
[sayfa 1]
Mullā Ṣadrā
Mukhtar H. Ali
1 Introduction
Ṣadr ad-Dīn Muḥammad b. Ibrāhīm ash-Shīrāzī (1571–1640/980–1050), popularly known
as Mullā Ṣadrā, is considered the culminating figure of Islamic philosophy in Persia.1
Born into an aristocratic family in Shīrāz, he was given the best education from an
early age in the city of his birth. He then traveled to Isfahan to study under two of the
greatest scholars of his time, Mīr Muḥammad Bāqir Dāmād Astarābādī (d. 1631/1041),2
with whom he studied philosophy and theology, and the enigmatic sage and jurist,
Shaykh Bahāʾ ad-Dīn ʿĀmilī known as Shaykh Bahāʾī (d. 1620–21/1030)3 with whom he
studied transmitted sciences and Qurʾānic exegesis. Having mastered both intellectual
and transmitted sciences, he retreated to Kahak, a village outside of Qum, Iran, where
he composed his magnum opus, al-Ḥikma al-mutaʿāliya fi l-asfār al-ʿaqliyya al-arbaʿa
(Transcendent Philosophy on the Four Intellectual Journeys), popularly known as al-
Asfār al-arbaʿa (The Four Journeys). He composed more than fifty works, but it was in
the Asfār that he formulated a comprehensive philosophical system that integrated rea-
son, revelation, and mystical experience. Mullā Ṣadrā’s school of “Transcendent Philoso-
phy” (al-Ḥikma al-mutaʿāliya) synthesized several major streams of Islamic thought,
including scholastic theology (kalām), Avicennan (d. 1037/428) Peripatetic philosophy
(mashshāʾ), Suhrawardī’s (d. 1191/587) Illuminationist philosophy (ḥikmat al-ishrāq), and
the Sufism of Ibn al-ʿArabī (d. 1240/638).
There has been a resurgence of scholarship in the writings of Mullā Ṣadrā, partic-
ularly after Muḥammad Khwājawī published new editions of all of his commentaries
in Arabic in the early 1980s. Muḥsin Bīdārfar’s introduction to Khwājawī’s edition of
commentary on the Qurʾān also drew attention to the other Qurʾān-related texts.4 Al-
though Henry Corbin (d. 1978/1398), Toshihiko Izutsu (d. 1993/1413), Seyyed Hossein
Nasr, and Fazlur Rahman (d. 1988/1408) first opened the door to Ṣadrā’s thought in
Western Scholarship, most of these studies focused on his philosophical works. It was
Nasr who dedicated a chapter to Ṣadrā’s Qurʾānic output in his book Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīr-
He was later given the title Ṣadr al-Mutaʾallihīn, the “foremost of the theosophers”.
Mīr Dāmād was the founder of the philosophical School of Isfahan. Nasr notes, “He was essentially
an Avicennan philosopher with an Ishrāqī interpretation of some Peripatetic theses.” See Seyyed Hos-
sein Nasr, Islamic Philosophy from its Origin to the Present (New York: State University New York
Press, 2006), 218.
The polymath Bahāʾ ad-Dīn ʿĀmilī was a leading Shiʿi theologian and jurist of the Safavid era. He
was at once a philosopher, mathematician, architect, astronomer, Sufi and poet. See Sayyid Hossein
Nasr, “The School of Isfahan,” in A History of Muslim Philosophy, ed. M.M. Sharif (Wiesbaden: Otto
Harrassowitz, 1966), 2: 910.
Mullā Ṣadrā, Tafsīr al-Qurʾān al-karīm, ed. Muḥammad Khwājawī (Qum: Intishārāt-i Bīdār, 1987–90).
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111320083-016

[sayfa 2]
āzī and His Transcendent Theosophy,5 ushering in a new wave of studies on Ṣadrā’s
Qurʾānic output. This was followed by Latimah Peerwani’s articles and study On the
Hermeneutics of the Light Verse, where she outlined the principles of Ṣadrā’s herme-
neutics and his exegetical approach.6 Christian Jambet has also devoted attention to
Tafsīr āyat an-nūr reconciling Ṣadrā’s philosophical treatment and spiritual approach
to the Qurʾān.7 Mohammed Rustom has written several studies on Ṣadrā’s Qurʾānic
writings, including “Approaching Mullā Ṣadrā as Scriptural Exegete: A Survey of
Scholarship on His Quranic Works,”8 which surveys the literature on Ṣadra’s ap-
proach to the Qurʾān. His tour de force, The Triumph of Mercy: Philosophy and Scrip-
ture in Mullā Ṣadrā, is an in-depth study investigating Ṣadrā’s commentary on the
Qurʾān’s opening chapter, Tafsīr sūrat al-Fātiḥa.9 This work highlights Ṣadrā’s esoteric
hermeneutical vision, his comprehensive approach to the Qurʾān, and the profound
influence of Ibn al-ʿArabī (d. 1240/638) on his thought.10 Another important study that
addresses Ṣadrā’s commentaries within the larger backdrop of Sufi commentaries is
Annabel Keeler’s article, “Mullā Ṣadrā’s Commentary on Sūrat al-Sajda.”11
2 His Works and Influences on his Commentaries
Ṣadrā’s writings can be categorized into four main areas: philosophical works, commen-
taries on key Islamic philosophical texts, polemic pieces, and scriptural commentaries.
His philosophical works include al-Asfār al-ʿarbaʿa (The Four Journeys), Shawāhid ar-
Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī and His Transcendent Theosophy (Tehran: Institute for Hu-
manities and Cultural Studies, 19972), 123–35. This article was reprinted in a commemorative volume
for Toshihiko Izutsu (d. 1993): “The Qur’ānic Commentaries of Mullā Ṣadrā,” in Consciousness and Re-
ality: Studies in Memory of Toshihiko Izutsu, ed. Jalāl ad-Dīn Āshtiyānī et al. (Leiden: Brill, 1998), 47–57.
Latimah Peerwani, “Qur’ānic Hermeneutics: The Views of Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī,” Proceedings of the
British Society for Middle Eastern Studies (1991): 468–77; Peerwani, “Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī on the Herme-
neutics of the Qur’ān: His Philosophical Meditation,” in Eschatology, Exegesis, Hadith (Islam-West Phil-
osophical Dialogue: The Papers Presented at the World Congress on Mullā Ṣadrā, May 1999, Tehran)
(Tehran: Sadra Islamic Philosophy Research Institute, 2005), 369–90.
See Ṣadrā, Le verset de la lumière commentaire, trans. Christian Jambet (Paris: Les Belles Lettres,
2009); Christian Jambet, The Act of Being: The Philosophy of Revelation in Mullā Sadrā, trans. Jeff Fort
(New York: Zone Books, 2006).
Mohammed Rustom, “Approaching Mullā Ṣadrā as Scriptural Exegete: A Survey of Scholarship on
His Quranic Works,” Comparative Islamic Studies 4 (2008): 75–96.
Mohammad Rustom, The Triumph of Mercy: Philosophy and Scripture in Mullā Ṣadrā (Albany: State
University New York Press, 2012).
See Mohammed Rustom’s other works on Ṣadrā’s Qurʾānic output: “Mullā Ṣadrā’s Prolegomenon to
the Mafātīḥal-Ghayb,” JQS 9, no. 1 (2007): 128–33.
Annabel Keeler, “Mullā Ṣadrā’s Commentary on Sūrat al-Sajda,” in Eschatology, Exegesis, Hadith
(Islam-West Philosophical Dialogue: The Papers Presented at the World Congress on Mullā Ṣadrā,
May 1999, Tehran) Tehran: Sadra Islamic Philosophy Research Institute, 2005: 343–56.
292
Mukhtar H. Ali

[sayfa 3]
rubūbiyya (Divine Witnesses), Kitāb al-Mashāʿir (Book of Metaphysical Penetrations)
and al-Ḥikma al-ʿarshiyya (Wisdom of the Throne). His commentaries on Islamic philo-
sophical works cover significant texts such as Ibn Sīnā’s Shifāʿ (The Healing) and Suhra-
wardī’s Ḥikmat al-ishrāq (Philosophy of Illumination). His polemic pieces in which he
defends his views against the criticism of the religious scholars, include Sīh aṣl (The
Three Principles) and Kasr al-aṣnām al-jāhiliyya (Shattering the Idols of Ignorance).
Lastly, his scriptural commentaries, such as his commentary on Kulaynī’s Uṣūl al-Kāfī,
include treatises on religious topics such as Risālat al-ḥashr (Treatise on Resurrection),
also known as al-Ḥashriyya, and Risāla fī-l-imāma (Treatise on the Imamate), along with
works on hermeneutics and Qurʾānic exegesis, which will be addressed below.12
Although Ṣadrā is primarily known as a philosopher, he is also an exceptional an
exceptional exegete whose works on the Qurʾān occupy a central position in his meta-
physical worldview. Like his philosophical synthesis, his Qurʾānic commentaries bring
together four traditions of Qurʾānic commentary: the Sufi, the Shiʿi the theological and
the philosophical.13 It is worthwhile to assess some of these influences beginning with
Sufi commentaries, which have often been attributed to Imams Muḥammad al-Bāqir
(d. 732/114) and Jaʿfar aṣ-Ṣādiq (d. 765/148). The earliest of these commentaries pre-
served the statements of the Imams, such as Sahl at-Tustarī’s commentary Tafsīr at-
Tustarī, which is the oldest, then Abū ʿAbd ar-Raḥmān as-Sulamī’s (d. 1021/412) Ḥaqāʾiq
at-tafsīr (The Realities of Exegesis).14 This trend continued with Sulamī’s student Abū-l
Qāsim al-Qushayrī (d. 1072/465) in his Latāʾif al-ishārāt (The Subtleties of the Signs)
and later with Ibn al-ʿArabī’s contemporary Ruzbihān Baqlī’s (d. 1209/606) ʿArāʾis al-
bayān fī ḥaqāʾiq al-Qurʾān (The Brides of Explanation on the Realities of the Qurʾān).15
After the initial wave of Sufi commentaries, the most profound influence on Ṣadrā
came from Ibn al-ʿArabī’s al-Futūḥāt al-Makkiyya (The Meccan Openings), which ex-
pounds on Qurʾānic themes throughout. The most important post-Ibn al-ʿArabī com-
mentary to influence Ṣadrā is ʿAbd ar-Razzāq al-Kāshānī’s (d. 1329/730) Tafsīr Ibn al-
ʿArabī.
Shiʿi commentaries are generally traditionist rather than esoteric, explaining the
verses according to hadith of the Prophet and the Imams. Even when these statements
Ṣadrā, The Wisdom of the Throne, trans. James Morris (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1981), 51.
Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī, 123–35. See Ibrahim Kalin, “An Annotated Bibliography
of the Works of Mullā Ṣadrā with a Brief Account of his Life,” Islamic Studies 42, no. 1 (2003): 35–41;
Sajjad Rizvi, Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī: His Life and Works and the Sources for Safavid Philosophy (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2007), 77–87; Mohammad Rustom, “The Nature and Significance of Mullā Ṣad-
rā’s Qurʾānic Writings,” Journal of Islamic Philosophy 6 (2012): 109–30; Rustom, “Approaching Mullā
Ṣadrā”.
See Farhana Mayer, Spiritual Gems: The Mystical Commentary Ascribed to Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq as con-
tained in Sulamī’s Ḥaqāʾiq al-tafsīr from the text of Paul Nwyia (Louisville: Fons Vitae, 2011).
Pieter Coppens, “Sufi Qurʾān Commentaries, Genealogy and Originality,” Journal of Sufi Studies 7,
no. 1–2 (2018): 102–24.
Mullā Ṣadrā
293

[sayfa 4]
reveal mysteries of the Qurʾān, they are classified as traditionist or standard commen-
taries, such as Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan aṭ-Ṭūsī’s (d. 1067/460)16 at-Tibyān fī tafsīr al-
Qurʾān and Abū ʿAlī l-Faḍl b. al-Ḥasan aṭ-Ṭabrisī’s (d. 1144/538) Majmaʿ al-bayān, and
works of ʿAlī b. Bābawayh al-Qummī (d. 939/328) and Muḥammad b. Masʿūd al-ʿAyyāshī
(d. 932/320). Alongside these commentaries, Ṣadrā was deeply engaged with the Shiʿi ha-
dith tradition as evidenced by his SharḥUṣūl al-Kāfī, a philosophical commentary on
Kulaynī’s (d. 940–1/329) hadith compilation, al-Kāfī.17
Ṣadrā was also familiar with the commentaries written by the Ashʿarī theologians,
Fakhr ad-Dīn ar-Rāzī (d. 1209/606) and Abū Ḥāmid al-Ghazālī (d. 1111/505) and Muʿtazilī
commentator, Abū l-Qāsim az-Zamakhsharī (d. 1144/538), about whom he unfavour-
ably said,
That which Zamakhsharī and his likes understand from the Qurʾān is not, in reality, knowledge
of the Qurʾān. Rather, it goes back to the sciences of lexicography, grammar, verbal expressions,
and dialectical theology (kalām). But knowledge of the Qurʾān is other than these sciences, just as
the skin and husk of man is not man in reality, but only figuratively.18
Ṣadrā was averse to these types of commentaries because they not only distracted
from the real aim of seeking the Qurʾān’s inner reality, but those who pursued such
superficial scholarship were themselves misguided and were misguiding others, keep-
ing them fixated on literalists interpretations.
Although Ṣadrā incorporated all aspects of Islamic knowledge in his style of exe-
gesis, particularly philosophy, he embraced the methodology of the Sufis who relied
on unveilings and spiritual experience as the basis for their commentaries. Thus, his
hermeneutics or taʾwīl, (lit. “returning to the origin”) was a return to the prophetic
model, which was to learn directly from God: “Be God-conscious and God will teach
you” (Q 2:282), and thereafter, “Ask the people of remembrance if you do not know”
(Q 16:43). In this regard, after the teachings of the Shiʿi Imams, Ṣadrā was deeply in-
debted to the philosophical Sufism of the great master, Muḥyī d-Dīn b. al-ʿArabī,
whose teachings form the warp and woof of Ṣadran thought in general. But Ṣadrā
also drew from earlier masters of Sufism such as Bāyazīd Basṭāmī (d. 874/261), Abū l-
Qāsim al-Junayd (d. 910/297), ʿAbd Allāh al-Anṣārī (d. 1089/481) and ʿAyn al-Quḍāt Ham-
adānī (d. 1131/525).
Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan b. ʿAlī b. al-Ḥasan, better known as ash-Shaykh aṭ-Ṭūsī and ash-Shaykh aṭ-
Ṭāʾifa, a great Shiʿi jurist and compiler of hadith. His famous compilation al-Istibṣār fī mā ukhtulifa
min al-akhbār is one of the “four books” or canonical hadith works in Shiʿism.
For studies on Ṣadrā’s hadith interpretation, see Karim Crow, “Mullā Ṣadrā on the First Intellect in
his SharḥUṣūl al-Kāfī,” in Eschatology, Exegesis, Hadith, 571–90; Maria Dakake, “The Origin of Man in
Pre-Eternity and his Origination in Time: Mullā Ṣadrā and Imāmī Shī‘ite Tradition,” in Eschatology,
Exegesis, Hadith, 147–66.
Ṣadrā, Sīh aṣl, ed. Seyyed Hossein Nasr (Tehran: University of Tehran Press, 1961), 84, cited in Rus-
tom, The Triumph of Mercy, 29.
294
Mukhtar H. Ali

[sayfa 5]
3 His Works on the Qurʾān
His works on the Qurʾān19 consist of sixteen pieces, thirteen of which are commentar-
ies on independent suras, and three of which revolve around the theoretical aspects
of the Qurʾān. His major exegetical works include: Mutashābihāt al-Qurʾān (The Am-
biguous Verses of the Qurʾān), Asrār al-āyāt (The Mysteries of the Verses), Mafātīḥal-
ghayb (Keys to the Unseen) and Tafsīr al-Qurʾān al-karīm (Commentary on the Noble
Qurʾān). In addition, the following works deal the exegesis of individual suras:20
1. Tafsīr sūrat al-Fātiḥa (sura 1, The Opening)
This is the last of his complete commentaries, written less than a decade before his
death. Ṣadrā’s views on ontology, cosmology, psychology, and eschatology closely fol-
low Ibn ʿArabī’s doctrines. He also covers topics such as the meaning of the Basmala
(the phrase: “In the name of God the Merciful, the Compassionate”), and his theory of
substantial motion (al-ḥaraka al-jawhariyya).
2. Tafsīr sūrat al-Baqara (sura 2, The Cow)
Though incomplete, it is the last of Ṣadrā’s commentaries. In this work, he addresses
the questions of freewill and determinism as held by the other Ashʿarī and Muʿtazalī
theological schools. An important discussion on the inimitability of the Qurʾān (iʿjāz
al-Qurʾān) is provided in relation to the 23rd verse which challenges the unbelievers to
produce a verse of equal measure.
3. Tafsīr sūrat as-Sajda (sura 32, The Prostration)
This 135-page commentary is of the entire sura. Ṣadrā discusses his eschatology and
spiritual psychology, the correspondences between the microcosmic heart and the di-
vine Throne, as well as other concepts such as the Perfect Man, the Muḥammadan
Light and the levels of God’s folk.
4. Tafsīr sūrat Yāsīn (sura 36, Yā-Sīn)
Traditional sources consider this sura to be the “heart” of the Qurʾān. In this 450-page
commentary, similar to his al-Mabdaʾ wa-l-maʿād, Ṣadrā devotes his attention to key
eschatological issues and the posthumous states of the soul, relying heavily on Ibn al-
ʿArabī’s doctrines.
This section is derivative of Mohammad Rustom’s more complete outline of Ṣadrā’s Qurʾānic
works in, “The Nature and Significance of Mullā Ṣadrā’s Qurʾānic Writings.”
The following are the most popular editions of these works: Mafātīḥal-ghayb, ed. Muḥammad
Khwājawī (Beirut: Muʾassasat at-Tārīkh al-ʿArabī, 1999); “Mutashābihāt al-Qurʾān” in Ṣadrā, Sih risāla-
yi falsafī, ed. Jalāl ad-Dīn Āshtiyānī (Tehran: Markazī-yi Intishārāt-i Daftar-i Tablīghāt-i Islāmī, 20002),
255–84; Tafsīr al-Qurʾān al-karīm, ed. Muḥammad Khwājawī (Qum: Intishārāt-i Bīdār, 1987–90); Asrār
al-āyāt wa-anwār al-bayyināt, ed. S.M. Mūsawī (Tehran: Intishārāt-i Ḥikmat, 2006).
Mullā Ṣadrā
295

[sayfa 6]
5. Tafsīr sūrat al-Ḥadīd (sura 57, Iron)
The first of his commentaries, this 280-page work connects his philosophical ideas
found in the Asfār to Qurʾānic symbolism. Ibn al-ʿArabī’s influence is evident in his
exposition of man’s receptivity to the divine names, being the locus of the comprehen-
sive name Allāh.
6. Tafsīr sūrat al-Wāqiʿa (sura 56, The Event)
In this 120-page commentary, Ṣadrā addresses eschatological issues and also explores
the Imaginal world, much in the spirit of Ibn al-ʿArabī.
7. Tafsīr sūrat al-Jumʿa (sura 62, Friday)
This 200-page commentary deals with ontology, prophetology, the levels of faith and
praxis. Towards the end, there is a discussion on the degrees of remembrance (dhikr).
8. Tafsīr sūrat aṭ-Ṭāriq (sura 86, The Morning Star)
This short 50-page gnostic commentary discusses some cosmology with respect to the
stages of man’s development and spiritual journey. According to Ṣadrā, the basis of
this commentary is intuition and unveiling.
9. Tafsīr sūrat al-Aʿlā (sura 87, The Supreme)
One of the shorter commentaries, this 50-page work explains the nature of God’s tran-
scendence, given that the sura begins by a command to glorify the name of God (sab-
biḥi sma rabbika l-aʿlā).
10. Tafsīr sūrat az-Zilzāl (sura 99, The Quaking)
This short, 34-page commentary raises some eschatological points related to the open-
ing of scrolls on the Day of Judgement.
11. Tafsīr sūrat al-Ikhlās (sura 112, Sincerity)21
This gnostic commentary discusses divine unity, its degrees and the knowledge of God.
The following are commentaries on individual verses:
12. Tafsīr āyat al-kursī (The Verse of the Pedestal)
This is a 300-page commentary on verse of the Throne (Q 2:255) and the two verses
following it where Ṣadra explains the doctrine of spiritual authority (walāya). Begin-
ning with God’s walāya, Ṣadrā discusses the walāya of the Imams and their interces-
sion in the hereafter.
While this work is not commonly attributed to Ṣadrā, Kalin has included it in his bibliography. See
Ibrahim Kalin, “An Annotated Bibliography”.
296
Mukhtar H. Ali

[sayfa 7]
13. Tafsīr āyat an-nūr22 (The verse of Light)
Completed in 1620/1029, this work draws attention the tradition of commentaries on
this verse (Q 24:35), highlighting the sayings of the early Sufis, such as al-Ḥasan al-
Baṣrī (d. 728/110), Abū Saʿīd al-Kharrāz (d. 899/286), Dhū n-Nūn al-Miṣrī (d. 860/245),
Basṭāmī, Abū Bakr ash-Shiblī (d. 946/334), as well as those of al-Ghazālī, Fakhr ad-Dīn
ar-Rāzī, and Naṣīr ad-Dīn aṭ-Ṭūsī (d. 1274/672). The verse of light serves as his point of
departure for describing the human microcosm and his ideas on spiritual psychology.
4 Hermeneutical Vision
In this section, we will take a closer look at Ṣadrā’s hermeneutical vision in his key
theoretical works on the Qurʾān: Mafātīḥal-ghayb (Keys to the Unseen),23 Asrār al-
ayāt (Secrets of the Verses),24 Mutashābihāt al-Qurʾān (The Ambiguous Verses).25 Mafā-
tīḥal-ghayb, which consists of an introduction and twenty chapters, was written in
1632/1042 when he had already composed ten commentaries, making it a mature re-
flection on his hermeneutical approach. However, only the first two chapters focus
specifically on hermeneutics, while the remaining chapters unfold his method in the
context of other themes, such as the nature of knowledge, cosmogony, eschatology,
wayfaring and others.
The second work of hermeneutics, Asrār al-āyāt (Secrets of the Verses), delves
into the nature of revelation and the divine books. It also covers a range of theologi-
cal, philosophical and mystical issues, including proofs for God’s existence, the Mu-
ḥammadan reality, the Perfect Human the origin of the world, eschatology, the nature
of God’s speech and the divine book.
In the last and shortest of his hermeneutical works, the Mutashābihāt al-Qurʾān
(The Ambiguous Verses), Ṣadrā elucidates the nature of the ambiguous or allegorical
verses and the necessity of unveiling to interpret them correctly. This work serves as
a polemic against the exoteric commentators of the Qurʾān, who attempt to interpret
the allegorical verses without the requisite insight nor unveiling.
When we begin to analyse Ṣadrā’s approach to the Qurʾān in the Mafātīḥal-ghayb,
it becomes evident that Ṣadrā was not merely a traditional exegete, but a gnostic seek-
ing its inward meanings. His study of hermeneutics was driven by spiritual experience
Ṣadrā, Tafsīr, 4: 345–427; Ṣadrā, Majmūʿat, Lithographed by Aḥmad Shīrāzī (Tehran, 1904), 358–75.
The work has been translated by Latimah Peerwani, On the Hermeneutics of the Light Verse of the
Qurʾān, (London: ICAS Press, 2004).
The published version with Mullā ʿAlī Nūrī’s glosses is 700 pages. See Ṣadrā, Mafātīḥal-ghayb, ed.
Muḥammad Khwājawī (Beirut: Muʾassasat at-Tārīkh al-ʿArabī, 1999).
Ṣadrā, Asrār al-āyāt wa-anwār al-bayyināt, ed. S.M. Mūsawī (Tehran: Intishārāt-i Ḥikmat, 2006).
Ṣadrā, Sih risāla-yi falsafī, ed. Jalāl ad-Dīn Āshtiyānī (Tehran: Markazī-yi Intishārāt-i Daftar-i Ta-
blīghāt-i Islāmī, 2000), 257–84.
Mullā Ṣadrā
297

[sayfa 8]
and the very impulse to write on the Qurʾān was not his own but divinely inspired, as
he states:
(a) command has issued from the Lord of my heart (āmir qalbī), a spiritual allusion has come
forth from my innermost recesses (waradat ishāra min sirr ghaybī). His judgement and decision
have come to pass and He has decreed that some of the divine symbols (rumūz ilāhiyya) be
brought forth, and that the matters related to the Qur’anic sciences, the Prophetic allusions, se-
crets of faith, flashes of wisdom, esoteric glimmerings connected to the wonders of the glorious
revelation and the subtleties of Qur’anic interpretation become manifest.26
His goal in writing was to expound on the esoteric dimension of the Qurʾān, address-
ing exoteric and linguistic matters only as they pertain to the esoteric. Ṣadrā aimed to
elucidate symbols and subtleties through what he describes as piercing insight: “The
Master of the Holy Realm of the Divinity (ṣāḥib quds al-lāhūt), the Owner of the King-
dom of the Dominion (mālik mulk al-malakūt), granted me a new opening (fatḥjadīd),
made the sight of my insight piercing with His light, revealing to my heart an opening
which drew me near.”27 With this divine illumination, he began to lay down the foun-
dation of his taʿwīl in the Mafātīḥ.
The basic structure of his hermeneutics mirrors his cosmology, positing that
Being is a graded reality manifesting in three primary planes: the intellectual, the
imaginal and the material. The levels of hermeneutics also correspond to these three
degrees: the intellectual, symbolic and literal. By “intellectual,” Ṣadrā does not mean
rational but realities that exist without representation. The first premise of his herme-
neutics is that the Qurʾān has both exoteric and esoteric dimensions, quoting the
Prophet who states, “God, the Almighty has not revealed a verse except that it possess
an outward and inward (dimension),”28 and Imam ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib, “There is no verse
in the Qurʾān which does not possess an outward (ẓāhir) and inward (bāṭin) meaning
and a point of departure (maṭlaʿ).29 This principle aligns with the general ethos of Sufi
hermeneutic tradition, which appreciates both the literal and symbolic aspects of the
Qurʾān. Ṣadra elaborates:
The Qurʾān has degrees and ranks, just as man has levels and stations. The lowest level of the
Qurʾān is like the lowest level of man: the Qurʾān’s lowest level is what is contained in the book’s
binding and covering (jild wa-aghlāf), just as the lowest rank of man is what is in the outer cover-
ing and skin (al-ihāb wa-l-bashara). The husk of man attains nothing but the blackness of the
Qurʾān and its sensory form. The man of the outward husk only perceives husk-like meanings
(al-maʿānī al-qishriyya).30
Ṣadrā, Mafātīḥ, 76–77, cited in Rustom, “Mullā Ṣadrā’s Prolegomenon,” 129.
Ṣadrā, Mafātīḥ, 78, cited in Rustom, “Mullā Ṣadrā’s Prolegomenon,” 129.
ʿAlī b. ʿAbd al-Malik al-Muttaqī al-Hindī Kanz al-ʿummāl fī sunan al-aqwāl wa-l-afʿāl (Beirut: Dār al-
Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, 1998), no. 2461.
Ṣadrā, Mafātīḥ, 70.
Ṣadrā, Mafātīḥ, 117, cited in Rustom, The Triumph of Mercy, 29.
298
Mukhtar H. Ali

[sayfa 9]
These various levels of interority are expressed through either the explicit (muḥkam)
verses or the allegorical (mutashābih) ones. The allegorical verses lend themselves to
multiple interpretations because of the multivalence of their words. Once one be-
comes conversant with the literal meaning of the text, they must not be confined by
the literal meanings and delve into its inward meanings.
This brings us to another key aspect of his methodology: reading the book of God
through its relation to the book of the soul. Ṣadrā posits that there is a correspon-
dence between the outer book of existence and the inner book of the soul. Both
Qurʾān and hadith affirm that God’s signs manifest on both planes of existence and
within the human soul as illustrated by the verse, “We will show him Our signs on
the horizons and in the self until it becomes clear that He is the Truth (Q 41:53)” Ṣadrā
elaborates:
Know that the Qurʾān, like man is divided into a manifest (ʿalan) and hidden dimension (sirr),
each of which has an outer (ẓāhir) and inner (bāṭin) aspect. Its inner aspect has another inner
aspect known only to God: and none knows its interpretation but God (Q 3:7). It has also been
related in the ḥadīth, “The Qurʾān has an outer and inner aspect.” Its inner aspect consists of up
to seven inner dimensions (abṭun) which are like the levels of man’s inner dimensions, such as
the soul (nafs), heart (qalb), intellect (ʿaql), spirit (rūḥ), innermost mystery (sirr), and the hidden
and most hidden (al-khafī wa-l-akhfāʾ).31
There the Book of God can be read on the plane of the intellect or the plane of the
heart, each revealing a different reality as it reaches the deepest aspects of the human
being.32 Since the intellect is considered the inner prophet and the inner law, it mir-
rors the outer prophet and the outer law. Only those who possess true intellect can
attain knowledge of the Qurʾān’s inner mysteries, and even this understanding is
granted through divine opening and assistance. Ṣadrā writes,
As for the spirit of the Qurʾān, its kernel (lubb), and its secret, none but the possessors of deep
understanding (Q 12:111) (ūlū l-albāb)33 perceive it. They do not attain this through knowledge
Ṣadrā, Mafātīḥ115, cited in Rustom, The Triumph of Mercy, 27. See also Shigeru Kamada, “Mullā
Ṣadrā Between Mystical Philosophy and Qurʾānic Interpretation through His Commentary on the
‘Chapter of the Earthquake’,” International Journal of Asian Studies 2, no. 2 (2005): 280.
Imam Jaʿfar aṣ-Ṣādiq (d. 765/148) says, “The book of God Almighty has four aspects: the expression
(ʿibāra), the allusion (ishāra), subtleties (laṭāʾif), and realities (ḥaqāʾiq). The expression is for the layper-
son (ʿawāmm), the allusion for the elite (khawāṣṣ), the subtlety for the saints (awliyāʾ), and the reality
for the prophets (anbiyāʾ).” Muḥammad Bāqir al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār: al-jāmiʿa li-durar akhbār al-
aʾimma al-aṭhar (Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Wafāʾ, 1983), 92: 95. See Mayer, Spiritual Gems, xxi, and Annabel
Keeler, Sufi Hermeneutics: The Qur’an Commentar of Rashīd al-Dīn Maybudī (Oxford University Press,
2007), 55, citing from as-Sulamī’s Ḥaqāʾiq at-tafsīr, ed. Paul Nwyia, “‘Le tafsîr mystique attribué à
Ǧaʿfar Ṣâdiq’, Arabic text and introduction,” MUSJ 43 (1967): 188.
Lubb means essence or kernel, referring to the intellect.
Mullā Ṣadrā
299

[sayfa 10]
acquired by way of learning and thinking. Rather, (they attain this) through God-given (ladunnī)
knowledge.34
However, even if the Qurʾān’s true meaning is attained through divinely inspired
knowledge, this does not undermine Ṣadrā’s synthetic approach of employing reason
(ʿaql), revelation (naql) and gnosis (ʿirfān). In other words, the outer and inner mean-
ings are mirrors for each other; one cannot seek the inner by disregarding the outer.
The pure heart is like a mirror, clear and free of rust. When it faces the realities of
the worlds, it can perceive them according to its receptivity for reflection and
perception.
Ṣadrā’s commentaries adhere to certain established structures of traditional Qu-
rʾānic exegesis. He often begins with philological concerns, comparing the views of the
grammarians and discussing variant readings of a verse. At times, he mentions the oc-
casion of revelation (asbāb an-nuzūl) to contextualize the verse before delving deeper
into esoteric readings. However, he rejects the methodology of the exoteric commenta-
tors insisting that if scripture could be fully understood through the rules of grammar,
logic and rational inquiry, then the Arabic scholars and philosophers would have deci-
phered the entirely of the Qurʾān.35 Thus, he interprets the verses according to mystical
insights, seamlessly integrating them with his metaphysical framework.
5 Conclusion
The reception of Ṣadrā’s Qurʾānic corpus differs significantly from his other philo-
sophical writings, especially the Asfār which has had the greatest impact in Islamic
philosophy since Avicenna. These writings, however, are equally valuable, displaying
a thinker vast in scope and prolific in output. In many ways, they represent the culmi-
nation of his thought and life’s work. The uniqueness of his commentaries lies in the
synthetic approach for which he is known. Just as his philosophy is a confluence of
various philosophical schools and epistemologies, his hermeneutical vision reflects
this syncretic approach to the Qurʾān. However, it is abundantly clear that the thrust
of his approach is spiritual and mystical, rather than historical, lexical or legal. Ṣad-
rā’s writings are inexorably rooted in the school of Ibn al-ʿArabī.
Ṣadrā’s Qurʾānic works are more praxis-oriented than his philosophical works.
He emphasizes the importance of spiritual purification and decorum (adab) before
embarking on the path of interpretation (taʾwīl). He insists that certain conditions
must be met, such as presence of heart, reflection on the verses, contemplation on the
Ṣadrā, Mafātīḥ, 117, cited in Rustom, The Triumph of Mercy, 29.
Ṣadrā, “Mutashābihāt al-Qurʾān,” in Sih risāla-yi falsafī, 257–84.
300
Mukhtar H. Ali

[sayfa 11]
divine mysteries, and the removal of spiritual veils. His method exemplifies an exis-
tential reading, reflecting the correspondence between scripture, the book of exis-
tence, and the book of the soul.
6 Bibliography
6.1 Sources
Al-Majlisī, Muḥammad Bāqir. Biḥār al-anwār: al-jāmiʿ li-durar akhbār al-aʾimma al-aṭhar. 111 Volumes. Beirut:
Muʾassasat al-Wafāʾ, 1983.
Mullā Ṣadrā. Majmūʿat at-tafāsīr. Lithographed by Aḥmad Shīrāzī. Tehran, 1904.
Mullā Ṣadrā. Sih aṣl. Ed. Seyyed Hossein Nasr. Tehran: University of Tehran Press, 1961.
Mullā Ṣadrā. Kasr aṣnām al-jāhiliyya. Ed. Muḥammad Taqī Dānishpazhūh. Tehran: University of Tehran
Press, 1962.
Mullā Ṣadrā. Kitāb al-Mashāʿir. Ed. and trans. Henry Corbin as Le livre des penetrations métaphysiques.
Tehran: Département d’iranologie de l’Institut franco-iranien, 1964.
Mullā Ṣadrā. Ash-Shawāhid ar-rubūbiyya. Ed. Jalāl ad-Dīn Āshtiyānī. Mashhad: Chāpkhāna-yi Dānishgāh-i
Mashhad, 1967.
Mullā Ṣadrā. Al-Mabdaʾ wa-l-maʿād. Ed. Jalāl ad-Dīn Āshtiyānī. Tehran: Imperial Iranian Academy of
Philosophy, 1976.
Mullā Ṣadrā. Al-Ḥikma al-mutaʿāliya fī l-asfār al-ʿaqliyya al-arbaʿa. Eds. Riḍā Luṭfī, Ibrāhīm Amīnī, and Fatḥ
Allāh Ummīd. Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ at-Turāth al-ʿArabī, 1981.
Mullā Ṣadrā. The Wisdom of the Throne, trans. James Morris. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1981.
Mullā Ṣadrā. Risālat al-ḥashr. Ed. and trans. into Persian by Muḥammad Khwājawī. Tehran: Intishārāt-i
Mawlā, 1983.
Mullā Ṣadrā. SharḥUṣūl al-Kāfī. Ed. Muḥammad Khwājawī. Tehran: Muʾassasa-yi Muṭālaʿāt wa-Taḥqīqāt-i
Farhangī, 1987.
Mullā Ṣadrā. Tafsīr al-Qurʾān al-karīm. Ed. Muḥammad Khwājawī. 8 Volumes. Qum: Intishārāt-i Bīdār,
1987–90.
Mullā Ṣadrā. Yāddāsht-hā-yi Mullā Ṣadrā hamrāh bā fihrist-i kitābkhāna-yi shakhṣī-yi Mullā Ṣadrā. Ed.
Muḥammad Barakat. Qum: Intishārāt-i Bīdār, 1998.
Mullā Ṣadrā. Al-ʿArshiyya. Ed. Fātin Muḥammad Khalīl Labbūn. Beirut: Muʾassasat at-Tārīkh al-ʿArabī, 2000.
Mullā Ṣadrā. “Al-Masāʾil al-qudsiyya.” In Sih risāla-yi falsafī. Ed. Jalāl ad-Dīn Āshtiyānī. Tehran: Markazī-yi
Intishārāt-i Daftar-i Tablīghāt-i Islāmī, 20002: 185–254.
Mullā Ṣadrā. “Mutashābihāt al-Qurʾān.” In Sih risāla-yi falsafī. Ed. Jalāl ad-Dīn Āshtiyānī. Tehran: Markazī-yi
Intishārāt-i Daftar-i Tablīghāt-i Islāmī, 20002: 257–84.
Mullā Ṣadrā. Sih risāla-yi falsafī. Ed. Jalāl ad-Dīn Āshtiyānī. Tehran: Markazī-yi Intishārāt-i Daftar-i Tablīghāt-
i Islāmī, 20002.
Mullā Ṣadrā. Mafātīḥal-ghayb. Ed. Muḥammad Khwājawī. Beirut: Muʾassasat at-Tārīkh al-ʿArabī, 1999.
Mullā Ṣadrā. Majmūʿa-yi ashʿār-i Ṣadr ad-Dīn Shīrāzī. Ed. Muḥammad Khwājawī. Tehran: Intishārāt-i
Mawlā, 1998.
Mullā Ṣadrā. The Elixir of the Gnostics. Ed. and trans. William Chittick. Provo: Brigham Young University
Press, 2003.
Mullā Ṣadrā. On the Hermeneutics of the Light Verse of the Qurʾān, trans. Latimah Peerwani. London: ICAS
Press, 2004.
Mullā Ṣadrā
301

[sayfa 12]
Mullā Ṣadrā. Asrār al-āyāt wa-anwār al-bayyināt. Ed. Sayyid Muḥammad Mūsawī. Tehran: Intishārāt-i
Ḥikmat, 2006.
Mullā Ṣadrā. Breaking the Idols of Ignorance: Admonition of the Soi-Disant Sufi, trans. Mahdi Dasht Bozorgi
and Fazel Asadi Amjad. London: ICAS Press, 2008.
Mullā Ṣadrā. Spiritual Psychology: The Fourth Intellectual Journey in Transcendent Philosophy: Volumes VIII & IX
of the Asfar, trans. Latimah Peerwani. London: ICAS Press, 2008.
Mullā Ṣadrā. Le verset de la lumière commentaire, trans. Christian Jambet. Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 2009.
Mullā Ṣadrā. Addenda on the Commentary on the Philosophy of Illumination. Ed. and trans. Hossein Ziai.
Costa Mesa: Mazda, 2010–.
Mullā Ṣadrā. Tafsīr sūrat al-Fātiḥa. Ms. Tehran National Library 263.
Nwyia, Paul. “‘Le tafsîr mystique attribué à Ǧaʿfar Ṣâdiq’, Arabic text and introduction.” MUSJ 43 (1967):
179–230.
6.2 Secondary Literature
Akbarian, Reza. The Fundamental Principles of Mullā Sadra’s Transcendent Philosophy. London: Xlibris, 2009.
Coppens, Pieter. “Sufi Qurʾān Commentaries, Genealogy and Originality.” Journal of Sufi Studies 7, no. 1–2
(2018): 102–24.
Crow, Karim. “Mullā Ṣadrā on the First Intellect in his SharḥUṣūl al-Kāfī.” In Eschatology, Exegesis, Hadith
(Islam-West Philosophical Dialogue: The Papers Presented at the World Congress on Mullā Ṣadrā,
May 1999, Tehran). Tehran: Sadra Islamic Philosophy Research Institute, 2005: 571–90
Dakake, Maria. “The Origin of Man in Pre-Eternity and his Origination in Time: Mullā Ṣadrā and Imāmī
Shī‘ite Tradition.” In Eschatology, Exegesis, Hadith (Islam-West Philosophical Dialogue: The Papers
Presented at the World Congress on Mullā Ṣadrā, May, 1999, Tehran). Tehran: Sadra Islamic Philosophy
Research Institute, 2005: 147–66.
Ernst, Carl. “Sufism and Philosophy in Mullā Ṣadrā.” In Mullā Ṣadrā and Transcendent Philosophy (Islam-West
Philosophical Dialogue: The Papers Presented at the World Congress on Mullā Ṣadrā, May, 1999, Tehran).
Tehran: Sadra Islamic Philosophy Research Institute, vol. 1, 2001: 173–92.
Hindī, ʿAlī b. ʿAbd al-Malik. Kanz al-ʿummāl fī sunan al-aqwāl wa-l-afʿāl. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, 1998.
Jambet, Christian. The Act of Being: The Philosophy of Revelation in Mullā Sadrā, trans. Jeff Fort. New York:
Zone Books, 2006.
Kalin, Ibrahim. “An Annotated Bibliography of the Works of Mullā Ṣadrā with a Brief Account of his Life.”
Islamic Studies 42, no. 1 (2003): 21–62.
Kalin, Ibrahim. “Between Physics and Metaphysics: Mullā Ṣadrā on Nature and Motion.” Islam and Science
1, no. 1 (2003): 59–90.
Kalin, Ibrahim. “Mullā Ṣadrā on Theodicy and the Best of All Possible Worlds.” JIS 18, no. 2 (2007): 183–207.
Kalin, Ibrahim. Knowledge in Later Islamic Philosophy: Mullā Ṣadrā on Existence, Intellect and Intuition. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2010.
Kamada, Shigeru. “Mullā Ṣadrā Between Mystical Philosophy and Qurʾānic Interpretation through His
Commentary on the ‘Chapter of the Earthquake’.” International Journal of Asian Studies 2, no. 2 (2005):
275–89.
Keeler, Annabel. “Mullā Ṣadrā’s Commentary on Sūrat al-Sajda.” In Eschatology, Exegesis, Hadith (Islam-
West Philosophical Dialogue: The Papers Presented at the World Congress on Mullā Ṣadrā, May 1999,
Tehran). Tehran: Sadra Islamic Philosophy Research Institute, 2005: 343–56.
Keeler, Annabel. Sufi Hermeneutics: The Qur’an Commentar of Rashīd al-Dīn Maybudī. Oxford: University
Press, 2007.
302
Mukhtar H. Ali

[sayfa 13]
Kuspinar, Bilal. “Mullā Ṣadrā on the Light-Verse.” In Eschatology, Exegesis, Hadith (Islam-West Philosophical
Dialogue: The Papers Presented at the World Congress on Mullā Ṣadrā, May, 1999, Tehran). Tehran: Sadra
Islamic Philosophy Research Institute, 2005: 357–68.
Mayer, Farhana. Spiritual Gems: The Mystical Commentary Ascribed to Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq as contained in Sulamī’s
Ḥaqāʾiq al-tafsīr from the text of Paul Nwyia (Louisville: Fons Vitae, 2011).
Moris, Zailan. Revelation, Intellectual Intuition and Reason in the Philosophy of Mullā Ṣadrā: An Analysis of the
al-Hikmah al-ʿArshiyyah. London: Routledge, 2003.
Morris, James. “Civilization as Dialogue: Spirituality and Philosophy in Mullā Ṣadrā and Today.” In Mullā
Ṣadrā’s School and Western Philosophies (Islam-West Philosophical Dialogue: The Papers Presented at the
Second World Congress on Mullā Ṣadrā, May, 2004, Tehran). Tehran: Sadra Islamic Philosophy Research
Institute, vol. 1, 2005: 261–72.
Musadad, Asep N. “Mullā Sadra’s Ontological Perspective on the Qurʾan.” Al-Bayān – Journal of Qurʾān and
Ḥadīth Studies 14 (2016): 152–67.
Nasr, Sayyid Hossein. “The School of Isfahan.” In A History of Muslim Philosophy, edited by M.M. Sharif.
2 vols. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, vol. 2, 1966: 904–32.
Nasr, Seyyed Hossein. Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī and His Transcendent Theosophy. Tehran: Institute for Humanities
and Cultural Studies, 19972.
Nasr, Seyyed Hossein. “The Qur’ānic Commentaries of Mullā Ṣadrā.” In Consciousness and Reality: Studies in
Memory of Toshihiko Izutsu, ed. Jalāl ad-Dīn Āshtiyānī et al. Leiden: Brill, 1998: 47–57.
Nasr, Seyyed Hossein. Islamic Philosophy from its Origin to the Present. New York: State University New York
Press, 2006.
Peerwani, Latimah. “Qur’ānic Hermeneutics: The Views of Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī.” Proceedings of the British
Society for Middle Eastern Studies (1991): 468–77.
Peerwani, Latimah. “Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī on the Hermeneutics of the Qur’ān: His Philosophical
Meditation.” In Eschatology, Exegesis, Hadith (Islam-West Philosophical Dialogue: The Papers Presented at
the World Congress on Mullā Ṣadrā, May 1999, Tehran). Tehran: Sadra Islamic Philosophy Research
Institute, 2005: 369–90.
Rizvi, Sajjad. Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī: His Life and Works and the Sources for Safavid Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2007.
Rizvi, Sajjad. Mullā Ṣadrā and Metaphysics: Modulation of Being. London: Routledge, 2009.
Rustom, Mohammed. “Mullā Ṣadrā’s Prolegomenon to the Mafātīḥal-Ghayb.” JQS 9, no. 1 (2007): 128–33.
Rustom, Mohammed. “Psychology, Eschatology, and Imagination in Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī’s Commentary on
the Ḥadīth of Awakening.” Islam and Science 5, no. 1 (2007): 9–22.
Rustom, Mohammed. “Approaching Mullā Ṣadrā as Scriptural Exegete: A Survey of Scholarship on His
Quranic Works.” Comparative Islamic Studies 4 (2008): 75–96.
Rustom, Mohammed. “The Nature and Significance of Mullā Ṣadrā’s Qurʾānic Writings.” Journal of Islamic
Philosophy 6 (2012): 109–30.
Rustom, Mohammed. The Triumph of Mercy: Philosophy and Scripture in Mullā Ṣadrā. Albany: State University
New York Press, 2012.
Mullā Ṣadrā
303

[sayfa 14]
