


About the Translator 


MICHAEL E. MARMURA was born in Jerusalem on November I1, 1929. He 
received his BA in 1953 from the University of Wisconsin and went on to obtain 
both an MA and a PhD from the University of Michigan. From 1952 until 1995 
he taught at the University of Toronto. As Professor Emeritus, he is currently 
associated with the Department of Near and Middle Eastern Civilization of the 
University of Toronto. 

Dr. Marmura has published medieval Arabic philosophical texts and transla- 
tions, as well as numerous articles on Islamic philosophy, many of them devoted 
to the thought of Avicenna and al-Ghazali. His translation of al-Ghazali’s influ- 
ential Incoherence of the Philosophers for the Islamic Translation Series has received 
wide acclaim. Other of his publications include an edition of Avicenna’s Fi 
ithbat al-nubuwwat (Proof of Prophecy); Refutation by Alexander of Aphrodisias of 
Galen’s Treatise on the Theory of Motion, with N. Rescher; and Islamic Theology and 
Philosophy: Studies in Honor of George F- Hourani, of which he was the editor. With 
W. Montgomery Watt he coauthored a history of Islamic philosophy that was 
incorporated in Der Islam I: Politische Entwicklungen und theologische Konzepte. 





A Note on the Type 


The English text of this book was set in BASKERVILLE, a typeface originally 
designed by John Baskerville (1706-1775), a British stonecutter, letter designer, 
typefounder, and printer. The Baskerville type is considered to be one of the 
first “transitional” faces—a deliberate move away from the “old style” of the 
Continental humanist printer. Its rounded letterforms presented a greater 
differentiation of thick and thin strokes, the serifs on the lowercase letters 
were more nearly horizontal, and the stress was nearer the vertical—all of 
which would later influence the “modern” style undertaken by Bodoni and 
Didot in the 1790s. Because of its high readability, particularly in long texts, 
the type was subsequently copied by all major typefoundries. (The original 
punches and matrices still survive today at Cambridge University Press.) This 
adaptation, designed by the Compugraphic Corporation in the 1960s, is a 
notable departure from other versions of the Baskerville typeface by its overall 
typographic evenness and lightness in color. To enhance its range, supplemen- 
tal diacritics and ligatures were created in 1997 for exclusive use in this series. 


TYPOGRAPHY BY JONATHAN SALTZMAN 


BriGHAM YOUNG UNIVERSITY 
Mipp.e Eastern TEXTS INITIATIVE 


EDITOR IN CHIEF 
Daniel C. Peterson 


asanslaty, 
ree Oa 
FAG WS 
8 (27 ve 
- t J “a gE 

Ve S 
q ma? 
“AHik® 


EDITOR 
D. Morgan Davis 


ASSOCIATE EDITOR 
Muhammad Eissa 


ADVISORY BOARD 
Charles E. Butterworth 
William C. Chittick 
Farhad Daftary 
Majid F. Fakhry 
Michael FE. Marmura 
Ismail K. Poonawaia 
John Walbridge 
Hossein Ziai 


CO-FOUNDING EDITOR 
Parviz Morewedge 


Avicenna 


| The Metaphysics 
of The Healing 


Lays le 








A parallel English-Arabic text 


translated, introduced, and annotated by 


Michael E. Marmura 


Brigham Young University Press + Provo, Utah + 2005 


©2005 by Brigham Young University Press. All rights reserved. 


LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA 


Avicenna, 980-1037. 

[ahiyat. English & Arabic] 

The metaphysics of The healing : a parallel English-Arabic text 
= al-Ilahiyat min al Shifa°/ Avicenna ; translated, introduced, and 
annotated by Michael E. Marmura. 

p- cm.— (Islamic translation series) 
Includes bibliographical references (p. ) and index. 

ISBN 0-—934893-77-2 (alk. paper) 

1. Metaphysics—Early works to 1800. 2. Philosophy, Islamic— 
Early works to 1800. I. Title: Nahiyat min al Shifa®. I. Marmura, 
Michael E., 1929— III. Title. IV. Series. 

B751.S5E5 2004 

110’—dc22 2004052910 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


05 06 07 08 09 10 11 987654321 
First Edition 


Publication of this volume 
was made possible by the generosity of 
KHOSROW B. SEMNANI 
in honor of his wife 


GHAZALEH SEMNANI 








Sieh dled yy WW 1,638 


To the memory of 


FATHER GEORGES C. ANAWATI 











Contents 


Foreword to the Series 
Acknowledgments 

Note on Conventions 
Translator’s Introduction 


Key to the Arabic Notes 


Book One 
Consisting of eight chapters 


Chapter [One]: On beginning to seek the subject of first philosophy 
so that its individual quiddity among the sciences becomes evident 
Chapter [Two]: On attaining the subject matter of this science 


Chapter [Three]: On the benefit of this science, the order [in which 
it is studied], and its name 


Chapter [Four]: On the totality of matters discussed in this science 


Chapter [Five]: On indicating the existent, the thing, and their first 
division, wherewith attention is directed to the objective [sought] 


Chapter [Six]: On commencing a discourse on the Necessary Existent 
and the possible existent; that the Necessary Existent has no cause; 
that the possible existent is caused; that the Necessary Existent 
has no equivalent in existence and is not dependent [in existence] 
on another 


—ix-— 


XV 
XV 
XVII 
xix 


XXvi 


13 
19 


22 


29 


Chapter [Seven]: That the Necessary Existent is one 


Chapter [Eight]: On clarifying [the meaning] of “truth” and 
“veracity”; defense of the primary statements in true premises 


Book Two 
Consisting of four chapters 


Chapter [One]: On making known substance and its divisions 


in a universal way 


Chapter [Two]: On ascertaining corporeal substance and what 
is composed from it 


Chapter [Three]: That corporeal matter is not devoid of form 


Chapter [Four]: On placing form prior to matter in the rank 
of existence 


Book Three 
Consisting of ten chapters 


Chapter [One]: On indicating what ought to be investigated 
regarding the state of the nine categories and about their 
accidental [nature] 


Chapter [Two]: On discussing the one 


Chapter [Three]: On ascertaining the one and the many and 
Showing that number is an accident 


Chapter [Four]: That measures are accidents 


Chapter [Five]: On ascertaining the nature of number, defining 
its species, and showing its beginnings 


Chapter [Six]: On the opposition of the one and the many 
Chapter [Seven]: That qualities are accidents 


Chapter [Eight]: On knowledge, that it is an accident 


Contents 


34 


38 


48 
57 


63 


71 
74 


79 
84 


91 
96 
102 
107 


Contents 


Chapter [Nine]: On qualities that are in quantities, 
proof of [their existence] 


Chapter [Ten]: On the relative 


Book Four 
Consisting of three chapters 


Chapter [One]: On the prior and posterior, and on origination 


Chapter [Two]: On potency, act, power, and impotence, and 
on proving [the existence] of matter for every generated thing 


Chapter [Three]: On the complete, the incomplete, and what is 
above completion; on the whole and on the total 


Book Five 
Consisting of nine chapters 


Chapter [One]: On general things and the manner of their existence 


Chapter [Two]: On the manner in which universality comes to 
belong to universal natures; completing the discussion of this 
[topic]; and on the difference between the whole and the part, 
the universal and the particular 


Chapter [Three]: On differentiating between genus and matter 


Chapter [Four]: On the manner in which ideas extraneous to genus 
enter its nature 


Chapter [Five]: On the species 


Chapter [Six]: On making differentia known and ascertaining 
[its nature] 


Chapter [Seven]: On making known the proper relationship 
between definition and the thing defined 


Chapter [Eight]: On definition 


Chapter [Nine]: On the appropriate relation between definition 
and its parts 


xt 


i 
116 


124 


130 


143 


148 


157 
162 


168 
174 


180 
186 


190 


xit Contents 


Book Six 
Consisting of five chapters 


Chapter [One]: On the division of causes and their states 


Chapter [Two]: On resolving doubts directed against what the 
adherents of true doctrine hold, to the effect that every cause 
coexists with its effect; and on ascertaining the true statements 
about the efficient cause 


Chapter [Three]: On the compatibility between the efficient causes 
and their effects 


Chapter [Four]: Concerning the other causes—the elemental, 
the formal, and the final 


Chapter [Five]: On establishing purpose and resolving skeptical 
doubts uttered in refuting it; the difference between purpose and 
necessity; making known the manner in which purpose ts prior 
to the rest of the causes and the manner in which it is posterior 


Book Seven 
Consisting of three chapters 


Chapter [One]: On the appendages of unity by way of haecceity 
and its divisions; the appendages of multiplicity by way of otherness, 
difference, and the well-known kinds of opposition 


Chapter [Two]: On relating the doctrine of the ancient philosophers 
regarding the exemplars and the principles of mathematics and the 
reason calling for this; revealing the origin of the ignorance that 
befell them, by reason of which they deviated [from the truth] 


Chapter [Three]: On refuting the doctrine [of the separate existence] 
of mathematical [objects] and exemplars 


Book Eight 
On knowing the First Principle of all existence and 
on knowing His attributes; [consisting of] seven chapters 


Chapter [One]: On the finitude of the efficient and the receptive causes 


194 


201 


205 


215 


220 


236 


243 


249 


Contents 


Chapter [Two]: Concerning doubts adhering to what has been said, 
and the resolution thereof 


Chapter [Three]: On showing the finitude of the final and formal 
causes; on proving [the existence of] the first principle in an absolute 
manner; on making decisive the statement on the first cause absolutely 
and on the first cause restrictedly, showing that what is absolutely 
a first cause is a cause for the rest of the causes 


Chapter [Four]: On the primary attributes of the principle that is 
necessary in its existence 


Chapter [Five]: As though a confirmation and a recapitulation 
of what has been previously discussed concerning the unity of the 
Necessary Existent and all His attributes, by way of conclusion 


Chapter [Six]: That He is perfect—indeed, above perfection—good, 
bestower [of existence] on everything after Him; [that He is] truth 
and pure intellect; that He apprehends intellectually all things, 
and the manner of this; how He knows Himself how He knows 
universals; how He knows particulars, and the manner in which 
it is not permitted to say that He apprehends them 


Chapter [Seven]: On the relation of the intelligibles to Him; on making 
it clear that His positive and negative attributes do not necessitate 
multiplicity in His essence; that to Him belongs supreme splendor, 
the loftiest majesty, and infinite glory; on explaining in detail the 
state of intellectual pleasure 


Book Nine 
On the emanation of things from the first governance 
and the return to Him; [consisting of ] seven chapters 


Chapter [One]: On the attribute of the efficacy of the First Principle 


Chapter [Two]: That the proximate mover of the heavens is neither 
a nature nor an intellect but a soul, and that the remote principle 
is an intellect 


Chapter [Three]: On the manner in which acts proceed from the 
lofty principles so that, from this, one would know what one ought 
to know concerning the separate movers that are intellectually 
apprehended in themselves and are loved 


262 


270 


273 


278 


283 


291 


299 


307 


318 


xiv 


Chapter [Four]: On the ordering of the existence of the intellect, 
celestial souls, and celestial bodies [that proceed] from the 
First Principle 


Chapter [Five]: On the state of the generation of the elements 
by the first causes 


Chapter [Six]: On providence, showing the manner of the entry 
of evil in divine predetermination 


Chapter [Seven]: Concerning “the return,” [the hereafter] 


Book Ten 
Consisting of five chapters 


Chapter [One]: A brief statement on the beginning and “the return’; 
on inspirations, dreams, and prayers that are answered, and celestial 
punishments, on the state of prophecy and of astrological predictions 


Chapter [Two]: On the proof of prophecy; the manner of the prophet’s 
call to God, exalted be He; and the “return” to Him 


Chapter [Three]: On acts of worship: their benefits in this world 
and the next 


Chapter [Four]: On establishing the city, the household—that is, 
marriage—and the universal laws pertaining to [these matters] 


Chapter [Five]: Concerning the caliph and the imam: the necessity 
of obeying them; remarks on politics, transactions, and morals 


Notes to the English Text 
Bibliography 


Index 


Contents 


326 


334 


339 
347 


358 


364 


367 


370 


374 


381 
423 
426 


Foreword to the Series 


Brigham Young University and its Middle Eastern Texts Initiative are 
pleased to sponsor and publish the Islamic Translation Series ITS). We 
wish to express our appreciation to James L. and Beverley Sorenson of 
Salt Lake City for their generous support, which made ITS possible, and 
to the Ashton Family Foundation of Orem, Utah, which kindly provided 
additional funding so that we might continue. 

Islamic civilization represents nearly fourteen centuries of intense 
intellectual activity, and believers in Islam number in the hundreds of 
millions. The texts that appear in ITS are among the treasures of this 
great culture. But they are more than that. They are properly the inher- 
itance of all the peoples of the world. As an institution of The Church of 
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Brigham Young University is honored 
to assist in making these texts available to many for the first time. In 
doing so, we hope to serve our fellow human beings, of all creeds and cul- 
tures. We also follow the admonition of our own tradition, to “seek... 
out of the best books words of wisdom,” believing, indeed, that “the glory 
of God is intelligence.” 


—DANIEL C. PETERSON 


D. MorGAN Davis 


— xy — 


ee el 


Acknowledgments 


I must begin by thanking Professor Daniel C. Peterson and his editorial 
team, particularly Professor D. Morgan Davis and Elizabeth W. Watkins, 
for their careful scrutiny of this translation. Together with Angela C. 
Barrionuevo, Paula Hicken, Emily Ellsworth, and Linda Sheffield, they 
have corrected grammatical mishaps, tracked down ambiguities, and sug- 
gested extensive stylistic improvements. Irena Abramian was most help- 
ful in typesetting the Arabic text. 

Many years ago, Professor Edward M. Macierowsky, while still a grad- 
uate student, read an initial draft of my translation of the first two books 
of the Metaphysics of The Healing and made a number of useful comments. 
More recently, Professor Thérése-Anne Druart very kindly read a version 
of the entire translation and made many a helpful comment. I owe these 
two scholars a debt of thanks. (Any shortcomings of this work, however, 
remain entirely my own.) Iam also grateful to my wife, Elizabeth, who has 
supported and encouraged me in my work and has read parts of it, sug- 
gesting improvements in style. 

Last but not least, I am indebted to Avicennan scholars, past and 
present, whose researches have paved the way for the present translation. 
One such scholar is the late Georges C. Anawati, affectionately referred 
to by friends and colleagues as abiina, “our father.” It is to his memory 
that this work is dedicated. 


— xvii — 


Note on Conventions 


Inthis work, terms of Arabic derivation found in Webster’s Third New Inter- 
naional Dictionary generally follow the first spelling given and are treated 
asregular English words. Otherwise, Arabic or Persian words and proper 
nimes have been transliterated following, with few exceptions, the 
Romanization tables established by the American Library Association 
aid the Library of Congress (ALA-LC Romanization Tables: Transliteration 
Sdemes for Non-Roman Scripts. Compiled and edited by Randall K. Barry. 
Wshington, DC: Library of Congress, 1997). 

All works cited in the notes appear in short form. Full information 
fo each citation is available in the bibliography at the end of the book. 
Rierences to many of the primary sources cited in the notes include book 
aid chapter divisions as well as page and sometimes line numbers. Book 
aid chapter numbers are separated by a period; page and line numbers 
ar indicated with abbreviations, thus: Categories 3.4 (p. 113, ll. 9-11). 
Note also that unless otherwise specified, Avicenna is the author of such 
wks, and they will be found listed under his name in the bibliography. 

In the Arabic text, the original pagination of the Cairo critical edition 


olthe Metaphysics is shown in brackets. 


— xviti — 


Translator’s Introduction 


The Metaphysics (Al-Iahiyyat)! is the climactic, concluding part of Avi- 
cenna’s voluminous The Healing (Al-Shifa’). It builds on what preceded 
it but remains a self-contained work, its subject matter being unique. 
What, then, is its subject matter? Avicenna gives his answer in two comple- 
mentary, overlapping definitions of metaphysics. The first finds its fullest 
expression in the very first volume of The Healing, in the Isagoge 1.2; the sec- 
ond is given in the Metaphysics 1.1 and 2. Both definitions are Aristotelian. 
Both rest on the distinction drawn between metaphysics and the other 
two theoretical sciences, physics (natural philosophy) and mathematics. 

In the Jsagoge,” the distinction between these three sciences is based 
on the relation of their respective objects of knowledge to matter. The 
object of knowledge of physics and mathematics, Avicenna asserts, is 
always “mixed” with matter. In the case of physics, the object of knowl- 
edge is always mixed with a specific kind of matter, depending on the 
particular branch of natural science. The scientist, for example, is con- 
cerned with the causes pertaining to a specific kind of matter, not with 
the concept of causality as such. With mathematics, the object of knowl- 
edge is also always mixed with matter, but not, however, with a specific 
kind of matter. Thus, for example, geometric objects in the world outside 
the mind must consist of some kind of material, but they are not confined 
to a specific kind. As objects of mathematical knowledge, they undergo a 
degree of abstraction whereby the mathematician will consider their prop- 
erties dissociated from any specific kind of material, but not, however, 
from any matter whatsoever. Mathematical objects have no autonomous 
extramental nonmaterial existence. 

Metaphysics, on the other hand, has as its object of knowledge that 
which is not mixed with matter. This object, Avicenna explains in the 


— xix — 


XN Translator’s Introduction 


Isagoge, may be necessarily immaterial. This is the case with God and 
mind, But there can be an object of metaphysical knowledge which is not 
necessarily immaterial, an object that can mix with matter. The meta- 
physician, however, is not concerned with this object in its association 
with matter. The metaphysician is concerned with it in itself, abstractly, 
dissociated from its external material existence. To take the example of 
causality again, unlike the natural philosopher who is concerned with the 
causes operative in a specific kind of matter, the metaphysician is con- 
cerned with causality as such and with causality as one of the concomi- 
tants of the existent considered as such. This brings us to the second 
complementary definition of metaphysics, the definition appropriately 
encountered in the Metaphysics: 

All three theoretical sciences have the existent as their subject matter. 
Physics, however, is concerned with the existent “by way of its being subject 
to motion and rest.” Mathematics has as its subject matter the existent 
inasmuch as it is quantified or relates to measure and quantity. (Arith- 
metic thus is the science of discreet quantity; geometry, of continuous 
quantity.) Metaphysics, on the other hand, has for its object the existent as 
such, the existent without qualification. Its subject matter is the existent, 
not inasmuch as it is either in motion or quantified, but simply inasmuch 
as it is an existent. The metaphysician undertakes to examine the various 
meanings of existence, the relation of the existent to the ten categories, 
the necessary concomitants of existents—namely, unity and plurality, 
particularity and universality—and the relation of existence to quiddity 
or essence.” 

Avicenna draws a distinction between the subject matter of meta- 
physics and the things that are “sought after” in it. Among the things 
“sought after” are the principles presupposed in physics and mathemat- 
ics; also the four causes in the terrestrial realm, the higher celestial 
causes, and the cause of all causes, God. None of these causes constitute 
the subject matter of metaphysics. Avicenna is quite emphatic in main- 
taining that the existence of God, the principle of all existents other 
than Him, is one of the things “sought after” in metaphysics. It is not its 
subject matter. 

Avicenna brings home this point by raising a possible objection to the 
concept of the existent as such as being the subject matter of meta- 
physics. According to this objection, if the existent, inasmuch as it exists, 
is made the object of metaphysical knowledge, the principle of all the 
other existents cannot be established in it. For science investigates only 





Translator’s Introduction x} 
xt 


the concomitants of its subjects, not its principles. Avicenna answers this 
objection by maintaining, first of all, that the inquiry into the principles 
of metaphysics (as distinct from the principles of physics and mathemat- 
ics) is also an investigation of the concomitants of the existent. This is 
because being a principle is not a defining characteristic of the existent 
as such. Moreover, he then adds, the principle that is being sought after 
is not the principle “of the whole of existence.” For then the principle 
would be the principle of itself. Rather, the principle that is being sought 
after is the principle only of existence that is caused. : 
In making this point early in the Metaphysics (1.2), Avicenna gives us 
a first hint at the Neoplatonism that becomes the marked characteristic 
of the cosmology he develops in the last three books of this work (books 
8-10). God, for Avicenna, is not only the prime mover and the supreme 
teleological cause of the universe,* He is also the cause of the very existence 
of all things other than Himself. The world emanates eternally fom God 
as a consequence of His self-knowledge, in a hierarchical chain of causes 
and effects. Avicenna develops an emanative theory that was greatly influ- 
enced by that of his predecessor, al-Farabi (d. 950), but which remains 
distinct from it. 
Al-Farabi formulated a dyadic emanative scheme. After the emana- 
tion of the first intellect from God, there proceeds a series of dyads: 
celestial intellects and celestial spheres. Avicenna transforms al-Farabr’s 
dyadic emanative scheme into a triadic one. Accordingly, after the ema- 
nation of the first intellect from God, the series that Sree is a series of 
celestial triads. Each triad consists of an intellect, a soul, and a sphere 
Each member of each triad, whether intellect, soul, or body. eanstitutes 
the only member of its species. This point is vital for snderstandiue what 
Avicenna means when he maintains that God and the celestial intellects 
(as distinct from the celestial souls) know particulars “in a universal 
ee ae are of the celestial particulars is the only member of its 
at : ae in which God and the celestial intellects, by 
a ee ete: know its sole particular instance. This 
ee dite pas e€ oe the particulars in the world 
amici ier GSA = in this world, the species, whether 
God and the éelestial intelli ae eee if ae a fo see 
eee ra es a bee i s as | the universal qualities ofa 
eis ae pese ay es ie ar itself. The case is different 
are the causes of patter ae in nee a a iota eeeae 
e terrestrial realm. As causes of 


XXL Translator’s Introduction 


these particulars, they also have knowledge of future terrestrial events, 
Such knowledge emanates from the celestial souls to the imaginative 
faculty of prophets. In this way prophets are given knowledge of future 
particular events. 

This emanative scheme, expanded to explain (among other things) 
prophetic predictions, represents a synthesis of Neoplatonic, Aristotelian, 
and Islamic ideas. The scheme, however, is grounded in Avicenna’s ontol- 
ogy, which in turn is developed within the framework of basic Aristotelian 
concepts. Regarding this connection, it should be remarked that Avicenna 
regards The Healing as a peripatetic work. In introducing it (Jsagoge 1.1)5 
he mentions his book The Eastern Philosophy (Al-Falsafa al-mashrigiyya), in 
which he tells us that he presents philosophy ‘ald ma hiya_fi al-tab‘, liter- 
ally, “as it is ‘in nature,’” a statement open to different interpretations. 
As we read it, Avicenna is referring to philosophy as it comes to one nat- 
urally. It has also been interpreted as referring to philosophy in itself.® 
Avicenna contrasts this work with The Healing, which, he states, is more 
extensive in exposition and more cooperative with the peripatetics. (He 
also indicates that The Healing contains intimations which if heeded would 
render the Eastern Philosophy dispensable.) 

The peripatetic nature of The Healing manifests itself in its approach, 
particularly in the first seven books. It is analytic and probing as it seeks 
to answer questions and resolve difficulties, and it is highly critical of non- 
Aristotelian views—metaphysical Platonism, Pythagorianism, atomism, 
and aspects of Islamic theological thought (kalam). Avicenna’s Metaphysics 
is an endorsement of basic Aristotelian concepts—an endorsement, how- 
ever, that includes refinements and expansions leading to formulations, 
as in the discussion of universals, that are distinctly Avicennan. There is 
also synthesis. As already suggested, Aristotelian concepts are integrated 
in Avicenna’s emanative scheme of things to form a comprehensive 
metaphysical system. The conceptual building blocks, so to speak, of this 
system are largely Aristotelian and Neoplatonic. The final structure, 
however, is other than the sum of its parts, and the cosmic vision it por- 
trays has a character all its own. 

Turning to Avicenna’s ontology, underlying his worldview is the distinc- 
tion he draws between essence, or quiddity, and existence. From knowing 
what a thing is, one cannot infer that it exists. The quiddity of any caused 
existent, considered strictly in itself, excludes the idea of existence and its 
necessary concomitants—unity, plurality, universality, and particularity. 
“Horseness,” to use Avicenna’s well-known example in Metaphysics 5.1, 





Translator’s Introducti eH 
uction XX111 


“is nothing at all except horseness.” “Horseness” by itself is not the uni- 
versal “horse.” It becomes the universal “horse” (for Avicenna, existing 
only in the mind) when the “accident” universality, the quality that ee 
ders a concept in the mind predicable of many of a kind, is attached to it. 
The distinction between essence and existence underlies both Avi- 
cenna’s proof of God’s existence and his argument for the manner in 
which the world emanates from Him. Although quiddities, considered in 
terms of what they are, exclude the idea of existence, they do in fact 
exist, whether in the mind or externally.” The impossible does not exist. 
Hence, any existent must either be necessary or possible in itself. If it is 
necessary, it would have to be one, simple, and the cause of all other exis- 
tents. This is God. If it is possible, then its existence must be necessitated 
by something else. Thus, every existent other than God is possible in 
itself but necessary through another. In other words, every existent other 
than God is possible in the sense of being contingent. If its cause is also 
only possible in itself, it must in turn be necessitated by another cause, 
and if the latter is also only possible in itself, by yet another, and so on. 
These causes are essential causes. Unlike accidental causes that precede 
their effects in time, essential causes coexist with their effects. A chain 
of such essential causes, if infinite, would constitute an actual coexisting 
infinite, which for Avicenna is impossible. The chain must be finite 
caused by a cause that in itself is necessary, namely God.* With God the 
distinction between essence and existence ceases. God has no quiddity 
other than His existence. 
it is in terms of this conception of existence as being either possible 
In itself but necessary through another or of being necessary in itself 
that Avicenna explains the triadic emanative process. God, the being nec- 
essary in Himself, is engaged in an eternal act of self-knowledge. This 
results in the emanation of the first intellect. The first intellect then con- 
templates (a) God as the existent necessary in Himself, (b) his own exis- 
tence as necessitated by God, and (c) his own existence as in itself only 
Possible. These three contemplative acts produce, respectively, three 
existents: another intellect, a soul, and a sphere. This ebiitemplative 
activity 1s repeated by the successive intellects, resulting in the celestial 
triads that terminate with the active intellect from which the terrestrial 
world emanates. 
: Winn this emanative scheme, we meet some of the basic ideas of 
Mie philosophy. We meet them in such discussions as those 
utes (8.1, 6, and 7), of divine providence (9.6), and of 


xxiv Translator’s Introduction 


the Hereafter (9.7). We also meet them in the exposition of his political 
philosophy, to which book ten is devoted. Significantly, book ten begins 
with a chapter that sums up Avicenna’s emanative scheme. His concep- 
tion of the ideal “virtuous” city is developed within the framework of his 
emanative cosmology. At the basis of Avicenna’s political philosophy— 
which is rooted in al-Farabi’s political thought—is the concept of the 
philosopher-prophet, the recipient and conveyer of the revealed law. In 
the second chapter of book ten, Avicenna argues that the appearance in 
history of law-giving prophets (necessary for the very survival of human 
beings, to say nothing of establishing a virtuous political state) is a nec- 
essary consequence of God’s knowledge of “the order of the good.” In the 
three chapters that follow, he offers a philosophical interpretation of 
Islam, the religion and its institutions. He concludes his Metaphysics with 
the following statement: 


If one combines with justice speculative wisdom, he is a happy man. 
Whoever in addition to this wins the prophetic qualities becomes 
almost a human god. Worship of him, after worship of God, becomes 
almost allowed. He is indeed the world’s earthly master and God’s 
deputy in it. 


In Avicenna’s cosmology the prophet becomes the human link 
between the celestial and the terrestrial worlds. 


There are three complete translations of the Metaphysics into modern 
European languages: Max Horten’s German translation (1907), G. C. 
Anawati’s French translation (books 1-5, 1978 and books 6-10, 1985), 
and very recently an Italian translation by Olga Lizzini and Pasquale 
Porro (2002). A critical edition of the medieval Latin by S. Van Riet has 
also been published (books 1-4, 1977 and books 5-10, 1980), with a valu- 
able glossary of Latin, French, and Arabic terms (1980).° In his compre- 
hensive introduction to the French translation, Father Anawati discussed 
the German translation, the Tehran edition, and the Cairo edition on 
which the French translation and the present English translation are 
based, giving also a list of emendations. Father Anawati was a member 
of the team of scholars under the supervision of I. Madkour who were 
responsible for editing The Healing, and, with others, Anawati edited a 
number of its volumes, including the Metaphysics. A scholar of vast expe- 
rience with the writings of Avicenna and with the manuscripts of his 





Translator’s Introduction xX 


works, his considerable contributions to Avicennan studies culminated in 
his authoritative French translation of the Metaphysics. We have consulted 
with benefit Anawati’s translation, particularly where the Arabic text 
poses interpretative problems. Happily, we found that there is substantial 
agreement between it and the translation we are presenting. But ina text 
that poses many difficulties, both in its wording and its thought, there 
are bound to be differences in interpretation. 

The Arabic text prepared for this translation is essentially that of the 
1960 Cairo edition. The paragraphing, however, has been changed, and 
the paragraphs of both the Arabic and the translation have been num- 
bered. There are some changes in punctuation, although in general we 
have stayed close to the original Cairo edition. Other changes include 
some different readings taken from the apparatus criticus and from the 
emendations of Father Anawati. These are placed in the Arabic text in 
square brackets, with a note indicating the original reading in the Cairo 
edition and the source of the change. 


Key to the Arabic Notes 


In what follows, the reading is first given as it appears in the Cairo edi- 
tion, beside it, the reading we have adopted for this edition. Our reading 
is sometimes given by itself, with no reference to the manuscripts. This 
means that the correction is made on our part, either for a printing or 
grammatical error, or otherwise dictated by the flow of Avicennan lan- 
guage and thought. Sometimes our reading comes with the term, (51,3, 
which means that it has been chosen following the corrections of Father 
Anawati included in the table of corrections for the Cairo edition, which 
he produced in the introduction to his French translation. When our read- 
ing is enclosed in brackets in the text, it means that it does not appear in 
the body of the text of the Cairo edition. Sometimes our readings come 
associated with a letter or letters indicating a manuscript or manuscripts 
used in the Cairo edition and reported in its apparatus criticus. The symbols 
for the manuscripts used in the Cairo edition are as follows: 


& Tehran printing 

\» The margin of the Tehran printing 
~ Bakhit (al-Azhar) 331 

The margin of Bakhit 

Dar al-Kutub al-Misriyya 144 

> Dar al-Kutub al-Misriyya 894 

vw Dar al-Kutub al-Misriyya 826 

The British Museum 7500 


(8 


All the manuscripts have been described in the introduction of the Isagoge 
of the Shifa’ with the exception of manuscripts @ and vy, which have 
been described in the introduction to the Cairo edition of the I/ahiyyat of 
the Shifa’. 


— xxvi — 








alla bole 3 


ha Wy BUMS Upland dade 9 ayy Sieh Vol oa lad 

Wah Ul Gaas yo Goma «quer ga lay ways GLAM saw 9 LS hy, 
bal Llp sty Srl Sly Mal She Ye poe room Lily ogden 
Klee Sell gis Al pene! ule gs Yi gl fly BS, wigyie 
cities po Llp Zt Lee y eat BY aoe bande 9 Lea gl lls il dad 
Nop Bybee pS ES Gh, alll ab Ge yp dL. Ml an 
tack jy Pebey ipl in Sebel colbgase gh bgede gl ys Gel 


WS Pipl deb Ye Cab Bolas jy yy sabll sil 


N44 Rall SU ly e Oiveiak Lb 


Me iynahh SS ls 5 Olybaab ule b 
MT Ryall Sie as TY) (Yl) Gee 
Vous tla, tt eee t See ele c 


Celene ae be elt ye «dul git se cley ob lb Ledll cms) 
bla dade 3 «OY dene 9 ley oy or ber, 


— xxvlt — 











ory 


In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate 


Praise be to the Lord of the Worlds 
and His prayers on the chosen Prophet, Muhammad, 
and all his noble family. 


° 


THE THIRTEENTH TOPIC, ON METAPHYSICS, 
OF THE BOOK OF THE HEALING 


+ 





BOOK ONE 
Consisting of eight chapters 





Chapter [One] 


On beginning to seek the subject of first philosophy so that its 
individual quiddity' among the sciences becomes evident 


(1) Now that God, patron of mercy and success, has granted us suc- 
cess so that we have set forth [those] ideas of the logical, natural, and 
mathematical sciences that ought to be conveyed, it behooves us to com- 
mence making known the ideas of metaphysics. We [thus] begin, asking 
God’s help, by saying: 


mel pelle 


«gear ie SV ally saree dlarall oh de adheey cyllall oy all oul 
APY D eles IS ye pte SI al 


Jia 
pad dsle dy 


[Js jail 
ho (') 


poll FL AI UN Real pio ye Cle ell 2 


or balcony Le Gaygld cGaslly Maoh ey alll Liby 5 4p [1] (\) 


ASB all days 3 6 3h ght Lb ply La bly Lael ll Sle \s 


£ .gad albly Cyrene (G00 


ian 


10 


15 


30 


2 Book One, Chapter One 


(2) The philosophical sciences, as has been pointed out elsewhere in 
[our] books, are divided into the theoretical and the practical. The 
difference between the two has [also] been indicated. It has been men- 
tioned that the theoretical are those wherein we seek the perfecting of 
the theoretical faculty of the soul through the attainment of the intellect 
in act—this by the attainment of conceptual and verifiable knowledge? 
through things that are [the things] they are, without [reference to their] 
being® our [own] actions and states. Thus, the aim in these [things] is 
to attain an opinion‘ and belief which is not an opinion and belief per- 
taining to the manner of an action, or to the manner of a principle of an 
action inasmuch as it is a principle of action. And [it has also been stated] 
that practical [philosophy] is that wherein one first seeks the perfection 
of the theoretical faculty by attaining conceptual and verifiable knowl- 
edge involving things that are [the things] they are in being our own 
actions—thereby attaining, secondly, the perfection of the practical fac- 
ulty through morals.” 

(3) It was stated that theoretical knowledge is confined to three 
divisions—namely, the natural, the mathematical, and the divine. 

(4) [It was also stated] that the subject matter of the natural is bod- 
ies, with respect to their being in motion and at rest, and [that] its inves- 
tigation pertains to the occurrences that happen to them essentially in 
this respect. 

(5) [It was also stated] that the subject matter of mathematics is 
either that which is quantity essentially abstracted from matter, or that 
which has quantity—the thing investigated therein being states that 
occur to quantity inasmuch as it is quantity and where one includes in its 
definition neither a species of matter nor a motive power. 

(6) [Finally, it was stated] that the divine science investigates the 
things that are separable from matter in subsistence and definition.® 

(7) You have also heard that the divine science is the one in which 
the first causes of natural and mathematical existence and what relates 
to them are investigated; and [so also is] the Cause of Causes and Prin- 
ciple of Principles—namely, God, exalted be His greatness. 

(8) This much is what you would have come to know from the books 
that have previously come to you. But from this it would not have become 
evident to you what the subject matter of metaphysics really is (except 
for a remark in the Book of Demonstration,’ if you remember it). This is 


Lettl ye oly ‘ 


4 


& 


eis NN yy Bl ply Gall at 8 WS Ll pst gl (¥) 
Webs Fp al Sy Lge Gua Gl tl aby hath gly stl 
SrA pall Jame [6] clldg « Jail Jal gary all je alls ll JUS 
Shy nam (eb Al GSS clilyal, Wel Yoo end rob fray 
Sly Jet ae wetee pe rds gl pedis plaliely WL pl alert, 
Pore y Spal all J gan a gl JUS ol ll Neal 
BNE Ladd gd Nal LSB Myer eared LSbasl Wg ge om yeh 

iggy hoailly carlal 2 ADU pLisl 9 pares Abell gl Sy (1) 

fous Slay Spoce o Lge oy pla roy darldll gly (4) 
Ahh ode ye OIL YY V2 8 CS La ylall ye 

PU Uy cclstl salll jo oem S ge LeU] epoy Reale gly (0) 
9 Wayne ot Vy 5 2 Sl ow Jel Yor Seully 553 
Sr 5b Vy cool 

-odly ply doll lab  yN je tas AYN Gly (1) 

Ba GLY je ab toe Gall pe yg WI gt Lid mes ody (V) 
Ig LSOLNL Macey La ome oy «age Gm Ley geelly arlal opera 
[2 ].orm Jk al 

Cart oly AS ye Gh Lb ale 2idy ob 9S Lad ye DG (A) 
Gla ISB opm ByLB] ALLL ge Le Vl lal ppb gl gl alld y wt 


\o 


Qn 


20 


25 


30 


3 Book One, Chapter One 


because in the other sciences you would have something which is a subject; 
things that are searched after; and principles, [universally] admitted, from 
which demonstrations are constructed. But now you still have not truly 
ascertained what is the subject matter of this science—whether it is the 
essence of the First Cause, so that what one seeks here is knowledge of His 
attributes and acts, or whether the subject matter is some other notion. 

(9) Moreover, you used to hear that there is here [at hand] philosophy 
in the real [sense], and a first philosophy; and that it imparts validation to 
the principles of the rest of the sciences; and that it is, in reality, wisdom. 
You also used to hear, at one time, that wisdom is the best knowledge of the 
best object of knowledge; at another, that it is the most correct and per- 
fect knowledge; and, at yet another, that it is knowledge of the first causes 
of all [things]. [But] you did not know what this first philosophy is, and 
what this wisdom is, and whether these three definitions and attributes 
belong to one art or to different arts, each of which is termed “wisdom.” 

(10) We will now show you that this science we are after is first phi- 
losophy and that it is absolute wisdom, and [moreover] that the three 
attributes with which wisdom has been described are the attributes of one 
art, it being this art. It has also become known that for each science there 
is a subject matter proper to it. Let us now investigate what the subject 
matter of this science is; and let us consider whether it is the existence® 
of God—exalted be His greatness—or not, except [that God’s existence 
is] one of the things searched after in this science. We will thus say: 

(11) It is not possible that [God’s existence] should be the subject 
matter. This is because the subject matter of every science is something 
whose existence is admitted in that science, the only thing investigated 
being its states. (This was known in other places.) The existence of God— 
exalted be His greatness—cannot be admitted as the subject matter of this 
science; rather, it is [something] sought in it. This is because, if this were 
not the case, then [God’s existence] would have to be either admitted in 


elect uw oly! ¥ 


Exe 8 th DIS 6 psbal fle 3 gl elldy USS al gladly 
BE cael My pats) Gas pe Ran Cgolery allel oo oll, 
Wino Bayar a1 GS Fo SMAI 0 Jay «lll 9 pyc gll Le Gea 
| yl gas glallal, 

ab Wily «gpl Reddy AEELL GL Lys gl et OS Lally (4) 
RSL gig pad 5 aby RLY ASL 2 cesell Sle teak emma 
Nel tye eel oh Mab ARSE Gl atl pe athe Jal» 
Ley Jy Reali oe Laps VES ST UY OLY chal Ul gel, 
SR oleliad gl duel delead SMI olinally opabl fay ASL ode 
— ASS geet rnold 

tly «JVI Rada 2 ae a gill lal Le gl OW gd gas (15) 
Gals dete clio 2 ASI ly ay SE clea ily cdillell ASL 
esl ye SN told atte le poy ale SK gl ple aby Reliall oe ry 
C8 uc gh cosce SLs alla] go lal AP great pa day cg Le cll by 
2 Je cpl (oe Mls oy Ht oh 

ol saple Spey WM uly cp p25! 2 lb OKI jee V4) (\\) 
rele Ue ple [1] By callgel ye Long Ley cdl LIS 3 age gl gla 
Ub fp gl all the 8 Whe 9S Gl jem Vane Yl aM opeyy ge! 
pial ha oo eee SG Ll Joa) LIS Kgl gh a allay 4d Gyan 


A 


10 


30 


4 Book One, Chapter One 


this science but searched for in another, or else admitted in this science 
but not searched for in another. Both alternatives are false. For it cannot 
be sought in another science, since the other sciences are either moral, 
political, natural, mathematical, or logical. None of the philosophical sci- 
ences lies outside this division. There is [absolutely] nothing in them 
wherein the proof of God—exalted be His greatness—is investigated. 
[Indeed,] this is impossible. (You will know this with minimum reflection 
from principles repeated to you.) Nor can it be sought in sciences other 
than these, for then it would not be sought in any science at all. [God’s 
existence] would then have to be either self-evident or [else] something 
one despairs of proving through theoretical reflection. But it is neither 
self-evident nor something one despairs of demonstrating; for [in fact] 
there is a proof for it. Moreover, how can an existence which one despairs 
of demonstrating be legitimately admitted [as the subject matter of this 
science]? It thus remains that the investigation [of God’s existence belongs] 
only in this science. 

(12) The inquiry concerning [God] would, then, have two aspects— 
one [being] an inquiry concerning Him with respect to His existence® 
and the other [an inquiry] with respect to His attributes. If, then, the 
inquiry concerning His existence is in this science, it cannot be the subject 
matter of this science. For it is not for any science to establish its own 
subject matter. We will presently show you that the inquiry concerning His 
existence can only [reside] in this science, since it has become clear to 
you from the state of this science that it investigates [the things] that 
are basically separable from matter. You have glimpsed in the natural 
sciences that God is neither a body nor the power of a body, but that He is 
one—free in every respect from matter and from admixture with motion. 
Hence, the inquiry concerning Him must belong to this science. What 
you have glimpsed regarding this in the natural sciences was foreign to the 
natural sciences—{something] used in them that does not belong to them. 
By this, however, it was intended to hasten for man the knowledge of the 
existence of the First Principle, so that the desire to acquire the other 
sciences would take hold of him, and [to hasten] his being drawn to the 
level [of mastering these sciences] so as to reach true knowledge of Him. 


let yw ole ¢ 


phe Bolles by oll ba 3 Lhe OK ST Uy ST le 3 ley 
poet GM cps abe 3 llan Kl jy VAN dy. GrAbel ye gl ISG 
Pods les by sky lly dark Ly dole lade Ll gs) 
USL oe one Nee ot BM uly hae oa ge LF le SL gl 
OS Se LE ol be oye cil, hd 3S sl jew Vy coe li aly 
wiles pF em SAY eT le Bose 2 9K gl Lal gen Vy vole 
My a ey at ly Ge Legh Ly canis US Ug Kol ep 
S009 pe ras ATL Ge ell ds abe ob ily ge Legle 
shal Ie 9 ye Lilacs Lott gl 

cosy tye 6 ee Coll emel tives ge ue Coll gKy (1) 
SEAN jem pd cplell ie Sargrey oF Coull gO bly lie ye oy sy 
wat oe ON py AE 2 ONL esl ye oho Je pal ald «bal D8 & gy 
Se el oad 28 5 cob Ide 3 WOK Gl jae Voayery ge teal gl « Lal 
xe aM global 3 ley by heal ill) 2,1 jp Low al te 
Fp Bde yey ciolll yo ogy oly eb [V] epee Bb Vy gee 
ada FMS oy CY sally ola Lag ace Cont GSS gl ad tye 
Jal ay FAT Nee pad bee YS haaeny cobacll 5p Lye GW 
AEM, cess HLS Bae Mar SLM LL le gy glint 
ALY die ro gs sles gil lal 


\o 


a 


20 


30 


3 Book One, Chapter One 


(13) Since it is inescapable that there should be a subject matter for 
this science, and since it has become clear to you that that which was 
believed to be its subject matter was not its subject matter, let us consider: 
Is its subject matter the ultimate causes for all the existents—the four 
of them—not one being excluded from the discussion? For this is also 
{a view] which some people may believe. 

(14) But examining all the causes must also include their being con- 
sidered either [(a)] inasmuch as they are existents, [(b)] inasmuch as 
they are absolute causes, [(c)] inasmuch as they consist of each of the 
four [existents] in the manner that is peculiar to it (I mean, inasmuch as 
this is an agent, this a recipient [of action], and that some other thing), 
or {(d)] with respect to the aggregate composed thercof. 

(15) We thus say: Examination of them cannot be with respect to 
their being absolute causes, whereby the purpose of this science would 
be to examine matters occurring to the causes inasmuch as they are 
absolute causes. This is seen in a number of ways. Onc of these is that 
this science investigates notions that are not accidents proper to causes 
inasmuch as they are causes—[notions] such as the universal and the 
particular, potency and act,'® possibility and necessity, and others. [Now,] 
it is obvious and clear that these matters in themselves are such that 
they necessarily call for investigation. Moreover, they are not among the 
accidents proper to natural and mathematical things. Nor do they fall 
within the [class of] accidents proper to the practical sciences. It thus 
remains that the investigation of these rests with the science that is left 
in the division [of the sciences] —namely, this science. 

(16) Again, knowledge of the absolute causes comes about after the 
science establishing the existence of causes for those things that have 
causes. For, as long as we have not established the existence of causes for 
those things that are effects (by establishing that the existence of [the 
latter] has a relation to what precedes them in existence), it does not 
become a rational necessity that there is an absolute cause and that 
there is here some cause. As for sensation, it leads only to concomitance. 
And it is not the case that, if two things are concomitants, it then follows 


etl 5 oly 0 


A Sat gil gh al ass poy abil OKI a Kid Wy (04) 
WS lose pll Smal LV ae png Jet fale nego yt pul A porye yp 
sp la, 9 Lal Lae gb See Jyh SS ol ill Yer ely V Mga 

Clore oe tea gl bY Lal WOOL pa (6) 
g5h hate gill ell Leta My oly Se Legh eile Lud Lgl 
weer op gh el et dy chi ely «Je agli oy Gb atl Sg 
Me oe Had ol 

SS Fe dillon Leal go Le YS sas 9K ol gyew V tged (0) 
Filles lel go Le clad 2 a8 BM eI BBN yp pall Ios 5 Goyal 
OP Pema) Slee GF Coe al Ls gl ge oe Lael sageny yy Le lang 
SM, «Sadly ily « SLL TI fe olal oe LN Rod pl od 
on eee el 3 ay habe gl lst Gul y ob [A] lB ney edly 
Vy -Heada gaily dencdall yA ell ae jp od pe Coes 
pled Wes Sot 9S gl ab Eh aah Gell aici pal, Lal ys 
pla 12 yy PLB! oy BLU 

oN CLAM OL pill oe ole aillall OLAVL lal 5B Lely (95) 
bee Islet ll polo sey ccd LLB LVL 
Ue ow gm ly «atl all agony fil ae gic ayer eas Ue 
Marvel Se Sl cory «SEE BF HL dy ahh IY oop. abl Ly 


\o 


15 


30 


6 Book One, Chapter One 


necessarily that one of them is the cause of the other.'! The persuaded 
belief that occurs to the soul due to the multiplicity [of things] conveyed 
by sensation and empirical test does not become assured, as you have 
known, except through the knowledge that the things that exist are, for 
the most part, either natural or voluntary. And this, in reality, depends 
on the affirmation of underlying reasons and the acknowledgment of the 
existence of reasons and causes. This is not a primary [self]-evident 
[knowledge] but is something commonly held;!? and you have known the 
difference between the two. Nor is it the case, when it is close to being 
self-evident to the mind that temporal! things have some originating prin- 
ciple, that this must be self-evident. ([This is] exemplified by many of 
the geometrical matters demonstrated in Euclid’s book.) Moreover, the 
demonstrative proof of the above does not belong to the other sciences. 
Hence, it must belong to this science. 

(17) How, then, can the existence of the subject matter of science, 
whose states are investigated within [the category] of the things sought 
after [in science], be sought therein? If this [impossible state of affairs] 
is the case, then it is also evident that the inquiry concerning [the causes] is 
not with respect to the existence proper to each—because this is [some- 
thing] sought after in this science—nor can it be with respect to their 
being some aggregate and a whole (I do not say “aggregational” and 
“universal”). For, examining the parts of the aggregate is prior to exam- 
ining the aggregate (although in one respect, you have learned, this is not 
the case with the particular instances of the universal). Hence, examin- 
ing the parts must be either in this science—whereby they would have the 
greater claim to be the subject matter—or else in another science. But 
no science except this one includes discussion of the ultimate causes. 
If, however, the examination of the causes pertains to them inasmuch as 
they exist and [pertains] to the things that relate to them in this respect, 
then the primary subject matter [of metaphysics] must be the existent 
inasmuch as it is an existent. 

(18) Thus, the falsity of this theoretical [argument]—namely, that 
the subject matter of this science is the ultimate causes—becomes evi- 
dent. Rather, it should be known that [probing the ultimate causes] is its 
perfection and what it seeks after. 


+ la uw oll 4 


Je Se bi rly Daag La wlll a tlglaM, S50 LL 
Play WLS habe SV Sige ye eT gl ghadyec M cca 
UST ud aay Lay Jill ope 18My Jbl td i a aa 
Gaol op «fall ace U8 GTI] aly «Lage Gyll Sale by ogg] 8 
fae All ye Sle ca 3 OS ol om be Mae tala gl is 
U8 SAW pall 9 yd el gla SLI pall ot Mle gal 
pdt 0b SK gl oom 

Mall Ballpen! ye pnt all prod 5S gh KS GS (\v) 
U8] Hee Se ee cel al Lal gd WUT YS aly Sad a peell gle 
Lege ye Lal Vy lal We Bellen US GY cpr aorly Sade gill age 
badly pol ad spel B jal 3b WG ar Sal et \e Alam 
OF ol cod ale ob Leh Sh olie BS Kg oy cll 
BIS 3 6 yay SS Sh Bh go 3K hal Ue 9 UY ea be 
i Lily pball We 2 eal cL 3 psi pete ST le pedy Tle 
OSL and AI Ol ie We Ly tages ge ee pe GLAM 3 atl GB 
. dere hE opel ga Jel exoall OK 

AAW Ae pigs alll Us gl yay «ast Lie gptley Lal gly aad (V4) 
[V > ]-Argary SLE gl ale, oI om Jp «sual 





AIP 02 6 see age” 


red 


\o 


Nn 


15 


20 


7 Book One, Chapter Two 


Chapter [Two] 


On attaining the subject matter of this science 


(1) Hence, we must inescapably indicate the subject matter of this 
science so that the purpose that lies in this science becomes evident for us. 
We thus say: 

(2) The subject matter of natural science [as we have seen] was 
body, [but] not by way of its being an existent, nor by way of its being 
substance, nor by way of its being composed of its two principles ([by 
which] I mean matter and form), but by way of its being subject to motion 
and rest. The sciences that fall under natural science are farther away 
from this;! the same is the case with the moral sciences. 

(3) As for mathematical science, its subject was either measure 
abstracted in the mind from matter, or measure apprehended in the mind 
with matter, or number abstracted from matter, or number in matter. 
This investigation, too, was not directed toward establishing that it is 
either measure abstracted [from matter] or measure in matter or number 
abstracted [from matter] or [number] in matter, but [it] was in the direc- 
tion of the states that occur to measure after being thus posited. With 
the sciences that fall under the mathematical, it is more proper for their 
investigation to be confined to the accidental occurrences that attach to 
posited things [that are] more specific than these [former]. 

(4) The subject matter of logic, as you have known, was the second- 
ary intelligible ideas that depend on the primary intelligible ideas? with 
respect to the manner by which one arrives through them from what is 
known to what is unknown—not [however] with respect to their being 
intelligible[s], having [that] intellectual existence that either is not at 
all attached to matter or attached to noncorporeal matter.® Besides these 


sciences, there are no other sciences. 


etl y» ol¥y v 


[ sul jeal] 
dh22() 
plall Lag yo ge Jat 3 


Pp Gs Jo law Y Abily gall pysaall le Jai gl Cad (9) 
Jib call Ve 3 ye il 

coe we op Siply mab ae yoy G68 adel ll gh (1) 
Ciagally Sadl gel cada py 9s Le py tee bie Vy 
dal al ek SN esbily gKatly Soll ppg 90 Lidge yy Sy 
Lad AS, sy 

call 56 gail 8 byyee Lyla Lae po ye SS ab ob pl dl Uy (1) 
poleae Ulsciulll se tsccs eae Ul vals etal a bel Lie Uy 
396 ghia 3 gl aye glade al oUt] Gl Yale Gout Lal Kiply ssl 
Pilly AS aay oor ad ei AN Se ge 8 OY ial 9 gl ae 
leLagl [aat] A aol SY LB OK Yoh Gloleyicd 
plo ae oy yes! 

PAST Deal Slab ao pio ye GA cede US arlt laly (£) 
GLENN] pales 5 We hess LAS ge je SN Well gla i} acs 
Hg hol sale Gh. Y gil alloyed Wy Asian a Lge eV gee 
SANE pal obs ib Kid tile bal 








ei «gas ak” 


\o 


A 


10 


20 


30 


8 Book One, Chapter Two 


(5) Moreover, investigating the state of substance inasmuch as it is 
an existence and a substance; of body inasmuch as it is a substance; of 
measure and number inasmuch as [these] two exist, and the manner of 
their existence; and [the state of] formal things that are either not in 
matter or are in matter which is not corporeal matter, and the manner 
of their existence and what mode of existence is proper to them—[all 
this] is one of the things to which one ought to devote [a special] inquiry. 
This [inquiry] can neither be part of the knowledge of sensible things 
nor [be] part of the knowledge of what exists in sensible things. The acts 
of estimating and of defining, however, strip [what exists in sensible 
things] from sensibles. It is, hence, part of the knowledge of that whose 
existence is separable. 

(6) As for substance, it is clear that its existence, inasmuch as it is 
only substance, is not connected with matter. Otherwise, there would be 
no substance that is not sensible. As for number, it would apply to [both] 
sensible and non-sensible things. Thus, inasmuch as it is number, it is 
not attached to sensible things. 

(7) In the case of measure, however, the utterance [denoting it] is an 
equivocal term. It includes [(1)] what is said to be “measure,” by which is 
meant the extension that gives subsistence toa natural body; and [(2)] what 
is said to be “measure,” by which is meant a continuous quantity predi- 
cated of the line, the surface, and the determinate body. You have known 
the difference between the two. Neither of them is separate from matter. 
However, measure in the first sense, although inseparable from matter, is 
also a principle for the existence of natural bodies. If, then, it is a principle 
of their existence, its subsistence cannot be connected with them in the 
sense that it derives subsistence from sensible things; rather, sensible 
things derive their subsistence from it. It is, hence, also essentially prior to 
sensible things. This is not the case with shape. For shape is an accident 
[that occurs] as a necessary concomitant of matter after its substantiation 
as an existing finite body and its carrying a finite surface. For limits are 
necessary for measure with respect to matter’s realizing its perfection 
through [measure]—[limits] becoming thereafter necessary concomitants 
of [measure]. If, then, this is the case, shape exists only in matter and is 


not a primary cause for the emergence of matter into actuality. 


red yy oll A 


PE med poy aye ore tle abl de gs Soll! (2) 
as pall yl OF 9 Ltd gy Sy cSlogeye Le Le susdly lal 9 Ae 
FFI Yl, GLa Fal lal pout a 
clall the 5 3 I jem pls tow A ayn | Com Lad « Npase 942 
deeds Al SS eB bargey Label alam yo Vy clay dl 
«he e2gery Le lel tha 3) yb ole 56 0a 

GOW, Ssh Gee 2 Laid aye ge Levogey Sh gd paodt Ll (4) 
EWP ole Bl by Ole tl Jo ab oi sad Ul Lege YI Sage 
Clagett lh aoe 5 06 yp 

petll onlay ayy clade i ob Load Note al aladle Jaall bly (Vv) 
Cay BBN te Ss Aha Se oy lake Jl be ay «gael aul 
Ky caolal Byles Lage oly Vy Gady « Lager Dyall cays by. dy adly 
Rall Loo syed Le Lal ab solll Gul Y gi sly Jal coh jlaall 
esa doi Al gat Wy ell alee [1] SK il pao Lao Lae gh 
BE SIL pale Lal 3h gi splyil die aad obeyed fp colagebl 
Lance Lan oy Sola SY Yale SCAN gb cell CN, alee gauche 
SLSCal tym ye gladall CB dyad} 5lb . Laie bodes Yloy lage ye Lali 
Ae, SU bape JSS ob WIS QTE «ae cp arly a Sol 
- Saal Jlaotll gy d 25,) 


\o 


Oo 


10 


20 


25 


30 


35 


9 Book One, Chapter Two 


(8) As for measure in the other sense, it is subject to theoretical 
inquiry with respect to its existence and to theoretical inquiry with respect 
to the accidental occurrences [it undergoes}.* As regards the theoretical 
inquiry concerning its existence [that asks] what mode of existence [this] 
is and to what division of the existent it belongs, [this] is also not an inves- 
tigation of an idea that is connected with matter. 

(9) Regarding the subject of logic viewed in itself, it is clear that it is 
outside sensible things. 

(10) It is thus evident that all these [subjects] fall under the science 
that is engaged with [those things] whose subsistence is not connected 
with sensibles. It is impossible to posit for them a common subject matter 
other than the existent of which they would all constitute the states and 
accidental circumstances. For some of them are substances, some are 
quantities, and some are other categories. No ascertainable meaning can 
be common to all of them other than the true meaning of existence. 

(11) Similarly, one may also find matters that must be defined and 
ascertained in the soul, being common to [all] the sciences, where not any 
one of the sciences undertakes discussion thereof—for example, the one 
inasmuch as it is one, the numerous inasmuch as it is numerous, the 
agreeing, the different, the contrary, and others. Some [of the sciences] 
only use them; others will only take their definitions without discussing 
the mode of their existence. These are not accidental circumstances 
proper to anything pertaining to the subjects of these particular sciences; 
nor are they among the things whose [mode of] existence is anything 
other than the existence of attributes for entities; nor [again] are they 
among the attributes shared by all things so that each one of [these 
attributes] would be common to everything. Moreover, [the subject mat- 
ter of metaphysics] cannot be specifically confined to any one category, 
nor can it be the attributes of any one thing except the existent inasmuch 
as it is an existent. 

(12) It is thus clear to you from this totality [of what has been said] 
that the existent inasmuch as it is an existent is something common to 
all these things and that it must be made the subject matter of this art 
for the reasons we have stated. And, moreover, because it is above the 
need either for its quiddity to be learned or for itself to be established 


so as to require another science to undertake to clarify [such] a state of 


affairs therein ([this] because of the impossibility of establishing the 


eae 


PAV BOA) oo oll 4 


We Llily coagy Ree 5p La a3 9B ST Gaal all LI, (A) 
cage all Bl Gl ey cot opel ebosl leogeny Gh ofall Lb adjlye 
alll ghd ar ge Lal bow yo Lc 

le pedl oF GE al all wld Rye 5 Glad poy Lib (4) 

lage Bl ald gles Ve bbe, il alll 9 a YS obs gh ee (Ve) 
OB. 2d Vacjley SVE Ye 5G Ane per Wees sliew Ys 
gee lagen dt SE ely el Mee aay OLS \pany pale leew 
23 ga Reem Yl Gene 

PI dell gb Gietly sae gl Con opel Leal 2 9 08 IS (19) 
ele fyr] velgl pe dS Pore shal aly Vy ely cpsbell byte 
Yoni aad clld 555 anally BLELly lly Sg Sy rely 
coy ea geey 925 UF IG Vy ane Jk Ul ony bid Yl 
SSA a ye casey ALI pda ra cle poy ye tbe als 
et SOS Al oleall ye Lal Syciywwlial seas St Les gmy 
Sb SVs Asis Lal od ol yey et ee cel MoS 
ore leo Mt eile OK 

CODA ak Dota wl oeegs ge Le opel glalabl oda yy bh walled (11) 
Bea Kole pl je Gb AY, Ub Wackall ody pp ogll Jeon gl cow aly 
OHS MLL AS Li cla abil be 2b ale JSS gl Jt > all 


\o 


10 


20 


30 


10 Book One, Chapter Two 


subject matter of a science and ascertaining its quiddity in the very science 
that has that subject), [it thus needs] only the admission of its existence® 
and quiddity. The primary subject matter of this science is, hence, the 
existent inasmuch as it is an existent; and the things sought after in 
[this science] are those that accompany [the existent,] inasmuch as it is 
an existent, unconditionally. 

(13) Some of these things belong to [the existent] as though they 
were species®—as, for example, substance, quantity, and quality. For, in 
undergoing such a division, the existent does not require, [as is] required 
by substance, [a] prior division into many divisions, where it must [for 
example] be divided into human and not human. Some of these are akin 
to proper accidents,’ such as the one and the many, the potential and the 
actual, the universal and the particular, and the possible and the necessary. 
For, the existent, in accepting these accidents® and in being prepared for 
them, does not need to become specified as natural, mathematical, moral, 
or some other thing. 

(14) Someone, however, may say: If the existent is made the subject 
matter of this science, then the principles of the existents cannot be 
established in it, because, in every science, investigation is of the things 
that follow its subject, not of its principles. 

(15) The answer to this is that theoretical inquiry of the principles is 
also an investigation of the things that occur as accidents to this subject. 
[This is] because the existent’s being a principle is neither [something] 
that gives it its subsistence nor [something] impossible in it; but, with 
respect to the nature of the existent, [it] is something that occurs acci- 
dentally to it and is one of the accidents to it. For there is nothing more 
general than the existent [that would allow a principle] to attach to [some] 
other [thing] in a primary way. Neither does the existent need to become 
natural, mathematical, or some other thing in order to be subject to the 
occurrence of being a principle. Moreover, the principle is not a principle 
of the existent in its entirety.® For, if it were a principle of the existent in 
its entirety, then it would be a principle of itself. On the contrary, the 
existent in its entirety has no principle, a principle being a principle only 
for the existent that is caused. The principle is thus a principle of part of 
the existent. Thus, this science does not investigate the principles of the 


Lets y» ole \: 


He aly Col pcled ab pong y gill plall Dak pity ppb ,l li] 
Media A yy May Saye ye 2 Le opal a all LY Sig paul 
byt Fy ey 
Chm ABS Sy wh ree Go syle any (11) 
Aah ge Ola BI adh ele US LSI ON Upll aeis h B 2 el 
ly sel yl foe Heol 2 lg oie amy Sli poy GLY I LZY 
DDS Bape glow ld col ty Kably {Shy Wily « aly ayaly 
[Ye] Nd pe sl Le Lbs I Lede oes gh IY slay al il 
Semel pall Ia pel pe ope gll Jam Lal Seis gl Jilly (14) 
Gold Ge ot ple IFS Sat Yo lage sl igl Olt] aK gl 
ale Gf Varying 
Ve a rlge ge tow ge Lal egal 3 baal gl ae Ge LLB (10) 
fal DL tM 8p 9b EY, pee ob ae SS age ll SY cp pall 
Cpe gll oe wel eg jad a ay Leth oslyall yey cal yeyLe pl a gengt 
Cb ol Late I Lan’ pues hg! dhe ley Lally. Uy! Bhoe gals 
Mae ay AS agra ed athe Lees Kola opm le pal 
2 yey Lae Lt Lil cal Lae VAS ageegll fp Samad Lae IK AS 5 yo yal 
sal gale Ge Coe alll Ie 9S ogg Gad Lae ye Lb Jl 


\o 


10 


20 


30 


1 Book One, Chapter Tivo 


existent absolutely but investigates only the principles of some [of the 
things] in it, as in the case of the particular sciences. For, although these 
[latter] do not demonstrate the existence of their common principles 
(since they have principles common to everything toward which each 
moves),'° they [nonetheless] demonstrate from the things within them the 
existence of that which is a principle [for the science] posterior to them. 

(16) What adheres necessarily to this science [therefore] is that it is 
necessarily divided into parts. Some of these will investigate the ultimate 
causes, for these are the causes of every caused existent with respect to its 
existence. [This science] will [also] investigate the First Cause, from which 
emanates every caused existent inasmuch as it is a caused existent, not only 
inasmuch as it is an existent in motion or [only inasmuch as it is] quantified. 
Some [of the parts of this science] will investigate the accidental occur- 
rences to the existent, and some [will investigate] the principles of the 
particular sciences. And because the principles of each science that is 
more particular are things searched after in the higher science—as, for 
example, the principles of medicine [found] in natural [science] and of 
surveying [found] in geometry—it will so occur in this science that the 
principles of the particular sciences that investigate the states of the par- 
ticular existents are clarified therein. 

(17) Thus, this science investigates the states of the existent—and the 
things that belong to it that are akin [to being] divisions and species— 
until it arrives at a specialization with which the subject of natural science 
begins, relinquishing to it this speciality; [and at a] specialization with 
which the subject matter of mathematics begins, relinquishing to it this 
speciality; and so on with the others. And [this science] investigates and 
determines the state of that which, prior to such specialization, is akin to 
a principle. Thus, [some of] the things sought after in this science are 
the causes of the existent inasmuch as it is a caused existent; some [of the 
things sought after] pertain to the accidental occurrences to the existent; 
and some [pertain] to the principles of the particular sciences. 

(18) This, then, is the science sought after in this art. It is first philos- 
ophy, because it is knowledge of the first thing in existence (namely, the 
First Cause) and the first thing in generality (namely, existence and unity). 
It is also wisdom, which is the best knowledge of the best thing known. 
For, it is the best knowledge (that is, [knowledge that yields] certainty) of 


PAP BA Bo oly \\ 


Ye Sly WB LI poll $LIST AS Law taal ye Cons Up lila 
doly Srogees be ae WAZ egal Wy 51 SAM Yoke oy he jay! 
NB Al aa je Ua Whee 0 bogey le gad Wilh cle 

hell ge oe lee el Baye pea gl all Legh (99) 
INI Gell GF tony cong he oy Sale oy SULA Dc spall 
Jeti Space appr ge gh LEY Joe ogre ge 9h Eales ogee ye Bae jars il 
pall sole ge toes be leey ope pall Sule ge toe be ley bid 
take foe ge all 3 Sle po ash [00] phe Stgole My aah! 
43 oats Sl plall Ihe (8 Gah yd Larsegl Od olelly « gecdal 3 Cal 
Bed olghl Jel ye cad abl blest 

PBT 2 Ml pally Cage gll Spel ye tone lal age (MV) 
Ad alas lal pall Epo ye Ane Dao gaeds lf oe ple 
SB Ley US eo Sy AN ahd Loli pp dee bre areas 
pl ae plan 53] SS ale "Lyyby] ae Teens] Ld anes als 
Vpdany a erall arly OD Ngan cider ayorge 98 LK slall aye gli lial 3 
ASA ole 2 

ale all a «Boh Medal gg Relea os 3 lla lal ga Liye (YA) 
Bro slly ose sil phy <p yaa ao sls onl Wall Ay opel 3 yy 
Joab cll gl se Juail QB Sp slae Jad ale asl > SLI Lal yy 





Bad BREN In Goo odd — 
DIRE AIRS ee fret 


\o 


ea 


10 


20 


30 


12 Book One, Chapter Tivo 


the best thing known (that is, God, exalted be He, and the causes after 
Him). It is also knowledge of the ultimate causes of the whole [of caused 
things]. Moreover, it is knowledge of God and has the definition of divine 
science, which consists of a knowledge of the things that are separable 
from matter in definition and existence. For, as has become clear, the 
existent inasmuch as it is an existent, and its principles and the acciden- 
tal occurrences [it undergoes] are all prior in existence to matter, and 
none of them is dependent for its existence on [matter’s] existence. 

(19) If, in this science, one investigates that which is not prior to 
matter, what is being investigated therein is only an idea, that idea not 
requiring matter for its existence. But the things investigated in [this 
science] are of four parts: [(1)] Some of these are basically devoid of mat- 
ter and that which attaches to matter. [(2)] Some are mixed with matter, 
but [this] is the admixture of the cause that gives subsistence and is prior; 
it is not matter that renders it subsistent. [(3)] Some may be found with 
or without matter—for example, causality and unity. What these share 
in common, insofar as they are [the things] they are [in themselves], 
consists in their not needing matter for their realization. This group also 
shares in not being material in existence in the sense that it does not 
derive its existence from matter. [(4)] Some are material things—as, for 
example, motion and rest. What is investigated in this science, however, 
is not their state in matter, but only the mode of existence that belongs 
to them. Thus, if this last division is taken with the others, they would all 
have in common the fact that the mode of investigation pertaining to 
them is in the direction of an idea whose existence does not subsist in 
matter. The case here is [the same] as it is in the mathematical sciences, 
wherein sometimes that which is determined by matter is posited, but 
where the mode of theoretical inquiry and investigation concerning it 
would be in the direction of an idea [that is] not determined by matter 
and where the relation with matter of what was investigated does not 
remove the investigation from being mathematical. 

(20) [From the above,] the purpose of this science has become mani- 
fest and apparent. 

(21) This science shares something in common with dialectical and 
sophistical [arguments] in one respect, differs from both [together] in 
[another] respect, and differs from each [separately] in [yet another] 
respect. As for its having something in common with the two, this is 
because what is investigated in this science is [something] which no 


ladll yo ole yl \Y 


99 FD ptt LAT yee Lal pty case ge Ley Shs abl a pel 
abl (3 sala BL yh ale ail ye gil Ml lal am aly call Spall Lal 
Yh «aN Ss Ng gh ped Miah sey Maley oper ye 8 Le ogersll S] cope sly 
Large y sgh ge poy dolll le ope gl puie 

«ptt GF AD Sony Lib coll pal, Y Les alll Ine Oo Coe aly (99) 
plas Je 243 les Spell sol cial ll ope gl claw yb gall ull 
Kil cba Wey Igienry Deol soll [VV] gokey doll ye Ray Vpeand they! 
oy Soll 9 amy ob pany 4) Regie doll Condy pall pgall Ctl aldo 
SEV gh oo le ttl W GH VSG Ge Slab! Pol BY x5 
Shope sliale pb Ugh B Lal LL ode As tty cialll ony I geal gc 
yet Sy GKeadly BAC chaple jyal parry 3a ye agers sole pF 
Ue SEN ISB WY gill opel god fe doll ble pall Lhe 3 ae Spel 
be gate op ot lps Cot pi gl BSH we LM ee pel 
SH cil suede ge Med eon G5 ob oly! pl SI ASG balls 
Le Be am ee Y gy cial sre pb ae ye 5 GU ae Leal atl os 
«bigs JULI WIS Lok Leet 9 SG gl ge doll we toy 

«PH Gi pth Ihe eral gl My yb ab (1) 

Aang it lagillony Aary + Mlemtently Jatt A Ley ala aay (11) 
pall Nie bab Leone, Le GS LYS Leh aay ge Lae ely Seiden 


\o 


QS 


10 


15 


20 


30 


13 Book One, Chapter Three 


exponent of a particular science discusses, whereas both the dialectician 
and the sophist discuss it. Regarding its differing from both, [this] is due 
to the fact that the [metaphysician] (the first philosopher inasmuch as he 
is the first philosopher) does not discuss the problems of the particular 
sciences, whereas [the former] two discuss them. As regards the special 
difference [of this science] from dialectic, [the difference lies] in power. 
For dialectical discussion yields opinion [and] not certainty, as you have 
learned in the art of logic. As for its difference from sophistry, [this] is in 
terms of desire.!! This is because [the metaphysician] desires the truth 
itself, whereas [the sophist] desires to be thought of as a wise man who 
utters truth, even though he is not a wise man. 


Chapter [Three] 


On the benefit of this science, the order’ 
[in which it is studied], and its name 


(1) Regarding the benefit of this science, you must have come to 
know from the sciences preceding this one the difference between the 
beneficial and the good and the difference between the harmful and 
evil_—that the beneficial is the cause that in itself leads to the good and 
that benefit is the idea through which one arrives from evil at the good. 
Now that this is established, you would have known that all the sciences 
share in one benefit—namely, the attainment of the human soul’s per- 
fection in act, preparing it for happiness in the hereafter. However, when 
one looks in the introductions of [philosophical] books for [a statement 
about] the benefit of the sciences, [one discovers] that the intention is 
not directed to such a meaning but, rather, to the assistance [each science] 
renders the other, so that the benefit of any one science becomes an idea 
through which one arrives at the validation of another science. 

(2) If “benefit” is [used] in this [second] sense, then it can either be 
spoken of in an absolute sense or be spoken of in a specific manner. As 
regards the absolute [sense], it consists in the beneficial being conducive 
to the validation of another science of whatever [level]. As regards the 
specific [sense], it consists in the beneficial being conducive to the [vali- 
dation] of a [science] higher than it. [This higher science] acts as the 
purpose for the [lower science], since [the latter] acts for its sake, the 


converse not being the case. 


Vectl ye OLY \y 


SS AE Ll, « fla byy 14 ay «Zip ple cole Ab GY 
LIS RELI asl Bleed GY Iyl Spehed ge tom oye Jill Spel 
WS opal Y fal aoe Jad OI GY ald Reb Jacd Cale Ly. ghiSG, 
hl ogy Le QV alld aol VLb aslea taal Ul, “es isle cule 

[WV] SH Saal ly I Se SS ail fe gl ayy aby and 


[stl jal] 
(Zz) 


GE Ue JS SM pslall Bey 08 9S gl apd cplall Datei UL, (9) 

> Ell ly co be Sl ny sallow Beal ly 98 Le Dy lal ow Gal 

Bh BL At & hen Gall gall ep Mecelly GBI gL aly Jel 

MUS rah try ined, baie BALE WO phil gl cule 0B lhe 58 03 Sly 

SI 9d) oP MB BLA, aay oN soled LL age Jedly GLY tl 

cae DP Una Rigas Sp cual We GIL ged analll Gl ppl bales Gp 

(ark de Sid ae ot gar lle ee 5S So 

Laas V5 Jin aby « lllen Vg Slay oad call bela, (v) 

SB aaall bly SES ST le gat Ito, dul S ol g gla Lb 
KAN ye ade ye 3] ad ALIS yay cae fol ye LUpey ail oS 


\o 


15 


20 


30 


l4 Book One, Chapter Three 


(3) Hence, if we take “benefit” in the absolute sense, then this [meta- 
physical] science does have a benefit. If [however] we take “benefit” in the 
special sense, then this science is above being of use to another science; 
rather, the rest of the sciences are of use to it. 

(4) On the other hand, if we divide absolute benefit into its divisions, 
it would consist of three parts: [(1)] a division wherein that which is con- 
ducive is conducive to a loftier idea than it; [(2)] a division wherein that 
which is conducive is conducive to an idea equal to it; and [(3)] a division 
wherein the conducive is conducive to an idea lower than it—[where, | 
in effect, it contributes to a perfection lower than itself. If a special name 
is sought for this [latter], the most appropriate would be “emanation,” 
“bestowal,” “providence,” “leadership,” or some similar thing which you will 
find once you examine inductively the suitable utterances in this category. 

(5) Benefit, in the specific [sense], is close to the rendering of service, 
whereas the benefit attained by the lower from the nobler does not resemble 
the rendering of service. [For] you know that the servant benefits the one 
served and that the one served also benefits the servant (I mean, when 
“benefit” is taken in the absolute [sense]), where the species and specific 
aspect of each benefit constitute a species that is other [than the rest]. 
Hence, the benefit of this science—the manner of which we have shown— 
is to bestow certainty on the principles of the particular sciences and to 
validate the quiddity of the things they share in common, even when [the 
latter] are not principles. This, then, is the benefit of the leader to the sub- 
ordinate and of the one served to the servant, since the relation of this 
science to the particular sciences is that of the thing which is the object of 
knowledge in this science to the things that are the object of knowledge 
in those sciences. For just as [the former] is a principle for the existence of 
these [latter sciences], knowledge of [the former] is a principle for vali- 
dating the knowledge of these [latter sciences]. 

(6) Concerning the order [in which] this science [is studied], it should 
be learned after the natural and mathematical sciences. As regards the 
natural [sciences], this is because many of the things admitted in this 
science are among the things made evident in the natural sciences— 
as [for example] generation and corruption, change, place, time, the 
connection of every moved thing by a mover, the termination of [all] 
moved things with a first mover, and other than these. As for the mathe- 
matical [sciences], this is because the ultimate aim in this [metaphysi- 
cal] science—namely, knowledge of God’s governance, knowledge of the 


rlesdl ogy \¢ 


dail U5 Nay [VA] «fade all Log GS lel oak dase BEL BB (1) 
Ab pl psll flo Jp cob phe 9 peal je Joel al Ine gh yews call 

GK pad tLedl BG Ci lash] dled decal LO 13) USS (€) 
ghee ge Prhey ee pest 9S pady fae Jal ws JD hey es Jog 
413 Oye IS Y dae I gy gd ogee I Moye Ase Juogll Kiedy al 
jh chalsly edgally cay ROBY! 4, INI gO YO pel a lb M5] Lay 
rade ope oll ie aad ball LW cata Ua] Das ante Ue gd 

apt oy het Maal Ly aad ye iad dead deuelly (0) 
pis Wal pyacly cpgasall ata pall gl pl cil dadl at ob ol 
FT es ell age gy hats BES Gy Milas os Nil anal gol gold 
KAW sec AS AN plat cols cpt Bolbl Coe ery Ep Gall pal Lae aatead 
pally cad ll pa Antes 3] Lag tole SS pd oly «ed AFM aol 
Padme opal po Coll ttl Aad R5DN shal Jl alll los Aad 3] cpolel 
cE 9g) Nace US gh LSS. pghal OU Ob Gb opal LY Gy lll ae 
[V9] AEs alll giedd Lae glad LUIS 

Aascdall Ul a Dbly Racdal pgll oy ts gl gp pal Gadi Ul, (1) 
c Lady SOI: foo garda abe 3 og Ue RLM yl 5 LS gt 
Ml dee hoSedll fly Apes Ame Kg, aby ol ally 
GIL ytd Hyae gay lal Khe 3 al Gorall BG OUI LI, al 


\o 


10 


20 


30 


15 Book One, Chapter Three 


spiritual angels and their ranks, and knowledge of the order of the 
arrangement of the spheres—can only be arrived at through astronomy; 
and astronomy is only arrived at through the science of arithmetic and 
geometry. As for music and the particular divisions of mathematics and 
the moral and political [sciences], these constitute benefits that are not 
necessary for this science. 

(7) A questioner, however, may ask and say: “If the principles in the 
natural sciences and mathematics are only demonstrated in this science, 
and [if] the questions in [those] two sciences are demonstrated through 
the principles, and [if] the principles of those two sciences become prin- 
ciples for this [metaphysical] science, this would be a circular demon- 
stration, becoming, in the final analysis, a demonstration of a thing from 
itself.” What ought to be said in resolving this doubt is what has already 
been said in the Book of Demonstration.” From this, however, we will bring 
only a measure sufficient for this context. We say: 

(3) The principle of a science is not a principle merely because all 
the questions depend on it for their demonstrative proofs, actually or 
potentially; rather, the principle may be taken in the demonstrations of 
some of these questions. Moreover, it is possible that there are questions 
in the sciences whose demonstrations do not employ something posited? 
[from other sciences] at all but only use premises that have no demon- 
strations proving them. The principle of a science, however, is only a truly 
scientific principle if its adoption bestows the certainty acquired from the 
cause. If, however, it does not give the cause, [then it is] only said to be a 
principle of a science in a different manner; it is more fitting to speak of 
it as a principle in the way that sense is said to be a principle, where sense 
inasmuch as it is sense bestows only [knowledge of] existence. 

(9) The doubt is, hence, removed. For the natural principle can either 
be self-evident or [be] demonstrated in first philosophy through that which 
is not demonstrated by [the natural principle] thereafter. Through it, 
however, only other questions are demonstrated, so that what constitutes 
a premise in the higher science for yielding that principle is ignored in 
the principle’s [own] yielding [of a demonstrative conclusion]; but [the 
latter] would have another premise. It is also possible that the natural and 


rectly oly \o 


Sey! DV LIj Jplalldyer Mplebey ikey SOU ary Shs 
peer Wy Ansty cold nla Wall pega ViC yl ley gle Vag 
pled Sig bls PEL OLULL oLobslolye, 
pty daca he Oo gold C56 IS) oi) Syed Jey gl pL gl YE (vy 
call La3 Slane 258% gL 3 ipl Plan A8 ll Uae iy! Ul 
Cali Se Fg Gy yeh oT ay leygo Ly ahs OS cabal Iog tgalee yea 
Lely «Slay WSS rpty 15 ob L ge tp ttle Je 5 Sls gl ow ily 
‘td aio gl Ie PALES Slade a oy 
wT Mele Bat BLN eee OV bie OSS il ed lll Lg (4) 
ih pee BF «PLM oe a chy BEL LM GS Ly Sb cagiy gl yet 
Sees EY] UL EI Play] Jace Vester pla 3 5 5 
Ais OF 1 AY La alll Lae GK UL AT le. he gly YG baal 
Be pla Nace a Ji Lb ca dob, gue) O1S) Lily cba ye SU atl ol 
See oe age el Sle am he Lae a ln gh obey 5 ys 
Le sia cs eat 
Jarmy Ants LS OSGI bpm add! Lal 58 ola sil ais) a (4) 
MPA Os Sy cae TS] a ped Ue IS al 9 LS I 
PA 2 VS OY Le abel odes ye Loc wel pl 
Pl rll MN Sol ie 8p gelaniid  clatlel pant 





Pio bh cue cw lad 4” led lees. ey’ 


\o 


10 


20 


25 


30 


16 Book One, Chapter Three 


mathematical science would have yielded for us [only] a demonstration of 
the fact, even if it did not yield for us demonstration of the reasoned fact;* 
and that this [metaphysical] science would then yield for us a demonstra- 
tion of the reasoned fact, particularly as regards the remote final causes. 

(10) It has thus become clear that that which is, in some manner, a 
principle of this [metaphysical] science, being [at the same time] one of the 
questions in the natural sciences, is [something] whose demonstration 
either [(a)] does not follow from principles that are demonstrated in [meta- 
physics] but from principles that are self-evident; or [(b)] follows from 
principles that are questions in this [metaphysical] science but which do 
not revert to become principles for these selfsame questions, but for other 
questions. Or [(c) it could be that] these [latter] principles are of things 
belonging to this [metaphysical] science for proving the existence of that 
whose “why-ness” is intended to be shown in this science. It is known that, 
if the matter is in this manner, the proof would not be at all circular so as 
to be a proof that reduces to assuming the [very] thing to be proved. 

(11) You ought to know that, within [this subject] itself, there is a way to 
show that the purpose in this science is to attain a principle without 
[requiring first] another science. For it will become clear to you anon, 
through an intimation, that we have a way for proving the First Principle, 
not through inference from sensible things, but through universal, rational 
premises [(a)] that necessitate [the conclusion] that there must be for 
existence a principle that is necessary in its existence; [(b)] that renders [it] 
impossible for [the latter] to be in [any] respect multiple or changing; and 
[(c)] that necessitate [the conclusion] that [this principle] is the principle 
of the whole [of the other existents] and that [this] whole is necessitated 
[by the principle] according to the order [possessed by] the whole. Due to our 
impotence, however, we are unable to adopt this demonstrative method— 
which is a method of arriving at the secondary [existents] from the [ primary] 
principles and from the cause to the effect—except in [the case of] some 
ageregates of the orders of existence, [and even then] not in detail. 

(12) Thus, in its own right, this science should be prior to all the 
[other] sciences; but, from our point of view, it is posterior to all of them. 
We have thus spoken about the rank of this science within the aggregate 
of the sciences. 

(13) As for the name of this science, it is [metaphysics,] “that which 
is after nature.” By “nature” is not meant the power which is a principle 
of motion and rest, but the totality of the things that come about 
through corporeal matter—|[including the latter] power and accidents. 


lect oly ‘4 


sides AIUI fill 3 Lee gash 

PAN SLI je ll bg bey hoe SGI Ll pall a (\+) 
Mls Mets Cpanel he ont tale yay ue done pl 
AD Goole sod ooh pad SS oll eB Je tools y SL aK gl 
Be Jo pal Be ye ao tgoltll 5S Gi lly fol pd esd plod 
se SUN de S| pM laa ol pslery CSL alll 3 Liga] gl aly le agers 
[YJ Ant Shs stl el Ul ee th oS Fe yp ol Ke 

pial Ua i ell ool link Mi ut Bgl be glow (9) 
Ake Wal LE) ae LSD eat ST oe ae TY] bee ad 
AS bate Gb yp eet sly DLN ab ye YUN Lal ott] 
dee GS gl Be OK GI C9 rsh eee eee Ades 
PAIS. SSF Jone ne Ma Kal Kile pa Sales, 
AUN She gold 5p Ashen a gill Glagll bal lb NL be cosas Y Lua 
“Sra po ga Ola gral lye Jar im (BM call halal ge, 

wr VIL YS pall he Lake 9S gland 3 oll Ina ie gale (1) 
spall tlaee Sy plall edie Ne WS OB YT Ul ge eh ye 

rigid ay | Cadall aay Lon sal gpl a pe uly (\¥) 
LEM Syl ly ALL Ul je wold! ogi thee sc jay Se be 





ure es 


. 


«ab» Gay ad phall nw bat Gell» gay ae bane ol Oly «3b gay bob! 


nn 


10 


20 


30 


17 Book One, Chapter Three 


For it has been said that “nature” is said of the natural body that has the 
nature, the natural body being the sensed body [along] with what belongs 
to it by way of properties and accidents. The meaning of “[that which] is 
after nature” [involves] a posteriority relative to us. For, when we first 
observe existence and get to know its states, we observe this natural exis- 
tence. As for that which this science, if considered in itself, deserves to be 
named, [this] is to speak of it as the science of what is “prior to nature,” 
because the matters investigated in this science are, in [terms of] essence 
and generality, prior to nature. 

(14) Someone, however, may say: “The purely mathematical things 
examined in arithmetic and geometry are also ‘prior to nature’—partic- 
ularly number, for there is no dependency? at al] for its existence on 
nature because it cannot be found in nature. It thus follows necessarily 
that the science of arithmetic and geometry should be ‘the science of 
what is prior to nature.” 

(15) What ought to be said in answering this doubting is [as follows]: 
As regards geometry, that aspect of it where theoretical investigation 
pertains only to lines, surfaces, and corporeal things, it is known that its 
subject is not separable in subsistence from nature. Hence, the accidents 
necessary to [this subject] have the greater claim to [this inseparability]. 
[In the case of] that [aspect of geometry] whose subject is absolute 
measure, absolute measure is taken in it inasmuch as it is disposed [for 
the reception] of any relation that happens to occur. This does not belong 
to measure inasmuch as it is a principle for the natural sciences and is 
a form, but [only] inasmuch as it is a measure and an accident. The 
difference between measure as the dimension of matter in an absolute 
[sense] and measure as quantity—and, [moreover, the fact] that the 
term “measure” is used equivocally for both—are [things] known from 
our exposition of the logical and natural sciences. If this is the case, then 
the subject of geometry is not in reality the known measure that gives 
subsistence to the natural body, but measure which is predicated of line, 
surface, and body. It is [this latter] which is disposed [to receive] the var- 


ious [geometrical] relations. 


etl po Oly \V 


eth a adel Bly Medal a) coll dal pee dal Je, 3 6] JB 2 
Ll PLAY Ram, adel ow Lo» gary elelly Geld ye dle eel 
wcpdal age gl Nae als [YY] alge ge Cay copes ls byl gb 
jo ed Sle gl ae cally 2 lll i goog ol Goce cell Ll 
Ball 5 cpgeatly OILY ge cola Le OB lge Seed yl GV cae tal 
LL oo ee as Saat oll Mol dea gl old at, (16) 
KN dacdal 92-3) GW VAB soll Le pases Cadi b> Lal 2 Leasgly 
aga J3 0 pledenaglp rlbinle 3 Kgl cond dell BY v9.54 
pad oF Lo dag ul a) ga AS Ins 2 Sle Gl Gam Gill (\o) 
Gylin pb AS poy Sl psland lenenlly cplenlly Loglabl 3 ys Lil er ag 
GRAY Nl 45 po ge Ty Uy Iyl ad Lei PL OV cpl C3 daglal 
PUG shoe jd lay esl AN ae al te lal lal aa a5 
lala Lab 8 be by yey shade go Le Sy prey Slaplall Le 
Sh Gal gla gy y «lar Syogl ru] 92 Gall pladl oy Gl ola, 
LY Laned Pye ye eld IIS YS Ualy ALLBVG Lae lp Lill au 3h 
podly clatly Led Ne J yall jlaall J cst) eel psa psbell plait a 
[x] Aero Coll red! go (ey 





Sed coe on 


™ 


\o 


10 


20 


25 


30 


18 Book One, Chapter Three 


(16) As for number, the doubt concerning it is more persistent. At 
first sight, it would seem that the science of number is the science of 
“what is after nature,” unless one means something else by the science 
of “what is after nature”—namely, the science of that which is separable 
from nature in all respects. As such, this science would have been named 
after that which is noblest in it, just as this science is also termed “divine 
science” because knowledge of God—exalted be He—is [its ultimate] 
aim. Often things are named after their noblest meaning, their noblest 
part, and the part which is akin to the purpose. It would thus be as if this 
[metaphysical] science is the one whose perfection, noblest part, and pri- 
mary purpose was knowledge of what is separable from nature in every 
respect. Then, if the appellation [“metaphysics”] is set beside this mean- 
ing, the science of number would have nothing in common with this 
meaning. So much, then, for this. 

(17) But the verified explanation that the science of arithmetic is 
extraneous to the science of “what is after nature” is [as follows]: It will 
become manifest to you that the subject [of arithmetic] does not pertain 
to number in every respect. For number can be found in separable things 
and in natural things; and a posture, abstracted from all things to which 
[number] is an accident, can occur to it in the human estimative facultyS— 
[this] even though it is impossible for number to exist except as an accident 
of something in existence. Number whose existence is in things separate 
[from matter] cannot become subject to any relation of increase or decrease 
that may occur but will only remain as it is. Rather, it is only necessary to 
posit it in such a way that it becomes receptive to any increase that happens 
to be, and to any relation that happens to be when it exists in the matter 
of bodies (which is, potentially, all modes of numbered things) or when 
[number] is in the estimative faculty. In both these states, it is not separable 
from nature, 

(18) Hence, the science of arithmetic, inasmuch as it studies number, 
studies it only after [number] has acquired that aspect possessed by it 
when it exists in nature. And it seems that the first theoretical study of 
[number that the science of arithmetic undertakes] is when it is in the 


lect uw oll \A 


poodle SSG) fest ple Saty STs agtth sas Ly (99) 
Ps cpl ebay on ikcem leet Le» ple ggl Y . wae bal a le» abe 
cad be ay ll wer BIS dala a3 Sj Cpls ys bo ale 
155 lal AA a Ss all yall SY «Lal gM lal ltl aa 2 US" 
AIS yo tl Ly a2 oly thn ellie y obs Qu Le 
tee sh SpVlonpaing calr| ysl, LS il lll ya hil tia gh 3K 
Y gall Wa eli h Re pin ge Kean CID Sy caaey 6 heal be Le 
NAS NB ce Ie eae ba) GL all pled SSK 
Cancel wy be» oho ge by OLLI dle 90 yt gli St, (Vv) 
FH a2sdl SB day IS je sarl 2 ul Ae porge Gl ell yan all gs 
OF lay asl 8 og) ayn by heacdall yl b sey aby BLL 
HA Lee VW loey sal SKI SEV Coy ed aye pw et 
ay epee SSK gl Lal Bl ND oogey sadly GOL. oyegl 8 
won lly did ade ge be ot Wl [glailly] ssbyl ye cial Hus 
Bt 3 oS bl eas Ay cast oly A LB OK tee een 
Me EN By Send BOS gl clagaall ye god Syl Go pec 
shale) [V4] Gyler po ya 
4) jem 3943 je Ue saad be tom pe Ld ole 3b (\A) 
Fry olb WOK slaty dele S45 xe J 5S Ul gal Led 








Oleadl . jleitl’ 


fC) 


Q 


10 


20 


19 Book One, Chapter our 


estimative faculty having the description [mentioned] above; for this is 
an estimation [of number] taken from natural states subject to combi- 
nation and separation, unification and division. 

(19) Arithmetic is thus neither a study of the essence of number nor a 
study of the accidents of number inasmuch as it is absolute number, but 
[it is a study] of its accidental occurrences with respect to its attaining a 
state receptive of what has been indicated [above]. It is either material, 
then, or [it] pertains to human estimation dependent on matter. 

(20) As for the theoretical study of the essence of number and what 
occurs to it inasmuch as it is neither connected with matter nor depen- 
dent on it, it belongs to this [metaphysical] science. 


Chapter [Four] 


On the totality of matters discussed in this science 


(1) Hence, we must, in this art, know the state of the relation of the 
thing and the existent to the categories—the state of privation, the state 
of necessity (that is, necessary existence and its conditions), and the 
state of possibility and its true nature (this being the same as theoretical 
investigation of potentiality and actuality). [We must also] examine the 
state of what is in essence and what is accidental; the true and the false; 
and the state of substance and [the number] of divisions it has. For, {in 
order] to be an existing substance, the existent does not need to become 
natural or mathematical; for there are substances that lie outside these 
two. We must, hence, know the state of substance which is akin to prime 
matter—how it is, whether it is separable or not separable, whether it is of 
uniform or diverse species, its relation to form. [We must then investigate] 





Pla jo oly . 


BI Wibod y Stl aay al, All ag mAs eo LL Sy cay 
panty oly Oriiy at 

Srp sol ale 8 Vy coal ol 3 aS GLb (04) 
Dem gh9 «Aull tl leo Slow res eee eile Bh Wiles ous ys 
Soll J) ieee Te asa hae, 

Wy BOUL Gla Yam ye oye Lady coal old 3 eat LI, (4 


[XO] ha 1h gd cl set 


[ell pail 
}23( 5) 


pil Ie 943 WK Le thao 3 


based, A Je Oya Slicballobe GU aed (1) 

SRY Sle, Sal oy yy wall oye gl cal oral they Spaall Jey SOV yall 
Gly SHY GH Le Lo has gly | dally ay BF ell dew gy de, 
sera clon pl AY gap ladl S; etl Se oy bby Gh dy fo yll 
SE sale bee Ob Laks gl Leb joa ol Ul lage Lae oS al oo 
Solis ge ay ce Gal ed BB sat der ph loco bps 


Sarall abl gly cay yl I as Leg «Cialioee ee sl esl Gey Glee pb | 


\o 


10 


20 


30 


20 Book One, Chapter Four 


formal substance and what it is, whether it is also separable or not sepa- 
rable, the state of [the substance’s] composite [of form and matter], the 
state of each of [the latter] composites with respect to definitions, the 
manner of correspondence between definitions and things defined. 

(2) Since, in terms of some kind [of opposition], the opposite of sub- 
stance is accident, we must get to know, in this [metaphysical] science, the 
nature of the accident—its [various] types and the mode of definitions 
by which accidents are defined—acquainting ourselves with each of the 
categories of accidents. In the case of [an accident that is] prone! to be 
thought of as a substance when it is not a substance, we will demonstrate 
its accidental nature.? We must [also] know the ranks of all the sub- 
stances in relation to each other in existence according to their priority 
and posteriority. We must likewise know the states of the accidents [in 
this respect]. 

(3) In this place it is proper to acquaint ourselves with the state of the 
universal and the particular, the whole and the part; the manner of exis- 
tence of the universal natures; whether they have an existence in external 
particulars; the manner of their existence in the soul; and whether they 
have an existence separate from [both] external [particular] things* and 
the soul. Here we would acquaint ourselves with the state of genus and 
species and the like.® 

(4) Because, in being either a cause or an effect, the existent does not 
need to be natural, mathematical, or some [similar] thing, it would be fit- 
ting to follow [the above] discourse with [a discussion of | causes—their 
genera and states, and the manner of the state that ought to be between 
them and [their] effects—and to make known the difference between the 
efficient principle and others. We [must] discuss action and passion and 
make known the difference between form and teleological end, prove the 
existence of each, and show that at every level they lead to a first cause. 

(5) We must make clear the discussion of principle and beginning; 
then the discussion of the prior, the posterior, and origination; the kinds 
of these; their species; and the particular property of each of their species. 
[We must make clear] what among [these] is prior by nature and prior 


lett ye olyyl Y. 


FS AS «SiMe ay clas ga JEG MA] Ua ge fay pn ca 
agoF ly ob oye be drks SG coyadl ae Lage vey 
tab lal bo BSI sed rll pe ley wbl lee (1) 
i ge ge She ayally Gal eM ly SA Ni ayaL AGS cadlccly «2 yl 
et IF Ave (1N] aly pe dl gla gh Sl ty oie 0 
Syy Uy a oe oe Nl Baw Ke paw Yall sly ayy 
ale Se ollie” 
Ay JS Ly ISI Je Gy ol ell ye gly (17) 
Las geny AS, SAL GLE Oo ope Wey ASS Lal os) US; 
Lala abl Sle ae lang «tll GLENN Gyles ayn WY Jay cpl vs 
etlow Gon bey 
Labs sl Lab Sigil Vole slike oS Seton sel gy (€) 
EW) Vel, etal, shal Spi ls 62 gi ght wuts 2 J 
iy HEUT LM y Stl Gays by cM dell peg lpr JU SS gl ae 
Sots Ally sya oy SEB Ay By ais Jal BG gly cage — 0 
Sg dle Scart 5B lagly «lage only 
Syadly sti, pF OS HOM Lt OS oy (0) 
Leading dntail Leake SR ly car gy She pasty asl gly ald Geely 





wv 
lsd «Sle dye * 


Q 


10 


20 


30 


21 Book One, Chapter Four 


for the intellect, and [we must] ascertain the things that are prior for the 
intellect and [make clear] the mode of addressing those who deny them; 
and we will contradict whatever among these things includes a widely 
accepted opinion that is contrary to the truth, 

(6) These [things] and their like are the sequels of the existent inas- 
much as it exists. Because the one is coextensive with existence, it also 
becomes necessary for us to examine the one. Once we examine the one, 
it becomes necessary to examine the many and to know the opposition 
between the two. At this point, it becomes necessary to examine number, 
its relation to existing things, and the relation of the continuous quantity, 
which is in some respects the opposite of [number], to the existents. [We 
must then] enumerate all the false opinions concerning [number] and 
will make known that none of this is separable, [nor does it constitute] a 
principle for existing things. We must establish the accidental happen- 
ings that occur to numbers and the continuous quantities, such as figures 
and their like. [Now,] among the adjuncts of the one are the resembling, 
the equal, the corresponding, the homogeneous, the comparable, the 
similar, and the self-identical.6 We must, hence, discuss each of these 
[things] and their opposites [and show] that [these opposites] relate to 
multiplicity—[opposites] such as the nonresembling, the unequal, the 
heterogeneous, the dissimilar, the “other” in general, difference and con- 
trariety and their types, and the truly contradictory and its nature. 

(7) After this, we will move on to the principles of existing things. 
We will prove the existence of the First Principle and [show] that He is 
one, ‘Truth, and the utmost in majesty. We will make known in how many 
respects He is one and in how many respects He is truth; how He knows 
all things and has power over all things; the meaning of “He knows” and 
of “He is powerful”; that He is bountiful, that He is peace—that is, pure 
good—that He is loved for Himself, that He is true enjoyment, and that 
true beauty [resides] with Him. We will then strip away the opinions 
stated and thought of Him that are contrary to the truth. 

(8) We will then show His relation to the existents [that proceed] 
from Him, [indicating] the first of the things that exist through Him. 
{We will next explain] how the existents [proceeding] from Him are 
ordered in ranks, commencing with the angelic intellectual substances, 





lett ip Ole 1 


BGO ULSI yb ncnyy «fill ace at LAW gtd lel ee 
sale god le ype ly LAM 
Bgl sell Vy «ayy 92 Le age GEL) lone em by od (4) 
eee gh a: cools o Leal as gl jh oye yl 
tnd Lay call GB sa gl omy ling [TV]. Lage EI Syaiy «STH 
ang olay sll J} cle deny alli gall «hall SU Ly colagegll I) 
cObagrgl Le Vy Bylo ot al al Shay cad YALL 15 
19 aks IRAN LE La OLS, «skaed ays  aylysl oy 
PPably «Bally SUEMy « pilenlly c aalaly ccgledly call swell als 
Ctl il fb oe ly YOUliay whe ye aly 8 5S gl os 
«Seely SAL, ALLY ally « SLA poy culled poy ccegludl pb, 
phy deal sled, lglel, 
Sela IM al ot olay agsle JI JESS aa (Vv) 
BS aily K5p> sory Soy Kaelyy aay Sy Ah Spy aid ale Y 
‘help salty ls by Fe 28 AS cr gt Sale 
Ce hl bl ercey «gh Sl 8p <I Byte Gare pt dl ole ail, 
geuislall Mi pag Sb, Job 
45 5 SLAY Y,) ley case bagel 5 GS GS ob (A) 
ASU pall aa ASW dt Clagrgll as Ci GS! 


\o 


Q 


10 


20 


25 


30 


22 Book One, Chapter Five 


[followed by] the angelic substances [endowed with] soul, then the celes- 
tial spherical substances, then these elements [in the world of generation 
and corruption, ascending] then to the things formed by them, [and] 
then to man. [We will then explain] how all things revert to Him [in 
dependence] and the manner in which He is for them [both] an efficient 
principle and a perfecting principle. [We will discuss] what the state of the 
human soul would be when the relation between it and nature is severed, 
and what its rank in existence would be. In [the course of discussing all] 
this, we will indicate the high estate of prophecy, the obligation of obeying 
it, and [the fact] that it [proceeds] necessarily from God. [We will also 
indicate] the morals and actions which, together with wisdom, are needed 
by the human soul for [attaining] the felicity of the hereafter; and [we 
will describe] the different types of felicity. 

(9) When we reach this point, we shall have concluded this, our book, 
God being our help in this. 


Chapter [Five] 


On indicating the existent, the thing, and their first division, 
wherewith attention is directed to the objective [sought] 


(1) We say: The ideas! of “the existent,” “the thing,” and “the nec- 
essary” are impressed in the soul in a primary way. This impression does 
not require better known things to bring it about. [This is similar]? to 
what obtains in the category of assent,? where there are primary principles, 
found to be true in themselves, causing [in turn] assent to the truths of 
other [propositions]. If the expression denoting them does not occur to the 
mind or is not understood, then it would be impossible to know whatever 
is known through them. [This is so] even though the informative act 
striving to bring them to mind or to explain what expressions indicate 
them is not engaged in an endeavor to impart knowledge not [already] 
present in the natural intelligence, but is merely drawing attention to 
explaining what the speaker intends and upholds. This may occur through 
things which, in themselves, are less evident than the things intended 
to be made known but which, for some cause or some expression, have 


become better known. 





ess ole YY 


QM cps USI Spotl ada d chal al Lh asus 
hae we BS «Heb WTA] Lae GS LN ie al >xi BS 
hy call gy gy MBO cada! 15] GLA idl Je 5 $F Ly Js 
Mele egy ipl Se Je ol iy Lb aig Lory Ai yp GSE 
ee RSLS sill Wi te SI Sey GEN ley call we piel Yl, 
cslentl Stoel dyiy yy eV doled! YW gS gl gad 
[YA] NS he ay Glee allly « line LOS Las Ine Lak lao (4) 


[Bi Leill] 
j.2i(2) 


A Qe aS ABS Le SM Mpeltly «tll, spell Je adl gy 


UL pit 9 pa j Melee csaapally cH gtlly capmall gltdgid (9) 

A Sol ISEB. Neogel Ls asl ictey lela Mel jal Uy 

PELs tera « Lace ol Oy «AGI Wy emell yl egole pare 

Oly «We ye Le yar 3 oll Keel «Nelo Slsl Lal aging sl IY os, 
ples BUN (cle a dan pei I JIL Lalas Jy Gill yc KS V0 

ANS SE May Satay fll ody epee se J Sad pd de ob 
aelojle bikes Libs YS capi sige Sega a awl 


on 


10 


20 


30 


23 Book One, Chapter Five 


(2) Similarly, in conceptual matters, there are things which are prin- 
ciples for conception that are conceived in themselves. If one desires to 
indicate them, [such indication] would not, in reality, constitute making an 
unknown thing known but would merely consist in drawing attention to 
them or bringing them to mind through the use of a name or a sign which, 
in itself, may be less known than [the principles] but which, for some 
cause or circumstance, happens to be more obvious in its signification. 

(3) If, then, such a sign is used, the soul is awakened [to the fact] that 
such a meaning is being brought to mind, in [the sense] that it is the 
intended [meaning and] not another, without the sign in reality having 
given [any] knowledge of it. 

(4) If every conception were to require that [another] conception 
should precede it, then [such a] state of affairs would lead either to an 
infinite regress or to circularity. 

(5) The things that have the highest claim to be conccived in them- 
selves are those common to all matters—as, for example, “the existent,” 
“the one thing,” and others. For this reason, none of these things can be 
shown by a proof totally devoid of circularity or by the exposition of bet- 
ter known things. Hence, whoever attempts to place in them something 
as a [defining] constituent falters—as, for example, one who says: “It is 
of the existent’s true nature to be cither active or acted on.” This, while 
inescapably the case, belongs to the division of the existent, the existent 
being better known than the active and the passive. The masses conceive 
the reality of the existent without knowing at all that it must be either 
active or passive. For my part, up to this point, this has not been evident 
to me except through a syllogism—nothing else. How, then, would it be 
the state of one who strives to define the state of the evident thing in terms 
of some quality belonging to it which requires a proof to establish that it 
exists for [that thing]? 

(6) The case is similar with somebody’s statement: “The thing is 
that about which it is valid [to give] an informative statement,”* for “is 
valid” is less known than “the thing”; and “informative statement” Is 
[likewise] less known than “the thing.” How, then, can this be the defini- 
tion of the thing? Indeed, “is valid” and “information” are known only 
after one uses, in explaining what they are, [terms] indicating that each 
is either a “thing,” a “matter,” a “whatever,” or a “that which [is]”—all 
of these being like synonyms of the word “thing.” 


lect oy» oly vY 


May Bly ban Ay «spell egal 8 Lt ol pall 9 WIS (1) 
siete JUL Lbs Yas ‘aed lays LY Ol So) le Jaigl ay 
Ys Wel 3S L Sly bald YS cae gel bat BEIT, dole 
or SUG abl lls sles) le atl eg Aaa cli laced (slo (1) 
[Ys] Rules Miah tll OSS gh pb Sy cone Voll yaa coe 
HMB AM aah yet ain gh clon jue 3, (4) 
sgl sh eels 
WS 5H Mbt LAY Yat 5 pe 9 SS GL LM I, (0 
a3 yy: Ole be Ot Sh KE Ge OF 9 dol gle gitly cope ST 
cles $y Lt bp scl gle gy ally er el gt gly gl ac 
OF Wy OEE ry heise seb OK Gl ope Mey 5) Nk US” 
a Oy yas lll ygarry one Jota 5 Sel aye lly cope gll Ll 
Cot ol Hall ode II (esses, in WEB AS gh cow STi 5 bye Vy age 
ta, alld) « 52 Je Sa lege ye Je RGSS ot Yorba Vu 
WA eagey os So oly Ui elt ca 
— Phas rea Sill gs esc gh JB ye S35 Wy (1) 
Ly Set tae Gag 6 SG MAID oe sl GLI g «ety Ge 
tl gh ee gt al Lage ely Bhs B Jarre Gl oy jbl spay Rowell yt 
«sill oY lbs LO ts goes «Sal» al gl cle» al gl «ply 


\o 


Oo 


10 


20 


25 


30 


24 Book One, Chapter Five 


(7) How, then, can the thing be truly defined in terms of what is 
known only through it? Yes, in this and similar things there may be some 
act of directing attention; but, in reality, if you say, “The thing is that 
about which it is valid [to give] an informative statement,” it is as if you 
have said, “The thing is the thing about which it is valid (to give] an 
informative statement,” because the meaning of “whatever,” “that which,” 
and “the thing” is one and the same. You would have then included “the 
thing” in the definition of “the thing.” Still, we do not deny that through 
this [statement] and its like, despite its vitiating starting point, there 
occurs in some manner a directing of attention to the thing. 

(8) [Moreover] we say: The meaning of “existence” and the meaning 
of “thing” are conceived in the soul and are two meanings,° whereas “the 
existent,” “the established,” and “the realized” are synonyms. We do not 
doubt that their meaning has been realized in the soul of whoever is 
reading this book. 

(9) “The thing,” or its equivalent, may be used in all languages to 
indicate some other meaning. For, to everything there is a reality by 
virtue of which it is what it is. Thus, the triangle has a reality in that it is a 
triangle, and whiteness has reality in that it is whiteness. It is that which 
we should perhaps call “proper existence,” not intending by this the 
meaning given to affirmative existence; for the expression “existence” is 
also used to denote many meanings, one of which is the reality a thing 
happens to have. Thus, [the reality] a thing happens to have is, as it were, 
its proper existence.® 

(10) To resume, we say: It is evident that each thing has a reality 
proper to it—namely, its quiddity. It is known that the reality proper to 
each thing is something other than the existence that corresponds to 
what is affirmed. 

(11) This is because, if you said, “The reality of such a thing exists 
either in concrete things,’ or in the soul, or absolutely, being common to 
both,” this would have a meaning [that was] realized and understood; 
[whereas,] if you were to say, “The reality of such a thing is the reality of 
such a thing,” or “The reality of such a thing is a reality,” this would be 
superfluous, useless talk. [Again,] if you were to say, “The reality of such 
a thing is a thing,” this, too, would not be a statement imparting knowl- 
edge of what is not known. Even less useful than this is for you to say, 


rlettl i oly v6 


SE ey cot Se Mad Laie lal oe gl en 2S (V) 
aS Dl cay be ge tl ole bl ai iby UI Lag atl, us 3 
«Gabry Kl» am GY cae ces gall e All ga ll g] LE 
Vole [ry] ttl am b+ 8H 381 8 KS csoly awe ptr, 
vinci Ue Naan ge calls Slab ee caged sl iy png SS 

shane Lady cdl BD Slain gt gay oe Sh cae Gl tSadiy (A) 
Lane I BEL Yy caely oar le tah ele fably ootily Loge] 
Ce cies 

Sab YEU DST ae ho a Jay ob alle gh Ley e tlly (4) 
Moy ely sidan oly tite dl aide CIN Cg Ly patie 
ay Lad gb FLY aye gar ly cgethl opel abaaee ey il 
OK be LAS cept Mole RELI loo a sles le Lala day 
gill eth! 99> 31 

py Kal pho tie it Sl all pal ibe, Lys) 
UY Galy Gill opengl ba dellle ob Se Gl 

ct 3 gl LEW Uday y WSL robs laut aly (99) 
Wet NS Rico hI Sy pin Janne ge Lig Gh Lene gam Lille gl 
Atte So Jy ie 9b I 5 Ipto GI dike US dae ll oS 


AA SL Joi Glace Salil Joly Spo Le ake pe VS Lal gS ce gt 1S” 











d 9mm ghly dg shlo? 


\o 


iy 


10 


1d 


20 


30 


25 Book One, Chapter Five 


“Reality is a thing,” unless by “thing” you mean “the existent”; for then 
it is as though you have said, “The reality of such a thing is an existing 
reality.” If, however, you said, “The reality of A is something and the 
reality of B is another thing,” this would be sound, imparting knowledge; 
because [in saying this] you make the reservation within yourself that 
[the former] is something specific, differing from that other [latter] thing. 
This would be as if you said, “[This is] the reality of A, and the reality of 
B is another reality.” If it were not for both this reservation [you make 
within yourself] and this conjunction, [the statement] would not impart 
knowledge. This, then, is the meaning intended by “the thing.” The neces- 
sary concomitance of the meaning of existence never separates from it at 
all; rather, the meaning of existence is permanently concomitant with it 
because the thing exists either in the concrete or in the estimative [faculty] 
and the intellect. If [this] were not the case, it would not be a thing. 

(12) Concerning what is said—[namely,] “The thing is that about 
which information is given”—[this] is true.2 But when, in addition to 
this, it is said, “The thing may be absolutely nonexistent,” this is a matter 
that must be looked into. If by the nonexistent is meant the nonexistent 
in external reality, this would be possible; for it is possible for a thing 
that does not exist in external things to exist in the mind. But if [some- 
thing] other than this is meant, this would be false and there would be 
no information about it at all. It would not be known except only as 
[something] conceived in the soul. [To the notion] that [the nonexistent] 
would be conceived in the soul as a concept that refers to some external 
thing, [we say] “Certainly not!” 

(13) Regarding the informative statement, [the above analysis is cor- 
rect] because information is always about something realized in the mind. 
No affirmative information about the absolutely nonexistent is [ever] 
given. If, moreover, information about it is given in the negative, then an 
existence in some respect is given it in the mind. [This is] because our 
saying “it” entails a reference, and reference to the nonexistent that has 
no concept in any respect at all in the mind is impossible. For how can 


anything affirmative be said about the nonexistent when the meaning of 


our statement, “The nonexistent is such,” is that the description “such” 
is realized for the nonexistent, there being no difference between the 
realized and the existent? It would be as though we have said, “This 
description exists for the nonexistent.” Indeed, we say: 


avn or oly! YO 


Lely sdagerye Mein WS Abae GJ BEE oe ll ce th ew IM cet 


~ 


soi BY sltly te ee Ub oT et O dkny cle take 28 bb 


rel JS SY 6 2 ll [1] ee pate Sle tal lis 
cap) Leer SUBYI Keay slo ne Wy gel dade Gate, Lee 9) 
aera ae he AM ol ogelh sae ogi} Gylis Vy gall Law ah et 
OP Sealy Ag losers gl SLEW SB lage ae WL GS c Lb ah 
Lb BIW K 

N08 po Sle Gill gl gm case pu call go e tll GL ile Legly (14) 
peel 2 3B ad fe Sl oe pl DULY le Legace GS od etl GI 
Legon A 9 EE 6 ANG Sl 5d AIG jhe GLEN ppp aall 
SOY, Il po ee Ky tbh 96S 2 ge gly dell Llp 
pS ype il 2 Lyte Kg Ub Lab isl Byala dl Je W Lees 
race | 

ryaally PM Geos ot ge Lt GK F186 ul (vr) 
bse ayy) foo aid Lal btbae pol ly oleh ae sy glall 
bare YT gill — pyaall MLYly alt) ead cum Ug A. gall 3 
SM Ht ppaall le Coy GSO Je - CPN Poser sll Ge dey a 
SoM oy S5Yy cpgaraall Lolo «I ery holes «lI pyoall gl Lg 
‘Ast fe  ppanall ogy [TF] Geog Is gl: LB U3 XS Sop ll, 


\o 


10 


15 


20 


30 


26 Book One, Chapter Five 


(14) That which describes the nonexistent and is predicated of it 
either exists for the nonexistent and is realized for it or does not exist and 
is not realized for it. If it exists and is realized for the nonexistent, then it 
must, in itself, be either existent or nonexistent. If it is existent, then the 
nonexistent would have an existing description. But, if the description 
exists, then that which is described by it necessarily exists. The nonexistent 
would, then, be an existent—and this is impossible. If [however] the 
description is nonexistent, then how can that which in itself is nonexistent 
exist for something? For that which in itself does not exist cannot exist 
for the thing. Yes, the thing may exist in itself without existing for some 
other thing, [but this is a different matter]. 

(15) If, however, the description did not exist for the nonexistent, this 
would be [tantamount] to the denial of the description for the nonexistent; 
for, if it were not the denial of the description of the nonexistent, then, if 
we were to deny this description, we would obtain the opposite of this. 
Hence, there would be the existence of the description for it. And all this 
is false. 

(16) We say only that we have knowledge of the nonexistent, because 
when the meaning occurs only in the soul and no reference to [what is] 
external [to the soul] is made by it, then what is known would be only 
that very thing in the soul. The assent, occurring in terms of the two parts 
of what is conceived, consists in [affirming] that it is possible that, in the 
nature of the thing known, an intellectually apprehended relation to 
what is external should occur (there being no [such] relation, however, 
at the present time). Nothing other than this is known. 

(17) According to those who uphold the view [rejected above], there are 
matters in the assemblage of whatever is being informed about and known 
that, in [the state of ] nonexistence, have no “thingness.”? Whoever desires 
acquaintance with their doctrine should go to what they rave about in 
their statements—l[statements] that hardly deserve preoccupation. 

(18) These [people] have fallen into [the error] that they have because 
of their ignorance [of the fact] that giving information is about ideas that 
have an existence in the soul—even if these are nonexistent in external 
things—where the meaning of giving information about [these ideas] is 


lect jy Oley ‘at 


Ingrye GS GI Lake Jaouy prada roy Lgl de Val (16) 
cegaral oles oye ye 56Gb A ee bey KY, ppraall ole, 
pera SS bagerye GO GB cigar gl logerge Mead 3 GK Gl Le je 98 
pdb Mle Y osm ge ly Gpeglld ciogeye Real OK lily cage ye Aine 
lager ge Anat pgerall GS ASG cay rne Meal OIE yy Sees Liang « aye ge 
2B cpa sl lage Sl oocen Aad lope GY bb Se 
Lele 8D loge ye VSG Vy Ae ee Spey ‘eth aR 

LSB cpgaall 56 Aina ob ob ppunall is oye Rell SS 3] Ub (10) 
Ne jee OS cpgaall 6 derail Led IDB cpyaell oe Rnall oil ya he Sol 
- Jeb AS lary fa) derail oyey Gh 

phy dat etl eat at all 398 cpgaadly Ube US gh ge Uily (99) 
OF rcbl oy Bgl parellly Ltd adsl 3 Le pai eslall SE ez yl had te 
aD ly eile Sf asian dd Py pda Gap 3 gle al pate 
. yb pgler WB ca) Ku 1B JI 

Lal abay a6 yu thao 3 gl e ei 8 Oo poll egdl wey (VV) 
pHasSl a Iya pe IS le as SLL ey gall g WALLY 
[YE]. te SAY) foe gms Y 

F OK UL LEY gh pte ms Ad gay Lad yl oy ily (VA) 
Nee SSN cae GKy GLEN Oo begun SIE Sly ctl Boyes Yoke 


\o 


on 


10 


20 


30 


27 Book One, Chapter Five 


that they have some relation to external things. Thus, for example, if you 
said, “The resurrection will be,” you would have understood “resurrection” 
and would have understood “will be.” You would have predicated “will be,” 
which is in the soul, of “resurrection,” which is in the soul, in [the sense] 
that it would be correct for this meaning, with respect to another meaning 
also intellectually apprehended (namely, one intellectually apprehended 
in a future time), to be characterized by a third meaning (namely, [the 
object] of intellectual apprehension: existence). This [pattern of reason- 
ing] applies correspondingly to matters relating to the past.'® It is thus 
clear that that about which information is given must have some sort of 
existence in the soul. Information, in truth, is about what exists in the 
soul and [only] accidentally about what exists externally. 

(19) Hence, you have now understood the way in which “the thing” 
differs from what is understood by “the existent” and “the realized” and 
that, despite this difference, the two [that is, “the thing” and “the exis- 
tent”] are necessary concomitants. 

(20) Yet, it has reached me that some people say that what is realized 
is realized without being an existent, that the description of a thing can be 
something neither existing nor nonexisting! and that the [expressions] 
“that which” and “whichever” denote something other than that which 
[the expression] “the thing” denotes. Such people are not among the 
assemblage of the discerning; if challenged to distinguish between these 
expressions in terms of their meaning, they would be exposed. 

(21) We now say: Although the existent, as you have known, is not a 
genus and is not predicated equally of what is beneath it, yet it has a mean- 
ing agreed on with respect to priority and posteriority. The first thing to 
which it belongs is the quiddity, which is substance, and then to what 
comes after it. Since it [has] one meaning, in the manner to which we 
have alluded, accidental matters adhere to it that are proper to it, as 
we have shown earlier. For this reason, it is taken care of by one science 
in the same way that anything pertaining to health has one science. 

(22) It may also prove difficult for us to make known the state of the 
necessary, the possible, and the impossible through ascertained definition, 

{and we would have to make this known] only through a sign. All that 
has been said of the [things] that have reached you from the Ancients 
in defining this would almost entail circularity. This is because—as you 


edly» LY sy 


SB ML eng 49 Sp Metall 6) el o} ee GLE I Ls Y gl 
Ine gh. oe > ALM dec patel 8 NN 3 Sr heey «a Sp 
295 Peden By SB Islan sty Lal Join 3 sae 3 Ul yall 
al go. alll a SI Lal nw hey. 2B Jptee ghy cS yter EI as 
F PHA NY, pill Bh bey berg Kal pa Var pol 
TEI sees ge Lely «pall Ob oye gl 

i, «frothy > y> gall erell alee lar + gill gl OV cag ob, (\4) 
SW OS 

dy Ohel> 9S pothl 5] rg )5% Ls gl al bail le, (v-) 
6 SND ly c Lyne Y, Nagra YB pad stl die VSS aby cage ys 
BST ily irl a Iga gg e tlale Jay Le de Nn ala, 
LyttSol VGlaggie tomy BUN ade gp jee'll 

Vetoes cake LS ay gh Gab gly ah gS aS (19) 
CGB UML 8 Oy pall load gee ard 2 Ue ogc 
GM soul Je [YO] roly cer ge Sly vane WIKd pdiy aad 
JE sols gle a 9S ub, JS by 8 IS aad pyle ail all ULI 
slay Whe Gove yb eat gl LS 

GN oll ally Sally Coil S50 gt ble plan aby (19) 
2 13 GV Ge lal Eolas BLE Le ay Mohd Aey Lal 


\o 


a) 


10 


20 


25 


30 


28 Book One, Chapter Five 


have come across in the [various] parts of the Logic—whenever they 
want to define the possible, they include in the definition either the nec- 
essary or the impossible, there being no other way save this. And when 
they want to define the necessary, they include in the definition either the 
possible or the impossible. [Similarly,] when they want to define the impos- 
sible, they include in its definition either the necessary or the possible. 
Thus, for example, if they define the possible, they would at one time say 
that it is that which is not necessary, or [at another] that it is the presently 
nonexistent whose existence at any supposed moment in the future is 
not impossible. [Again,] if they find that there is a need to define the nec- 
essary, they would say that it is either that which is not possible to sup- 
pose as nonexistent or that which is impossible to suppose [as anything] 
other than it is. Thus, at one time they include the possible in its defini- 
tion and at another the impossible. And as regards the possible, they 
would already have included in its definition either the necessary or the 
impossible. Then [again,] when they wish to define the impossible, they 
either include the necessary in its definition by saying, “The impossible 
is that whose nonexistence is necessary,” or [they include] the possible 
by saying, “It is that for which it is not possible to exist,” or some other 
expression equivalent to these two. 

(23) The case is similar with such statements as: “The impossible is 
that whose existence is not possible, or that whose nonexistence is neces- 
sary; the necessary is that whose nonexistence is not allowable and is 
impossible, or that for which it is not possible not to be; the possible is that 
for which it is not impossible to be or not to be, or that for which it is not 
necessary to be or not to be.” All this, as you see, is clearly circular. A fuller 
exposure of this is something you have come across in the Analytics.'” 

(24) Nonetheless, of these three, the one with the highest claim to be 
first conceived is the necessary. This is because the necessary points to the 
assuredness of existence, existence being better known than nonexistence. 
| This is] because existence is known in itself, whereas nonexistence is, in 
some respect or another, known through existence. 

(25) From our explaining these matters, it will become clear to you 
that it is false for someone to say: “The nonexistent can be brought back 
into existence because it is the first thing about which information is 


relly oll vA 


Witl Kall pare al yal 1 BL ghellgd Bal ye be aM aly Ly 
«Saaz Igdon Gl Mab] Bly lb ary Vy JBI Udy yp Uae 
Lore (9 de! JEN Lyoow gl Iysbyl ly .JLEL Li Fall Use 3 tae 
pyaall al gh crapll pe ail edge LY SalI lyae IS] ye {abl Lly cory pall 
aod Bd Slong EAM 8g Al caogey pal GILL 
U2 13] Gall ail lc Ligaee Goya Gl Ke Veil al UL Lys gai igasa 5) 
Ul, gti JBL corm bab Kall Lick od Yue oS ale pb ane, 
SMyalyt Mh SEL EL Ly sap yall Loe 3 JB clyde Lp a SalI 
Fas ly Spo soap pa JE GL: LBs gh cogil Lae (3 lye copay 
Pade cay Ta gl sy gh SEY ill al Ig ag 

ae Sl 3) GK GI SEY ill pw all gl y- St LES (19) 
SSL ba Sl Olay ee wall pCa ly SY GI 
St cole, ued gall I SV NOK ol os ad Gall » Kall KY 
1 MMS ILI GSU, . yal yo slg IS ay SY Gl oS 
. L353 ot 

SY Ady all 52 Ml ype gh Sa oe Ul al le (14) 
Alby Bom see SY cgacll oe Gyel syogly copegh SE le Ju call 
2rd coped ye bdo oy pally 

stpaall ol ga ie 8 Me, ah La eie bag] joy (12) 


bps es BGI Gow vel Wa pgaall gluldy opr fbas ee thal 





Moc leagid . Leage 


10 


20 


30 


29 Book One, Chapter Six 


given in terms of existence. This is because, if the nonexistent were to be 
brought back into existence, then there would necessarily be a difference 
between it and that which is similar to it, if [that which is similar to] it 
were to exist in its place. If [only] similar, it would not be identical with 
it, because it is not the thing that had ceased to exist (this latter, in its 
state of nonexistence, being other than [the former]).” 

(26) [But if one argues in this way,] the nonexistent becomes an 
existent in the manner to which we have alluded previously.'* Moreover, 
if the nonexistent were to be brought back into existence, then this 
would require that all of its special properties—in terms of which it is 
what it is—should be brought back into existence. But among these 
properties is the time [in which it existed]. But, if this time is brought 
back, then the thing would not have been brought back into existence, 
because that which would have been brought into existence is that which 
exists at another time. If [then] it is allowed that the nonexistent could 
return into existence with all the nonexisting properties previously exist- 
ing with it, time [being considered] either as having real existence that 
has ceased to be or (according to what is known of their doctrines) as one 
of the accidents having correspondence with an existent,!* then we would 
be allowing that time and temporal [states] could return into existence. 
But then there would not be [one period] of time and [then] another and, 
hence, no return [of the nonexistent to existence]. 

(27) The mind, however, rejects [all] this in a manner that renders 
exposition unnecessary; all that is said concerning this is deviation from 
the path of [peripatetic] teaching. 


Chapter [Six] 


On commencing a discourse on the Necessary Existent 
and the possible existent; that the Necessary Existent has 
no cause; that the possible existent is caused; that 
the Necessary Existent has no equivalent in existence 
and is not dependent [in existence] on another 


(1) We will now return to what we were [discussing] and say: There 
are specific properties that belong individually each to the Necessary Exis- 
tent and the possible existent. We thus say: The things that enter existence 





etl LY x4 


Bo 692 SE Gall ocd AN ge pad Whale GO GB Gp cally ery calle go 
3 55 Ve gS pall Sle 
VT the Ld a] Ce gh Gill adh le lagen pprall je oa (1) 
ora 8 OF ell pour bs Slee asl ial pyanbl gl bey 
By Dey ill ya olall QV cole pF pyaall Gedy al ly By wcl gs — 0 
LL CBS y cee LEN legal dae solely aisle] 544 eral gS gb gf 
xe de BIEN » ed yoy Mily gl pas ob oyey Mido dl + 
£295 OSB yy oy 3 KG Slay C5 yy SI je apelin 
83 Sl be Sy chy Jadclinn Y ds Ue cha Jatt gh le (19) 
[TV] del ah ete Ys 


[ oll jel] 
22 (_5) 
2231 Sally cop gl coll 3 Saal Lal 3 
clglas aged Kall gly cad dle Y 550-41 cals gl 
AB onde Bee Vy cog Sl Boyd (BE pb age Sols gl \0 


Krall capers col gl yp oly 0 gh Seb 9 ISL Gags (\) 
oa Jello JOA ayo hd Jos MN yell gl Used cols cope gl 


GS 


10 


15 


30 


35 


30 Book One, Chapter Six 


bear a [possible] twofold division in the mind. Among them there will be 
that which, when considered in itself, its existence would be not necessary. 
It is [moreover] clear that its existence would also not be impossible, 
since otherwise it would not enter existence. This thing is within the 
bound of possibility. There will also be among them that which, when 
considered in itself, its existence would be necessary. 

(2) We thus say: That which in itself is a necessary existent has no 
cause, while that which in itself is a possible existent has a cause. What- 
ever is a necessary existent in itself is a necessary existent in all its 
aspects. The existence of the Necessary Existent cannot be equivalent to 
the existence of another where each would equal the other as regards nec- 
essary existence, becoming [thereby] necessary concomitants. The exis- 
tence of the Necessary Existent cannot at all be a composite, [deriving] 
from multiplicity. The true nature of the Necessary Existent can in no 
manner be shared by another. From our verifying [all] this, it follows 
necessarily that the Necessary Existent is not [dependent on] relation, is 
neither changing nor multiple, and has nothing associated with His exis- 
tence that is proper to Himself. 

(3) That the Necessary Existent has no cause is obvious. For if in His 
existence the Necessary Existent were to have a cause, His existence would 
be by [that cause]. But whatever exists by something [else], if considered 
in itself, apart from another, existence for it would not be necessary. And 
every[thing] for which existence is not [found to be] necessary—if [the 
thing is] considered in itself, apart from another—is not a necessary 
existent in itself. It is thus evident that if what is in itself a necessary exis- 
tent were to have a cause, it would not be in itself a necessary existent. Thus, 
it becomes clear that the Necessary Existent has no cause. From this it 1s 
[also] clear that it is impossible for a thing to be [both] a necessary existent 
in itself and a necessary existent though another. [This is] because, if its 
existence is rendered necessary through another, it cannot exist without 
the other. But [if anything] whatsoever cannot exist without another, its 
existence [as] necessary in itself is impossible. For if it were necessary in 
itself, then it would have to come into existence, there being no influence 
on its existence by way of necessity from that which is other and which 
affects the existence of something else. [But since such an influence has 
been supposed,] its existence would not be necessary in itself. 





etl» oL¥y! Ye 


ee Lal acs Vail palby corgey com ailiy el Bh axocguss 
JEN NL L Mee Sy GEM 5B ge etl Ny ope sl bea Vy 
03999 ony dildy 

Ale a aildy oy SUL gly cab dle Vasly opel Coll ght dyed (1) 
Vee sleeislaly Ae eee Ser sheely dly ope loots ly 
279 FSW Wyle bps oly SG KS sl oe UK ey VK GI 
iby CHEN yp oagery pion Sl aye Vogel cody ly glut esl 
E> OS Gp ty ed Tote) NEL SS Gl jee Yoel Coty 
ep Ny ej cbliee 5b oye oly 9% gl wld bose’ 3 py 
[YA] Avery sill ergy 2 Lia Vy 

de ope Sols Ola . lls dale Yop gels al Ul ry 
Some OF 99 Hilde el Ib cote oageny Le By. Ip orgy GO corgry od 
2D erly pd cage y Com ely cond fyy2 dilly pel I] Le Bc ogey al 
2? od ly oe Moly Kel ils aly opr dlools GS Gal gd with 
2 Sols 59S 5l jen Val ols 7 ey Ae Yop alsa 
O99 295) 522 8 cys 0299 oon SE GLAM copes syed only cali 
arg By Ail Lely oopey bord cont O99 vey Sh jem Y LW cope 
DELI S099 Barb fp sill ages B sill ole Sty ab os, 


AND B odgry Lely 


\o 


eal 


10 


20 


30 


3S 


31 Book One, Chapter Six 


(4) Moreover, whatever is possible in existence when considered in 
itself, its existence and nonexistence are both due to a cause. [This is] 
because, if it comes into existence, then existence, as distinct from 
nonexistence, would have occurred to it. [Similarly,] if it ceases to exist, 
then nonexistence, as distinct from existence, would have occurred to it. 
Hence, in each of the two cases, what occurs to the thing must either occur 
through another or not. If [it occurs] through another, then [this] other 
is the cause. And if it did not exist through another, [then the nonexis- 
tence of the other is the cause of its nonexistence]. 

(5) Hence, it is clear that whatever exists after nonexistence has 
been specified with something possible other than itself. The case is the 
same with nonexistence. This is because the thing’s quiddity is either 
sufficient for this specification or not. If its quiddity is sufficient for either 
of the two states of affairs [existence or nonexistence] to obtain, then 
that thing would be in itself of a necessary quiddity, when [the thing] has 
been supposed not to be necessary [in itself]. And this is contradictory. 
If [on the other hand] the existence of its quiddity is not sufficient [for 
specifying the possible with existence ]—[the latter] being, rather, some- 
thing whose existence is added to it—-then its existence would be neces- 
sarily due to some other thing. [This,] then, would be its cause. Hence, it 
has a cause. In sum, then, either of the two things [existence or nonexis- 
tence] would obtain necessarily for [the possible that was] due, not to 
itself, but to a cause. The existential idea would be realized through a 
cause (namely, an existential cause); and the nonexistential idea [would be 
realized] through a cause (namely, the absence of the [former] existential 
idea, as you have known). 

(6) We thus say: [The possible in itself] must become necessary 
through a cause and with respect to it. For, if it were not necessary, then 
with the existence of the cause and with respect to it, it would [still] be 
possible. It would then be possible for it to exist or not to exist, being speci- 
fied with neither of the two states. [Once again,] from the beginning this 
would be in need of the existence of a third thing through which either 
existence (as distinct from nonexistence) or nonexistence (as distinct 
from existence) would be assigned for [the possible] when the cause of its 
existence with [this state of affairs] would not have been specified.! This 
would be another cause, and the discussion would extend to an infinite 
regress. And, if it regresses infinitely, the existence of the possible, with 
all this, would not have been specified by it. As such, its existence would 
not have been realized. This is impossible, not only because this leads to 





lett jo oly r\ 


Aly LAT anaes oo yrgd Sl EL sogh Se gel Mal Lely (4) 
7 Vigan pall a am pas lily cpaall 5 pcs aye al fam ald any [i] a 
cork FV sherk oe A fare yell y mls SOK ol LL ba WG sage fl 
rb & hare Y 58 jy All» alban d Ge gh yb 

MSs orb Fle yh oat Daeg seed be Sslgll yy (0) 
ae ad EGY 3) SAL Ad 5G gl Ll anes tha Vals, call 2 
pil alls 553 Shee [4] SH OS AN SK cob cig 
292943 AY OS oly AE Le foaly pb op aby cal Lalll Cal, 
MVS pF Sle topos GK ui oe, al las yl) cal 
AA Jp NYY ca Lely Gy vol re Leb ALLL, abe ald cathe gb case 
ill pase 2 Abed oasll gall Uy daa yong dle oe Aled 62 9-$) gall UI 
ile ey a aajest dash 

Ah La led rlitlly cilaly Lely poe gl cow al gi (1) 
Y gly es ol jm 58S Lal IS Mel wlably ddl ayoy xe gh Lol, 
UIE +5 oye, dhol, Ot Clow lary gy) ral Yaar pF dey 
(Sel be NS 9K cilall syery ae 231 GF peal sl cpuull ge aye gl ay a 
Lert 8 lb ee Suche pF soli ily lg pF OST gals 
Ml oe Sas AVY Slee tiny cogery al bar 3 990 seSiges a 


\o 


a 


10 


15 


20 


30 


32 Book One, Chapter Six 


an infinity of causes—for this is a dimension,” the impossibility of which 
is still open to doubt in this place—but because no dimension has been 
arrived at through which its existence is specified, when it has been sup- 
posed to be existing. Hence, it has been shown to be true that whatever 
is possible in its existence does not exist unless rendered necessary with 
respect to its cause. 

(7) We [further] say: It is impossible for the Necessary Existent to 
be equivalent to another necessary existent so that this would exist with 
that and that would exist with this, neither being the cause of the other 
[but] both, rather, being equal with respect to the matter of the necessity 
of existence. [This is] because, if the essence of the one is considered in 
itself, apart from the other, then it would have to be either [(a)] neces- 
sary in itself or [(b)] not necessary in itself, 

(8) If [(a}] necessary in itself, then either it would have also a neces- 
sity with respect to the other, whereby a thing would be both a necessary 
existent in itself and a necessary existent through another (which, as we 
have seen, is impossible); or it would have no necessity by reason of 
another and, hence, it would not be necessary for its existence to be con- 
sequent on the existence of the other, and it follows necessarily that its 
existence would have no relation with the other such that it exists only 
when this other exists. 

(9) But, if [(b)] it is not necessary in itself, then, considered in itself, 
it must be possible in existence and considered, with respect to the other, 
necessary in existence. From this it follows that either the other is of the 
same [state] or [it is] not. [If not, then it would not be equivalent in exis- 
tence.| If the other is of the same [state], then it follows that the neces- 
sity of existence of this [one] derives from that [other] when that [other] 
is either [(i)] within the bounds of possible existence or [(ii)] within the 
bounds of necessary existence. 

(10) If the necessary existence of this [one] derives from that [other]— 
that [other] being within the bounds of necessary existence—and does not 
derive from itself or some prior third thing, as we have stated in a previous 
context, but [derives] from that from which it comes to be, then a condition 
of the necessary existence of this [one] becomes the necessary existence of 
what occurs thereafter [as a consequence of | its necessary existence, the 
posteriority [here] being in essence. As such, no necessary existence is 
realized at all for it. If [on the other hand] the necessary existence of this 
[one] derives from that [other]—[that other] being within the bounds of 


leds) yf oly ry 


dm deed ple] Ae aa px gl Ins 9 tae gb Le fll 3 
pb sey 22S SE le SG ee a bogeys 2 by asad \ 
Ae Ol Li Coe 
Be elope Col) OK 2 Sel OKI jem Ys dety (¥) 
eH ale [4+] Masel poly Lege lage ly ali olay ne 
Oy aly Loved ol el 131 La VN ye J wa3) yl op QUI Lee 
ily Lely OY lal Lely oS gl Ll 55 
coulsk Lal peg SK gl L] sey Mealy Lely GSO (A) 
Way cad Se opel Colyy cally ‘Loses Col +2 9 gt 
pry colon ST ar SOY Gl bly cee ob US lle 
Bho UGS oe ATL tke wed SY glagky eT ary 
Be eee 
2231 SE Lb OK ol ad cally Lely Kal uly (4) 
OEY IWS SV oS gi ly Mae soy Ws rye ghooly SV Lely 
Sy cs Ge Id 92S opey GK GI Ul See slo 8 LIS TN G58 
elope se Blog sl g&| ane 
2M ogy mB ph by IS op IY apg opery GH GB (0°) 
Ae SSS Sally Aha toey DAL ST le I ie gh cad yo aly 


a oe . . 
wet 0929 9m 9 dm Sway |e oy yey 4d let Nie oy ey 5 


\o 


Ocal ic an rrart 
99623 5 op Seg y SS oly Kl ope y rye y al bem Stith Ye 





Q 


15 


20 


30 


40 


33 Book One, Chapter Six 


possibility—then the necessary existence of this [one] derives from the 
essence of that [other] when [that other] is within the bounds of possibility. 
The essence of that [other] which is within the bounds of possibility would 
bestow necessary existence on this [one], having derived not possibility 
but necessity from this [one]. Thus, the cause of [that one] is the possible 
existence of this [one], whereas the possible existence of this [one] is not 
caused by that [other]. As such, the two cannot be equivalent—I mean, 
that whose causality is essential and that which is essentially caused. 

(11) Another [circumstance]? occurs [relating to the above argument]: 
namely, that, if the possible existence of that [one] is the cause of the 
necessary existence of this [one], then the existence of [the latter] is not 
connected with the necessary existence of [the former], but only with its 
possibility. It follows, then, that the existence of [the latter] is possible 
with the nonexistence of [the former], when both have been supposed 
to be equivalent—and this is contradictory. Hence, it is impossible for 
the two to be existentially equivalent in the circumstance of not being 
attached to an external cause. Rather, one must be the one that is essen- 
tially prior, or else there must be some other external cause that either 
necessitates both by necessitating the relation between them or necessi- 
tates the relation between them by necessitating them. 

(12) The two related things [are such that] one is not necessitated by 
the other but ts [necessary] with the other, that which necessitates them 
being the cause that brought them together (and also the two substances 
or two subjects described by the two [relatives]). The existence of the two 
subjects or substances alone is not sufficient to [make] the two [related], 
a third thing that combines the two [being required]. This is because the 
existence of each of the two and its true nature would either consist in their 
being with the other [or not].* [If they consist in being with the other,] 
then the existence of [each] in itself would not be necessary. It thus becomes 
possible and, hence, becomes caused. Its cause, as we have stated, would 
not be equivalent [to it] in existence. As such, its cause would therefore be 
something else, and hence [the existent] and its cause would not be the 
cause of the relation between the two, but [the cause would be] that other. 

(13) [If, on the other hand, the existence and true nature of each] 
does not consist in [being with the other], then the conjunction of the two 
would be an occurrence pertaining to the proper® existence of each and 
consequent to it. Also, the existence proper to the one would not be due 
to its equivalence inasmuch as it is equivalent, but due to a prior cause, if 
it is caused. Then its existence would be due either [(a)] to its companion, 
not inasmuch as the latter is its equivalent, but due to the existence that 


APA! ee old ou 


Ks GRY 8 yay eld obs OF P29 yy 9K ORY we 
Ian SEY ded paly cape] gery lag Lake SY ue 3 alld 
3 ayy gly calls 299 ORL Ly Aba! 9 S340] geal fy La ye 
NAM Jslang SliIY cle sa be eel 8 Gt Kb cache 

lex) dle ys ws 29 SRLS Lal cgay po “st emi (19) 
(0 99 39m Sree SEL by Sargey bs 2329 Der ol We age 
caps IE SK gl Ke jad G3. AS Ne {5K Lod 03, dere 
OWL SMI gs Laredo coe fe cele they lilacs Y L Je 
J ce NII laud lee Lee Tels a hen gS 
- Lagilenl Ada Co 

Aa ad cally «A eh 6 Lely bevel at gbtally (\v) 
299 ody - bey Sb pest I gleponlt JI gbatt Lall Clapane ol 
Wee YAY Ny. age em tll ogy pe lamang lag ge poll gl gpl 
OSrAily 09 SV ee SKI ga bing gpl y sel Koy 5K 5 
2B BEI Cle ud SK iy Vee pred Ke ed only pi 
Wel «tages (oll a Dulile SV, GK we ST ipl ale gg 

Maly AdieY oLliagey Jed bal gS 49 GI Ly (.") 
Olhnass dle se I$ AB pom AIK ys 1K Yaad ill ope gl gh 
[tv] MR Cm YY nolo ye lb rey Sal Ly) dead Wyler 


GQ 


10 


20 


30 


54 Book One, Chapter Seven 


is proper to its companion (and, as such, they would not be equivalent, 
but, rather, [an instance of] cause and effect, its companion being also a 
cause of the imagined relation between them, as in the case of father 
and son); or [(b)] they would be equivalent, belonging to the class of 
equivalents where one is not the cause of the other, the relation [of con- 
comitance] being necessary for their existence. As such, the primary 
cause of the relation would be something external that brings about the 
existence of both, as you have known, the relation being accidental. 
Hence, there would be no equivalence there, except in terms of a differ- 
ing or a necessary concomitant accident. But this is something other than 
that with which we are concerned. There would necessarily be a cause 
for that which is accidental; and the two things, as far as equivalence is 
concerned, would both be caused. 


Chapter [Seven] 


That the Necessary Existent is one 


(1) We further say: The Necessary Existent must be one entity. Other- 
wise, let [us suppose the Necessary Existent were] a multiplicity in which 
each [member] is a necessary existent. It would then follow that each, 
with respect to the meaning which is its true nature, either would not 
differ at all from [any] other [member] or would differ from it. If it does 
not differ from the other in the meaning that belongs to [itself] essentially, 
differing from [the other] only in not being it—and this is inescapably 
a difference—then it differs from it in [something] other than the meaning. 
This is because the meaning in both does not differ; [but] something has 
conjoined [with] it, in terms of which it becomes “this” or in “this” (or it 
was conjoined by the very fact of being “this” or in “this”), while this 
[thing] that conjoins [with] it did not conjoin [with] the other. Rather, it 
is through [what the former has] that [the other] becomes “that,” or 
[through] the very fact that “that” is “that.” This is some [kind] of specifica- 
tion that has attached to that meaning through which there is a difference 
between the two [necessary existents]. Hence, each of the two differs from 
the other through [this thing that conjoined the one, but not the other,] 
but would not differ from it in [that it has] the same meaning. It would 
thus differ from it in [something] other than this meaning. 





leh uw oly “% 


OKs Mylar de (Re SESW cease gall woLe I> yb 
thar op Re UK gl ly «gly CE Lys Kang sapUal le Lal aobe 
Ald 3S are JENS, Wile Lmsel 5) SIG SL 
OSG Rees Wl cule L le Lyall sey DE yl tou 
2 Si Kay 43 cos nb hay path gl lll Yopll Yds 


[EF]. ee PE Lom ye GUS calle Vale 


[eb jail 
bo? (5) 


waly reshoolygl 3 


FBV, trots Ub IK gle sell oly Gl Lal ty (9) 
Fle ay SOK SIU opel oly ge ely My LS 
FAW AK Y 3h ob a Jat Siu Cam yo Ci all 
PMD Aloe VE Nay oye jal ah adleay eclally ald gil al 
Ha she ny pb isi aby Uae ob Ligh go ill all Vly sual pe 
bb SM gla a abe aly cle 2 jl Lae ail ui 1 gl cle 3 
Magy <cstall NS 558 Le amass Lay cl als laos aye 
MAD pall adi Baie ay car eT ls Lage only BOB stale 
all pF 


\o 


a 


20 


30 


35 Book One, Chapter Seven 


(2) [Now,] the things that are other than the meaning but which attach 
to the meaning are the accidents and unessential sequels. These sequels 
either occur to the thing’s existence inasmuch as it is that existence ([in 
which case] it is necessary that everything in this existence [must] agree, 
when [in fact] these were supposed to be different—and this is contradic- 
tory), or [these sequels] occur to [the thing’s existence] from external 
causes, not from [the thing’s| quiddity itself. [As such, | it would then follow 
that, if it were not for that cause, [the sequels] would not have occurred; 
and, if it were not for that cause, [the existent] would not be different 
[from another]; and, if it were not for that cause, the essences either would 
or would not be one; and if it were not for that cause, “this” by itself would 
not be a necessary existent, [nor] “that” by itself a necessary existent— 
[that is,] not with respect to existence, but with respect to the accidents. 

(3) Thus, the necessity of existence of each, particular to cach and 
singled out [for each], would be derived from another. But it has been 
stated that whatever is a necessary existent through another is not a nec- 
essary existent in itself; rather, within its own domain! it is a possible 
existent. It would then [follow] that, although each one of this [supposed 
multiplicity] is in itself a necessary existent, it is [also], within its own 
domain, a possible existent—-and this is impossible. 

(4) Let us now suppose that [each member of the supposed multi- 
plicity] differs from the [other] in some basic meaning, after agreeing 
with it in the meaning [of being a necessary existent]. It follows, then, 
that either that [basic] meaning would be a condition for the necessity of 
existence, or it would not. If it is a condition for the necessity of existence, 
it is obvious that everything that is a necessary existent must agree with 
respect to it. If it is not a condition for the necessity of existence, then 
the necessity of existence would have been established [as] a necessity of 
existence without it, [the latter] intruding on it, occurring accidentally 
to it, and [being] related to it after that [existence] has been completed 
as a necessary existence. But we have denied this as impossible, showing 
its falsity. Hence, [each member of the supposed multiplicity] cannot 
differ from [the other] in [the supposed basic] meaning. 

(5) Indeed, we must add further clarification of this, [taking it] from 
another aspect—namely, that division of the meaning of necessary exis- 
tence in [the supposed] multiplicity must conform to [only] one of two 


alternatives. It would have to be either by way of its division in terms of 





reall yy oly 0 


sl Selly ULE oo all Gylity eal 2 ge SLA, (4) 
nF [EL] opel 0 ee ttl aged bys ol LB gel Mle asst 
hal fed ay ol Uy He Ny aS Yl og oy cad SS gg 
pA IY OSS cays ol Ald MES 9S aL ad ge Vy 
ASI AI GS «SE shied, Oly! IK aul alt Yy 93 ate, 
Coed eee oY apr gots alah by ogg] oly aah al ID pa! 
. eM tom oy J 

(7 alban ca} opal cay Got ge roly Sogey yey oS (¥) 
PP j AN oe Nols albert oe Moly ge Le Fl fs aby ope 
So lbs oped iely Yl coda poly SSS copesl KE ao 
- Slows Liny ABI 2 3 age 

Pra call Baily bow hel gar pally cl Sue ety (4) 
F bet 3558 ORY Jom tlosy 3 bso Ks Lo pall bs 
Fp oh cm donly ob £5 ge gl cael pills cayegl yey 
JP 99 Opry peg diye he opel ge Boye a9 ley 
old Ling Woe bee By oy yey lb A Le oy cal olan cyayle cals 
[20]. gall dailben ol jew Y 538 

does sm pledl Slt gay Slay op bly by ay gl cons (9) 
Jew De Udy Jail ala os Je GK ol Ul tory yp dee VSS 3 


\o 


wi 


10 


20 


25 


30 


36 Book One, Chapter Seven 


differentiae or by way of its division in terms of accidents. [Now,] it is 
known that differentiae are not included in the definition of that which 
stands as genus, for they do not confer on the genus its true nature, con- 
ferring on it only actual subsistence. This is exemplified by “the rational,” 
for “the rational” does not confer on animal the meaning of “animality” 
but confers on it subsistence in actuality, as a specific existing entity. It 
must also be the case that the differentiae of necessary existence, if [such 
attribution] is correct, would have to be such that they do not confer on 
necessary existence its true nature but would confer on it actual existence. 
But this is impossible in two respects. 

(6) One of the two is that the true nature of necessary existence is 
nothing but the very assuredness of existence, unlike the true nature of 
animality, which is something other than the assuredness of existence 
(existence being either a necessary concomitant of it or an intruder on it, 
as you have known). Hence, the conferring of existence upon unnecessary 
existence would necessarily be the conferring of a condition [constituent] 
of its true nature. But the permissibility of this [to obtain] between dif- 
ferentiae and genus has been denied as impossible. 

(7) The second respect is that it would follow that the reality of nec- 
essary existence is dependent on its being realized in actuality through 
that which necessitates it, [in which case] the sense in which a thing is 
a necessary existent would be that it is a necessary existent though 
another. But what we are discussing [here] is necessary existence in 
itself. Thus, the thing which is a necessary existent in itself would be a 
necessary existent through another; and we have refuted this. 

(8) It has thus become clear that the division of necessary existence 
into these matters would not be the division of the generic meaning into 
differentiae. Hence, it has become evident that the meaning that entails 
necessary existence cannot be a generic meaning, divisible by differentiae 
and accidents. It thus remains that it would be a meaning [in terms of] 
species. We thus say: It would not be possible for its kind of species to be 
predicated of many, because, if the individuals of the one species, as we 
have shown, do not differ in the essential meaning, they must then differ 
only in terms of accidents. But we have prohibited the possibility of this in 





Pleat Ge oly 4 


Yabo etl ple ples bom Beas Vail gl esha jt ely Ll 
SlaAl ace Y Setll gb « GUE Ulsy «Jad lh asads Lily Lie eed ad 
28 SSS 6) Lal coed holt boyy Ub Jal lll aac cil ew 
J eB gy kate 9 Nery ad Vee ce Sloeslog, 
sens cy Slew Lady «badly og gl oat 

SY op $6 ai op dlopy tin wutal lave (4) 
We ybe Jets gl ps opel, cage gl Bie ge Sia 
a8) Gyyye Keke y byt bbl oop oes seglisbl gab cule 
_ = feailly acd oy Le ae Slee pce 

bat | pile op Nowy idin 9S sla al gllergl, (v) 
Way om Dye arly gt GK COI all GS a Cogs Jal 
Sly age coll 6 tll GSS OIL ose Opey Gd LOS LL, ye 
os Ula! 35 coyin aye gh cory 

gall plucl ERY GAN ol Jb dg opey plu Sl wb we (A) 
SVLSN] joe V apd gy kbs gill gall oh SS yal ot! 
Ys did Les se SSSI ad oll gl Ipals pecty Le eae gS 
PBL ees Sere gheatl olathe dl yeoe 59 0S Sl jem 
Be Sa lee by «shy BES Ly SS gl ony gli ell Caos 


\o 


10 


20 


30 


37 Book One, Chapter Seven 


necessary existence. It may be possible to show this by a kind of summary, 
where the purpose would turn out [to be] what we mean. We thus say: 

(9) If necessary existence is an attribute of the thing, existing for it, 
then [there are two alternatives. The first is that] it would be necessary, as 
regards this attribute—that is, necessary existence—that that very attri- 
bute should exist for this [thing] to which it is attributed. As such, any other 
[hypothetical attribute] of [the kind] cannot exist except as an attribute 
of that [one] thing. Hence, it would be impossible for [such an attribute] 
to exist for another and it must, hence, exist for [that thing] alone. [The 
second alternative is that] the existence [of the attribute] is possible but 
not necessary for it. As such, it would be possible for that thing not to be 
a necessary existent in itself when it is a necessary existent in itself— 
and this is a contradiction. Hence, necessary existence [belongs] to only 
one [existent]. 

(10) If [to this] someone were to say, “Its existence for this [thing] 
does not prevent its existence as an attribute for the other, and its being 
an attribute of the other does not falsify its being an attribute of [the 
former],” we say: 

(11) We are speaking of the assigning of necessary existence as an 
attribute [to the thing] inasmuch as it belongs to it and inasmuch as no 
attention is paid to the other. For this [necessary existence] is not an 
identical attribute of the other but is similar to it, [where] what is nec- 
essary in it is the very same thing which would be necessary in the other. 
To put it in another way, we say: 

(12) [In order for] each one of [the hypothesized necessary existents] 
to be a necessary existent and to be the specific thing that it is, it [must 
be] either one [and the same—in which case] whatever is a necessary 
existent is itself [that] thing and no other[—or not one and the same]. 
If its being a necessary existent is other than its being the very same 
thing [that] it is, then the conjunction of the Necessary Existent with 
[the fact] that it is the very thing that it is would have to be due either to 
itself, or to a necessitating ground, or to a cause other than itself. If due 
to itself and to the fact that it is a necessary existent, then whatever is a 
necessary existent would have to be this very thing. If due to a necessi- 
tating ground and cause other than it, then it would have a cause for 
being this very thing. Hence, there would be a cause for the specific prop- 
erty of its singular existence. It is, then, caused. 





elect ye Lgl ry 


erly Wal 9Ky shes 0 PR Oe 5} Ke ody capeslosey re 
:Jged valayl bt 

Pla KT Ub cl laggy tl dde GB bl oe dlosey al (4) 
Bye hl 5a gy deal IE ge WSS GI coed yey Bh Anal ode 
ond (oy so dl cad cA hee GV lagery sory gl lee vel amee 
Ie GS bend ely oe KE baey GK gl Uy Sorry doe gl 
99? ALS Nhe ASN ogee ll erly pty aildy opel oly pe etl 
bets NSW GY oes 

PW ie 6K SN iors ex VW aagry ol fb IB OB Oe) 
: Jed hie Sey Jen 

Vem yp Al gp bee oy cal dee opel yey (ud Od LOT (19) 
Grrl Woollen SW hie tld SN lageah 
Jib Gel igh - lew lb 

Lely oRigl bl ean 2455 oesloel ee ella Sal (11) 
aly SST] oly ork ply tee ew oer dlcely ob KOS 
yl oS ol Uy cA PAM age Sl Condy Byliad cae, 2 OS pb copy 
FSD copes coy My caSldl UGB ond Coy Cary il | aly 
Wo V0 ST cob Co ge ony tll OO Gly fay Lae oped Coly gL 


Sse gg mee ayell oa gory Aer uated «a 


\o 


10 


20 


25 


30 


38 Book One, Chapter Eight 


(13) The Necessary Existent is therefore one in [its] entirety (not as 
species are [subsumed] under genus) and one in number (not as individ- 
uals [subsumed] under species). Rather, it is a meaning, the explication 
of whose term belongs only to it; and its existence is not shared by any 
other. We will clarify this further in another place. These are the specific 
properties with which the Necessary Existent is exclusively endowed. 

(14) As regards the possible existent, from this its specific property has 
become evident—namely, that it necessarily needs some other thing to 
render it existing in actuality. Whatever is a possible existent is always, con- 
sidered in itself, a possible existent; but it may happen that its existence 
becomes necessary through another. This may either occur to it always, or 
else its necessary existence through another may not be permanent— 
occurring, rather, at one time and not another. This [latter] must have 
matter that precedes its existence in time, as we will clarify. That whose 
existence is always necessitated by another is also not simple in its true 
nature. [This is] because what belongs to it [when] considered in itself 
is other than what belongs to it from another. It attains its haecceity in 
existence from both together. For this reason, nothing other than the 
Necessary Existent, considered in Himself, is stripped of associating with 
what is in potentiality and [what is within the realm of] possibility. He is 
the single existent, [every] other [being] a composite [dual].? 


Chapter [Eight] 


On clarifying [the meaning] of “truth” and “veracity”; 
defense of the primary statements in true premises 


(1) As regards truth, one understands by it existence in external things 
absolutely, and one understands by it permanent existence, and one 
understands by it the state of the verbal statement or of the belief indi- 
cating the state of the external thing, if it corresponds with it, such that 
we would say, “This is a true statement” and “This is a true belief.” The 
Necessary Existent would thus be the permanently true in itself, while the 
possible existent would be true through another and false in itself. Hence, 
all things other than One Necessary Existent are, in themselves, false. As 





ress y» oly YA 


doh solyy «per CEA pd AL oly oye Sl oly gab (1) 
AB Ape ib aapegy id lend ge bps cd pI 1 
eS els le see a el dle oT oye 8 Lal lhe age 

Brgy? Clon dl pay Colt Alb Fp gd AB cope gh Kall Ul, (V4) 
cABld gel Lila gb ag dll SE ye LIS. loge ge Jad alae ol eo 
Lily « Lola d yaya gl Ll aby cop oayey om gl ae ky Soe 
SI con BP 239 B99 ey DJ Las ad ob GF Opry Ory OK Ol 
ab Slo onde 0099 com Silly dona gee LST SLi aagery putt dale | K 
role gry cob yal gal b call Look i cill Y aad Lye Lal 
dade 5 Se opel ceeds nb Ht VID coe p Lee Lye gl 
[#9] S5 Cad obs «2, phy creat Lok GY, al L 


[Ul ped] 
}45(¢) 


Wh olsdll 9 bgBV Ssh ge GUL, Garally abi gle G2 


cpHlall yen Ase gig Liles GLB ogee ace aged ght Ll (9) 

ca) Callas SF lal ey! Pcl Se be Jax call sai Sydl Se ane wees 
Usha aloe GAN ge oy NN Cols Sb. ge sled Lay ge IB bie sad 
Pb sol oe SoS spe b JG aes 9 bb cope ge oe gl Sally 


10 


20 


30 


39 Book One, Chapter Eight 


for the truth by way of correspondence, it is similar to the veracious, except 
that, as I reckon, it is “veracious” when considered in terms of its relation 
to the fact and “true” when the relation of the fact to it is considered. 

(2) The statements most deserving of being [called] true are those 
whose truth is permanent; and, of these, the most deserving are those whose 
truth is primary, requiring no cause. And the most primary of all true state- 
ments, to which everything in analysis reduces (so that it is predicated 
either potentially or actually of all things demonstrated or made evident 
through it), is—as we have shown in the Book of Demonstration!—l[as 
follows]: “There is no intermediary between afhirmation and negation.” 
This property is not an occurrence to one [particular] thing but is one of 
the occurrences to the existent inasmuch as it exists, because of its perva- 
siveness in all existing [things]. When the sophist denies this [primary 
statement], he either denies it only with his tongue, obdurately, or [denies 
it] because of a doubt in matters where, for example, he fails to see the 
contradictory extremes due to his being overcome by an error (because of 
his not having attained knowledge of the [true] state of the contradictory 
and its conditions). Moreover, censoring the sophist and ever alerting the 
perplexed [against error] is incumbent at all times on the philosopher— 
[a task he undertakes] inescapably through some type of dialogue. There 
is no doubt that this dialogue would be a type of syllogism whose required 
[conclusion] is necessary (unless it would not in itself? be a syllogism 
whose required {conclusion} was necessary but would [instead] be a syllo- 
gism in terms of [simply] being a syllogism [in form]).3 

(3) This is because the syllogism whose required [conclusion] is nec- 
essary is of two aspects. [The first] is a syllogism that is [a syllogism] in 
itself—namely, the one whose premises are themselves true* and are 
better known to the rationally discerning than the conclusion, and whose 
composition [is such] that it yields a valid conclusion. [The second] is a 
syllogism similar to the [former] in terms of being a syllogism [in form]. 
[This is] where [(a)] the state of the premises is similar to the first— 
[but only] for the one being debated—so that [the latter] would admit 
something even if [it is] not true, and, [(b)] if true, [the premises] would 
not be better known than the conclusion, which [the latter] would [also] 
admit. Thus, a syllogism is constructed against [the one being debated] 
either in an absolutely correct way or in a manner [that the latter] deems 
[to be correct]. In summary [then] a syllogism is that from which some- 
thing follows necessarily, once its premises are admitted. And [the above 
dialectical argument] would be a syllogism inasmuch as it is [as] thus 





let ys oll 4 


Deeb mel ab Gale ai Y Gala yo tillal Js ye gh Lily aed 9 
Add pied GLE gong pA HC 

Be SE Ud goly « Ltly wre gh Le | > Kl by gel, (1) 
er Hel DF Fall ee sill Bola Ly Spl, dled at Ly 
SENS ake, Wem os shag tb Sd dail shad Yoo gal 

VA eA ale ie Cad Reel ahny Lut) Olen gy dlauly V racl gs 
13] fled ylly [£4] ogee Bb aeged copege yo k dahl Gayle 
ad eLtl Sit oe BGK sh cite cl Y] oS ped ce Sh 
AUT Jed Jae SRV AY ole ade gy Lala soit! Bo leben ale 
JIE ES Wh tad poll ans cdg oS ol allt, 
2 oS ay ult SHALE Yy a ygl dH OF pias Moe YO SQy pil 
OK My colaten Late oh Lal d aunt 2 OS VAI Y colatin Late ol, all GoLill je 
-urtal Ll 

SUN gy cal 9 eB yey de oben oh coill Lidl Vly (1) 
Wk alt Ky cat» otis we Bly Quil pdsle lake 954 
> Al ae SIT old JE 3G il sty celal MS old, «bese 
TAT N Gl Sop Bae SEAL Boe Kho ttl eg 
Seale Tale Lill gS aad ALLL, 0226 gl flan Gove Galt, ae Gps 
BF il eth ud Sy. TS pate ie LLB OS 3S cr gt ae yale 


\o 


NH 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


35 


40 


40 Book One, Chapter Eight 


[described]. It does not follow, however, that every syllogism whose 
required conclusion is necessary has to be a syllogism. [This is] because 
its required conclusion must be accepted [only] if [its premises are] 
admitted.> If [these are] not admitted, it [could still] be a syllogism 
because there has been placed in it that which, if postulated and admitted, 
makes {the acceptance of its conclusion] necessary. But inasmuch as [the 
premises] have not yet been admitted, its conclusion is not necessary. As 
such, [the definition of] the syllogism is more general than its being a 
syllogism whose required [conclusion] is necessary. [Moreover,] its being 
a syllogism whose required [conclusion] is necessary is, as you have known, 
of two divisions. Thus, the syllogism whose required [conclusion] is nec- 
essary in accordance with the fact itself is the one whose premises are in 
themselves admitted® and are prior to the conclusion.’ As for the one 
[described] in terms of [simply] being a syllogism [in form], [this is the 
syllogism] where the person being addressed has admitted the premises 
and, hence, adherence to the conclusion becomes necessary for him. 

(4) One of the astonishing things is that the sophist whose purpose is 
to wrangle is forced into one of two states of affairs: either silence and the 
desisting [from all argument]; or, inescapably, the acknowledging of [the 
truth of certain] things and the confession that they yield [necessary] 
conclusions against him. 

(5) As regards the perplexed, his treatment [by us] consists in resolv- 
ing a difficulty. This is because the perplexed has inevitably fallen into 
the state of affairs he is in [due to a number of alternative reasons. It may 
be] due to what he sees of the disagreement among the many who excel, 
and to his witnessing that the opinion of each one of them is contrary to 
the opinion of the other, [each of ] whom [the perplexed] deems to be 
equal [to the other], not lesser than him. Thus, [the perplexed] cannot 
find [any] one of two [contrary] opinions necessarily more deserving of 
acceptance than the other. [His perplexity may also] be due to [the fact] 
that he has heard from the [above mentioned] famous [people], whose 
excellence is well attested, statements which his intellect, in its innate 
intelligence, does not accept. An example of this is the statement of one 
who said: “You cannot see a thing twice, nor even once,” and, “A thing has 
no existence in itself, [but] only through relation.” If [then] the one who 
utters such a statement is celebrated for wisdom, it is [hardly] unlikely for 
the seeker of knowledge to become perplexed by his statement. Alterna- 
tively, [the perplexity may also be] due to [the fact] that syllogisms are 
assembled for [the perplexed] whose conclusions are contrary, where he 
is unable to choose the one [as true] and to deem the other as spurious. 





rlesdl ye OLY os 
0b BY LLB GB yl 1B che Ia] pp oLaatde GY colaiie oj Luld old” 
Ula po colate ei) da cles ol UK, cpp lng aiey la] bad ayy! 
Lal 2 colatin op LS OS [0+] oldie oh LG OS y asl LL 
Pc Aendi Pell Canoe oleate oe gall Lal Cake le de Cpaed de 
23 Ga pLaL ge gall Ll, Heme op pably c\padil 9 Ral silane gil 
Rowell ae cai leoee bled he 

Lyell J lacal Lilla 2 gill flladyetl gh ttensl joy (4) 
Ade SLA LAUD VUE Uy Leo Stl 

Ld gy L] dle Y ool SY May cad Jo rhe poll Ly (0) 
pee aly Bh OS je eaalty SST Lowy GLY joa U Uda 6, 
asdl sel 9K glee Gow ie ae pats Veal bP oem el ol chy elie 
tai, of 22 prell Sally ae a Lyle aie 
Wy dh cosy hf gl AKe Y + tll ob By IS cipadl alder Ya gl Jil 
sll Una fa Sb GF Uae RLEML fp aud be ot} ogey Vly cinely by 
CLild nce ale Bal bly dd Goll a gl lem KI ASLE Lyte 
[29] OV ayy er Waoly sea sl fe ya ed Bt a 


\o 


a 


10 


20 


30 


BD 


41 Book One, Chapter Eight 


(6) The philosopher obviates what afflicts the likes of these [per- 
plexed individuals] in two ways: The first is to resolve the doubt into 
which [such an individual] has fallen. The second is to point out in a 
definitive manner that the existence of an intermediary between two 
contradictories is impossible. 

(7) As for resolving [the doubt] into which [the perplexed] had 
fallen, it includes making it known to him that people are people, not 
angels. To this [he should add] that it is not necessarily the case that they 
would be equal in being correct, [nor does] it necessarily follow that, if 
one is more correct [than another] in one thing, the other may not be 
more correct than [the former] in something else. [The philosopher must 
also point out] that most of those who pretend to be philosophers learn 
logic but do not use it, resorting, in the final analysis, to innate bent, riding 
it as one who runs without pulling reins or restraining a bridle; also that, 
among the virtuous, there are those who make hints with symbols and 
utter expressions that are outwardly repulsive or false, having, in [utter- 
ing them], a hidden intention. This, indeed, is the pattern followed by 
most wise men—nay, by the prophets, who in no way commit error or 
[fall into it] inadvertently. This [then] would remove the [perplexed per- 
son's] preoccupation of heart with respect to what he disapproves of in 
men of learning. 

(8) [The philosopher must] then apprise [the perplexed person fur- 
ther] and say: “When you speak, you must either intend by your utter- 
ance one specific thing or not intend [{it].” If he says, “When I speak, I do 
not understand a thing,” then [such an individual] would lie outside the 
lot of the seekers of guidance who are perplexed, contradicting [by his 
utterance] the very {statement he makes]. This type of discourse [can- 
not] be carried out with him. And if he says, “When I speak, I understand 
by [my] utterance all things,” then [again] he lies outside the pale of 
those seeking guidance. If [on the other hand] he says, “When I speak, 
I understand by my speech either one specific thing or a multiplicity of 
limited things,” then, in any case, he would have made, for the utterance, 
a signification to specific things where other things are not included in 
such a signification. [For,] if the multiplicity agrees in one meaning, then 
[the utterance} would have also signified one thing. If not, then the term 
[that is uttered] is equivocal, and it is certainly possible to single out a 
name for each one of that aggregate [of equivocal meanings]. This, then, 
is admitted by those who represent the perplexed who seek guidance. 











eleds| y oly $y 


1b by Le Jo volves oe Mpa SEA aye LA Syd (1) 
Alanaly cpiartl op GS gh Se Val le pt Le yt, SeLtll 5 

NS poy SDL Y ob pl gl dhe gh Us 55 a3 By LE UI (v) 
2 pe Sool) GOL ony abel GE ES ol coe ab 
Solandh sleet ge be ST SNK sty 
Ss Sid doaylll Jad pM FT aye cabanas pely lal lad uel 
hay Lad jen ge Oeil je Gly aplad Ghee gl gkie Spb ye ST 
Nee) a es oul a eee lis, 
Be yt ALB SE IP ody y 0 Lge ol LAME Agee 5p sin Y pall HLA 
elabell so Kul L 

cg i lly sats StL) Jb Wb aK Nal oll sad Gye (A) 
EF wb LS pil) CAS UBL JIB GB cmeall Yo) cau, LEY 5 
OF pall DD dae pS pacdy ced JULY bly ceed yout Sal alam 
LEANN jee ob et Saal ng OAKS BL SB Gly [OV] I 
Se he vasgrne 59S Ll) cage Cb ay cago CaS HHL IB gb 
wll Cg Lab Malla Ob Joo) rk eLatl le Ws Lai Jom a 
pV IS Sl aly Coals Came le Lal Jo 3B Joly we 9 Gi ES 


\o 


10 


20 


30 


35 


42 Book One, Chapter Eight 


(9) [Now, to continue,] if a name signifies one thing—as, for example, 
“human”—then “not human” (I mean that which differs from human) is 
not signified in any manner by the [former] utterance [“human”]. That 
which the term “human” signifies is not that which the term “not human” 
signifies. For if “human” were to signify “not human,” then it would fol- 
low necessarily that “human,” “stone,” “boat,” and “elephant” are one 
and the same thing. Indeed, it would signify “the white,” “the black,” 
“the heavy,” “the light,” and all [other] things outside the signification of 
“human.” The same would apply to what is understood by [all of] these 
expressions, From this it would necessarily follow that neither each thing 
nor each non-thing is identical with itself and [hence] that [all] discourse 
would have no meaning. 

(10) Moreover, it follows either that this would be a rule governing 
every expression and everything designated by the expression, or that 
[only] some things [would] have this characteristic [and] some [would be 
governed] by its contrary. If this obtains in all things, there would occur 
neither discourse nor speech—also, indeed, neither doubt nor argument. 
If [on the other hand] it is only in [some] things that the affirmative and 
negative [statements] are distinguishable, and in some they are not dis- 
cernible, then, when they are distinguishable, it is necessarily the case 
that what is signified by “human” is other than what is signified by “not 
human.” Where they are not distinguishable—as, for example, “white” 
and “not white”—then their signification would be one (in which case all 
that is “not white” is “white,” and all that is “white” is “not white”). If 
“human” were to have a distinct signification and were to be “white,” 
then it would also have to be [the] “not white” which is identical with 
“white”; and the same would apply to “not human.” Hence, once again it 
would happen that “human” and “not human” are not distinct. 

(11) This [analysis] and its like may remove the malady of the per- 
plexed seeking guidance in that he would know that affirmation and 
negation do not combine and are not both true together. Similarly, it 
becomes clear to him that both cannot simultaneously be removed and 
denied. For, if both together are false with respect to one thing, then that 
thing would, for example, be “not man” and also “not not man.” Hence, 
the thing which is “not man” and its negation (which is “not not man”) 





lect yo oly 6y 


By taba Lge Lael Madd IE ye ely SS aye gl Wee Y Key cae 
s gypeell pa ual pi 
be gel glad] Wh GLY ant, Hot Jes pall oS bly (4) 
Let aed ache Sou GHD ogee gl Ge aoe coll ld ale Jar gLuw yle ya 
Y 0 clea WI he Jon GLY GB le gles] Sl cul ale Soy gall OY 
oly a Je da fel, Ct Jilly cByilly cad ghd 
pote Je NS GL eal ale do ULE ge aeey cab, 
cant Ly ty Sol ot KK ol ay phd code LUM 5. 
pe ISI SKY 5h, 
clad he Ye Soy BI SSS Ug Kol UAVS (9°) 
oF a oS ob Wee (pany dial dy LAV ae jae KI 
8 LAY Gan BOS oh Lally GY b OS Y cles gl ye 
tHe Jos eben VSS ject Sao jot W Nga by dL ge engl ja 
Lal Wy aS jks Vteey LOW] Sy Le'l ww ade Jar ee jlecdl 
Vs aad ge 8 Sy carl ob seal geet KG KS oly Lyle 
vals 99 itl Gaal Lal aul 3B je pti A OS TS] SL c saul 
Bete sb Sheil Why GLAM Kal Gs liy Syed MIT GLIL Wy cro 
oath gl Synch bab cattle aay atl, ia (19) 
Ys Slatin Y Lgl ins 05 Lal US Lee glue y cjleclon Yt 
Wal aly «Re at ued 6 gil NS GO eg bee US Ta be GSS 


a 


10 


20 


30 


43 Book One, Chapter Fight 


would have been combined. The falsity of this has been indicated. These 
things and their like are among the things that do not require our elabo- 
ration. By resolving the difficulty [arising] from [the existence] of contrary 
syllogisms [encountered by] the perplexed, we are able to guide him. 

(12) As for the obdurate, he must be subjected to the conflagration 
of fire, since “fire” and “not fire” are one. Pain must be inflicted on him 
through beating, since “pain” and “no pain” are one. And he must be 
denied food and drink, since eating and drinking and the abstention from 
both are one [and the same]. 

(13) This principle, which we have defended against those who deny 
it, is the first principle of demonstrative proofs. It is incumbent on the first 
philosopher to defend it. The principles of demonstrations are useful in 
demonstrations, while demonstrations are useful in knowing the essential 
accidents of [the latter’s] subjects. [On the other hand,] knowledge of 
the substance of the subjects—which previously was known only through 
definition—is one of the things the philosopher here must attain. Thus, 
it is for this one [metaphysical] science to discuss both matters. 

(14) One may, however, wax skeptical about this, indicating that, if 
there are in [these matters] things discussed by way of definition and 
conception, then this would be that [topic] discussed by the practitioner of 
a science that is particular,’ while, if [these things are] discussed in terms 
of assent, then the discourse concerning them would be demonstrative. 

(15) [In response,] we say: These things which have been subjects in 
other [particular] sciences become accidental occurrences in this [meta- 
physical] science, because they are states that occur to the existent and 
are a division of it. Thus, that which is not demonstrated in another sci- 
ence is demonstrated here. Moreover, if no attention is paid to another 
science, and [if] the subject of this [metaphysical] science itself is divided 
into substance and accidental happenings proper to it, then that sub- 
stance, whether the subject of some [particular] science or of absolute 
substance, would not be the subject of this science but a part of its subject. 
Thus, this in some manner would be something occurring to the nature of 
its subject, which is the existent, where it would belong to the nature of the 
existent to attach to that substance and no other thing, or to be identical 





lett ea oly he 


cles] VY ye call atley GL] Wl ye coill ‘tll cel 8 SS gli] 
Al Jouy «Ab Us gl cow YU Net ly Lp able be aS oy 
Ag SKS peel OLAS yp MULE 

ily Saely Ky NBL Uggs GK ol aed cael Ul (44) 
s2rly SV SL pty pla ee Sly sol, aon esl SL bye aly 
oly Sy 

Hea rly sl gale Jyh gS ye ce bed gill LS (99) 
Bye 3 hy «cual NB eet ga Sl egoley ace Oh gl gil Spek 
Ld gS call [06] Ceol rye dyer S Ylepogl ail [aL] 
Jol pl Bd SSS cahaon Sl Lge dye pil Lead «dad 0b yay ale 
be yl 2 gl 

dre fre he Myo ASG Gh all Le he UES 5 SS (16) 
Grell 2 |b KK Sly «SAN pall Cole 43 KC call lb go CO pallly 
Gly kb pI jle 

POMS pod Slee Jolepoy Neds gl Jed (10) 
PAL sr V KS cal Ladle cope gll oye Sool UW plll Ue 
Sell aero pads lade Qheth Il Lely bya ale gays 5 
M pe Eee oe Sil paolo GK Wd delt 3S oylyey rye Gl 
PHB SS tea y Ab abil Lapping pul «lillar yaght 





le. pie 


\o 


44 Book One, Chapter Eight 


with it. For the existent has a nature that is properly predicated of all 
things, whether it is that substance or something else. For it is not because 
[that thing] is an existent that it is a substance, some substance, or some 
subject—as you have previously understood. 

(16) In addition to all this, the investigation of the principles of con- 
ception and definition is not itself definition and conception; nor is the 
investigation of the principles of demonstration itself a demonstration, 
for the two distinct investigations become one [and the same]. 








PAV Boal} S oly ‘¢ 


Plt gh ya pagbl alld she gl cage all ga cull me ede alle 
Ke Yam Cents dace Toyryall] Sb 5a GK yl dle 5h sll anid 
cle page gl 6 PP 9? Doms AY ud ANB oye gl pad obs SIS tt 
vA a Ne LF cane ele «Le py yy 
Vy Lpai Vy Le atly small gale Ge Lt ld A pay (\1) 
slaorly bow SUSE Staal aay Zo cbay Glib tgole je tol 





39> gall dey) 


wa 


10 





BOOK TWO 
Consisting of four chapters 





Chapter [One] 


On making known substance and 
its divistons in a universal way 


(1) We say: Existence may belong to a thing in itself (as, for example, 
the existence of the human as human), and it may [belong to it] acci- 
dentally (as, for example, the existence of Zayd as white). The things 
that are by accident are limitless. Let us, therefore, now leave [this topic] 
and concern ourselves with the existent and with the existence [belong- 
ing to a thing] in itself. 

(2) The most prior of the division of [things that] in themselves are 
existents is substance. This is because the existent is of two divisions. 
One of them is the existent in another thing (that other thing being [one] 
that realizes subsistence and species in itself) in a manner dissimilar to 
the existence of a part of [that other], but whose separation from that 
{other} cannot take place. This is the existent in a subject. The second 
is the existent that does not inhere in any other thing in this manner.' 
Hence, it would not be in a subject at all. This is substance. 


—45—- 








AUN ay tell 


Jad dx | lees 


[Jel pail] 
$3(1) 


KS de wll, adi as 3 


LAY ogey fe INL 9S 03 «pt ose gl 23 Pov] (1) 
Ayals AY Soydly SM yey «Gaul oy osey So cep GK ody ELI 
AMG GM ope gly coe gl Jets, alls NI 

teed de oy SV alby abl poll bed Lal sl (v) 
chet Dolly plall pane SV + til alls GoTo bb peal clumel 
Peal shy oe AI ON Cyl Ca Gb Ge cate C5 SY logery 
SF chil ae LAY yy nt DOK ol by spell «tll Spey 
-prhl ry TN pyioy 3 


_¢o_ 


Oo 


10 


20 


25 


30 


46 Book Two, Chapter One 


(3) [Now,] if what was referred to in the first division exists in a sub- 
ject, then that subject also is not devoid of one of [the following] two 
descriptions: If the subject is a substance, then the subsistence of the 
accident would be in a substance. If it is not a substance, then it would 
also [still] be in a subject, [in which case] the investigation reverts to the 
[question] of starting point. It is impossible for [the sequence of subjects] 
to regress ad infinitum, as we will show with reference to such a meaning 
in particular. It necessarily follows that the end [of this sequence] would 
have to be that which is not in a subject. It would thus be in a substance. 
Hence, the substance that renders the accident subsistent exists and is 
not rendered subsistent by the accident. Substance would thus be the 
one that is prior in existence. 

(4) As regards [the question] of whether an accident [inheres] in an 
accident, this is [something] that is not to be disavowed.? For speed [exists] 
in motion, straightness in a line, and the flat shape in the surface. Also, 
accidents are attributed to unity and plurality which, as we shall show 
you, are all accidents. [But,] if the accident is in [another] accident, then 
the two exist together in a subject. The subject, in reality, is the thing that 
renders both [of them] subsistent while it [itself] is self-subsistent. 

(5) Moreover, many who claim to have knowledge have allowed that 
something can be both a substance and an accident with respect to two 
things. Thus, [one of these people] would say: “Heat is an accident in 
something other than the body of fire, but in fire [as such]? it is not an 
accident because it exists in it as a part. Moreover, it is not possible to 
remove [heat] from fire with the fire remaining [a fire]. Hence, its exis- 
tence in fire is not that of the existence of an accident inhering in it. And 
if its existence in [the fire] is not the existence of an accident, then [the 
existence of heat] in [the fire] is the existence of a substance.” 

(6) This is a grave error. We have discussed it fully in the first parts 
of Logic. For, even though it was not the [proper] place [for discussing it], 
it was there that they had committed [this] error.‘ 

(7) We say: It was previously known that there is a difference between 
the receptacle and the subject; that by “subject” is meant that which 
becomes subsistent in itself and, in terms of being the species, becomes 
thereafter a cause for something to subsist in it ([but] not as a part of it); 





acl » ole ‘A 


Vepe sl ld py y 2 bee IM mud pall tl Uhl (1) 
PAID Pell ele Lae pro all oS Ob fgie gl goa vel y Lal ly 
Joely OM QL LO8] Soll ey epee Bal See Sil ob 
ep llr VSS dol gall a eb ee Scalp pF alld Gls 
wha bre Pell este dl 9S re 24K F2 P ned led 
2S 8 pall» ahh OSS epll  e 

BBN B85 pall 9b Sos pad ye SBE AK Joal Ul, (4) 
hes PIE OB Lady deatl 3 clad! Cy bbl Bu, 
a 2 FT Sly 2yally ele) YO cal eee LS colaay 3 Sly Sr Jl 
~Aaatis ailS yg aioe Lagat, Gall ge Red Pyoally oro 3 Wares 

Lets Lae 2M SK slip oot Sie wd (0) 
thee BWS SW peer bo Se ald GL Jad ole Lal le 
Jilly SUL ge led) jee ad Lal, pS ogee NV oye cand ll 
299 {eb leo gey Ke ISB gd Ge pall ogy ud Ll OB bar gey alo cas 
PA ops eo lope gd a yll 

MS Sool oly «ala Jy) 303 Jl Lath aby SLE aay (9) 
[OX]. Aka as | dele Le) gl cane ys 

SA Ere Sly  BpEpally Bh oy ol «ie ad che ab Ise (¥) 
Hie 6528 yh 4 od ests Loe she gl LU egy ands she lew 


\o 


wa 


10 


20 


25 


30 


BS 


47 Book Two, Chapter One 


and that the receptacle is anything in which something dwells [and 
which] becomes, by virtue of that [indwelling] thing, [the possessor] of a 
certain state. It is, hence, not unlikely for a thing to exist in a receptacle 
and for that receptacle not to have become in itself a perfectly subsistent 
species in act, but to have its subsistence realized through that which has 
indwelled in it alone, or with some other thing, or with other things com- 
bined, [thus] rendering that receptacle an existent in actuality or render- 
ing it a specific species. The thing which comes to indwell in this receptacle 
would necessarily not exist in a subject. This is because it would not be 
proper to say that it is in a thing except [in the sense that it] is in the 
aggregate or in the receptacle. In the aggregate, it would be as a part, 
whereas the subject is that in which a thing exists, [but] not as a part of it. 
In the receptacle, it would not be as a thing that occurs in another thing 
[that] is actually subsistent as a species and in which the indweller there- 
after resides. Rather, we have posited this receptacle as subsisting in act 
only through its being rendered subsistent by that which came to indwell 
in it. Moreover, we have rendered it [such that] it is only through [the 
indweller| that [its] being a species is achieved, or else that its being 
a species would come about through the combination of things whose 
aggregate would constitute that species. It is evident, then, that some 
[things] in the receptacle are not in a subject. 

(8) As for establishing this thing which exists in a receptacle but not 
in a subject, this is something incumbent on us to show shortly. Once we 
establish it, {it will be seen] that it is the thing to which, in this place, the 
name “form” is properly attributed, even though we equivocally speak of 
[some] other thing as “form.” [Now,] if that which exists in no subject is 
termed “substance,” then form is also substance. As for the receptacle 
that is not in another receptacle, it is necessarily not in a subject. [This is] 
because everything that exists in a subject exists in a receptacle; but the 
converse is not the case. Hence, the true receptacle is also a substance, 
and this composite [of form and matter] is also a substance. 

(9) You have known from the properties belonging to the Necessary 
Existent that the Necessary Existent can only be one and that that which 
has parts, or that which is equivalent to the existence [of that which has 
parts], cannot be a necessary existent. From this it becomes known that 





lecsl ea oly <v 


"BK Sl ang Below AML ad eh low ot FB gly 
Sat Lp Jal MUSE Leg aay pas JB AIS Sy owe loge ye 
Syed cadel 65h eLAl gle Tete ghey ale alll 5 als 
5 JET ee Jou gill Vang sce LES pe gl cal Ingen & pt ull 
BWA Ba Sih ches al ay us, Erey OY ley ile Y 
ws ABS be pp gl 95 cee S ULI ay MEL gl calad 
ea Sa be AM aS oe gD fam 6 tS pad JENS yay cae ope” 
Ar Ulery cal Lge alps Ui eae J Uae J 4 JIL ot 
IS le Ltlelieb desl ps gl ad Ue Ob) Le 
Gee Bod AID ae oly pl 
BN Me MDS Fy ge iy Jone 9 98 GH eal Hs ol LI, (a) 
Sols Lara acl eal ha eB hats ll gt 9 ol ly as 
Phere PVN] opr all OL pa SAU by yee Lal al Jb od 
GSW ST Joe SUSY ill JBI UB. aye Lele pall Heil 
‘Sealy pug IH WP Free 3 ree SON low Y gyi ye 3 
Pe La aol Way rye Lal ead J 
WKY se looly gl apes cody GM eldl yp cde aby (4) 


Se eb coe ty GS Voge) SEU | oN gh clot, 


\o 


ws 


20 


25 


48 Book Two, Chapter Two 


this compound and these parts are all, in themselves, possible in existence 
and that they necessarily have a cause that necessitates their existence. 

(10) Hence, we will first say: Each substance is either body or other 
than body. If [it is] other than body, then it is either part of a body or it is 
not part of a body but is something altogether separable from bodies. If it 
is part of a body, then either it is its form or it is its matter. If it is sepa- 
rable [and] not a part of a body, then either it has some administrative 
relation to bodies in terms of moving [them]—and this is called “soul”— 
or it is free from material things in all respects and is called “intellect.” We 
will engage in [a] discussion establishing each of these divisions. 


Chapter [Two] 


On ascertaining corporeal substance 
and what is composed from it 


(1) The first thing [this involves] is knowledge of body and ascertain- 
ing its nature. 

(2) As for showing that body is a single continuous substance not 
composed of indivisible parts, [this is something that] we have completed 
[discussing].’ As regards ascertaining and defining it, it is customarily 
said that body is a long, wide, and deep substance; hence, one must look 
into the manner of this. But, by each of the expressions “length,” “width,” 
and “depth,” one understands a variety of things. Thus, sometimes 
“length” is said of a line in whatever manner it happens to be; some- 
times “length” is said of the greater in magnitude of the two lines that 
encompass a surface; sometimes “length” is said of the greatest of various 
extended, intersecting dimensions in whatever manner they happen to be, 
regardless of whether they are lines or not; sometimes “length” is said of 
the supposed distance between the head and its opposite—whether foot 





Ra eee 
oll a 


Le howe VB Sly coe SN ASE egal 9 YS ela vay Spl ae I 


: Lar yoy 9 


cpr PI lly cle SK STUB pee KG ML ad (92) 
oKd Ce OSL Uy mace te GK ST Ub mee pb Gb 
2K bly ane SSG) LB poe oj GEG AL plan ab Byte 
pxil 3 Bp Whe ISS Gl LB pee the ad Byler gh Gly satal 
pS Sri Mie eg te Sp abl ye Bye GK gh Ladd peray wb pel 
[W] psd ods sly Foul 3 


[sO ed] 
chet () 


a Sy bey Gledl ell git 


. Ale jetty ad dyes lls July (9) 
3 Veet V ely 5, ye ply fa ely rye dl Glo Ll Cy) 
AF Jus ree mud 5]: Je gh daldl o> Wb hie yt Ly acs Lp 
Sealy ally Joel BU any FS IS Sp ly gh and gue 
PEN HEY Ja Ns 8y «ST AS LEN J Jaa Ca shes gi 
AS tall All AACS olell plac Job Ja syty clade loth cya! 
3! pol abbey GIN oy yall dal Ssh SU iby bs po yl tes ork 


\o 


a 


10 


15 


20 


30 


49 Book Two, Chapter Two 


or tail—in animals. As regards “width,” this is said of the surface itself, 
and of the lesser in magnitude of two distances, and of the dimension 
connecting right and left. “Depth” is [also] said of a thing such as the 
dimension connecting two surfaces, being so termed when one takes it 
starting from the top, [whereas] if one starts from the bottom it is termed 
“height.” These, then, are the popular perspectives in this. 

(3) It is not necessary that in every body there should be an actual 
line. For, as long as a sphere is not moving, it does not have a line at all 
in actuality, nor is an axis assigned to it. It is not a condition that, for the 
sphere to be a body, it should be moving, whereby an axis or some other 
line would appear in it. For it is realized as a body through that which 
realizes corporeality, motion occurring to it thereafter either accidentally 
or as a necessary concomitant. Moreover, body inasmuch as it is body does 
not necessarily need to have a surface. This is only required in it inas- 
much as [body] is finite. But to be realized as a body, and for us to know 
it as a body, it is not required that it should be finite. Rather, finitude is an 
accidental occurrence that is a necessary concomitant of it. For this reason, 
when conceptualizing body, the conception [of finitude] as belonging to 
body is not required. Whoever conceives an infinite body does not con- 
ceive a body which is “not body”; and [moreover] absence of finitude is 
only conceived for that which is conceived as body. But [an individual] 
would have erred [in this] in the way someone [errs] who says that “body 
is an organ.” For in this he would have erred [in the realm] of assent [to 
the truth or falsehood of a proposition] but not in the conception of [each 
of] its two simple constituents—namely, the subject and the predicate. 

(4) [To continue,] then, if body, in its realization as body, must have 
surfaces, it may be a body that is enclosed by [only] one surface—[this 
body] being the sphere. Moreover, it is not a condition for the body to be 
a body that it should have unequal dimensions. For the cube is also a body, 
and although it is enclosed by six edges, yet it does not [require] unequal 
dimensions in order to have “length,” “width,” and “depth” in one of the 
meanings [of this term]. Nor, moreover, is its being body dependent on 
its being placed under the heaven so that the different directions would 





relly oly 64 


Slay Lae poll ab Jy cand clon JE yl Myr re cepen| 
cipal oy Jolt aol fl 08 Lal Spally  SLAdly opel gy pth an 
Pere Kas cou foul ys Fon ern emt byl al Sle vd, 
De Se ellaeal 

Le led 5S OB Jal be ee SBI K ole dy (11) 
vA [W] I PSN Lyd yey at Le oF Neb gate Vy Cal Jay 
Ue eer Gert YR ST Le yh yee bo ls Ke WS gle 
PEI one ad Maly SL eh oY eyed dyad ging 
tHe Be Lo ly Lak Soom ado LiL cla en pate 

Nady a oY Geyle gale yc Latin 9S Sl Gy Le ol Lobe ity lene 
dyes pleolia 6 ee re ius ade 
OL: 36 GS es aS, Laer yp YALE pe yyy Vy « ee Y Lee 
oF lyGy2 all lang ales pyai Dearly grail J lesl ve cl ed 

pr aKilb gens af ae dpa wale (4) 
ber 3K gl Ped byt ye Lal july 5S yy voly Glew 4 Lew 
(9 He agtew ble al ee Lal OK gb alot sled al a % oI 
Mal Yy gla aol joey sayey Jb 3K so Wali lal ad ult 
CMe VN oy So rllhed ley ay 3K jb Lae iS sey 


\o 


10 


15 


20 


30 


50 Book Two, Chapter Two 


obtain for it in accordance with the direction of the world or {so that], in 
another sense, it would have length, width, and depth ([this] even 
though [body] must be either a heaven or within a heaven). From this it 
is clear that, for a body to be body in actuality, it is not necessary that 
there should in actuality be three dimensions in body in the manner 
[normally] understood by these three dimensions. 

(5) If this, then, is the state of affairs, how can we compel ourselves 
to suppose three dimensions existing in actuality in the body [in order] for 
[the latter] to be a body? Rather, the meaning of the description? of a 
body is that the body is the substance for which it is possible for you to 
begin by postulating in it a dimension in whatever manner you desire. 
The thing you begin with would be the length. Then you could also postu- 
late another dimension intersecting the other perpendicularly at bases. 
This second dimension would be the width. You could then postulate a 
third dimension intersecting the other two at bases where the three meet 
at one place. You are not able, however, to postulate a perpendicular 
dimension other than these three. 

(6) It is due to the body’s having this description that one refers to 
body as being long, wide, and deep, just as it is said that body is that which 
is divisible in [terms] of all dimensions. It is not meant by this that it is 
divided in actuality, as something completed; rather, [it is understood] 
as being of a nature that this division is postulated of it. 

(7) This, then, is how body should be defined—namely, that it is the 
substance that has this form by virtue of which it is what it is and that the 
rest of the dimensions postulated between its limits, and also its limits, 
its shapes, and its position, are not matters that render it subsistent but 
are, rather, sequels to its substance. It may be the case that some bodies 
would have some or all of these [things] as necessary concomitants; or it 
may be that all of these [things], or only some of them, would not become 
necessary concomitants of some bodies. 

(8) If you were to take a piece of wax and give it a shape that imposes 
on it actual dimensions between these limits that are numbered, meas- 
ured, and limited, and if you were then to change that shape, none of those 
[former dimensions] would remain in actuality [as] individually one [and the 





Hla WSS Sl ie oy VO oly «AT pak ey eyes Jab Ky cll 
Sri ole aoe LI SG) oe ped al ey go TE] cele GUY 
«Jail Leo GE Fo BOI LAM je Leyyill ogo Sl le 

ie abel 28 I Leal Jes 3I LK GS tie Ye WIGS UE (0) 
Pedi sl mel ale san Sle SSH andl Singer «al 
cSt po LM eS 9S CHL LE AS Law ab yogis gh IS itl pag 
rat WS 9K coil le oad) Oa) bles ys T Law Lal Gayi jh AK 
PO HB He gall yg bles IE aw ab epi gh dey c yopll 0 0 
ESO Abe pb eal ody Wo pae ban sa GIS, cooly oy fe dt 

Ae de Sh dl J de sl isl 5 Rall oly dl SS (1) 
Jr pene lam, ply alah gee B pelsll go aed gl 1S US ga 
spb aad Spb GSLs yal of cas bye 

le 929 (Ai) po WIS sal pak al yay coed Sin Gl con LS (Vv) 
aelaclogl, AK, Lal Udy Sy cp Ry all lei Sle adc gh le ge 
Meas WS al lee ob ple cam Leng oped det mb de gee Cu) 
[76] ean 3 Mee et peel an pi 

Upload obel Ye | ey Yeas cislall gy (4) 
Maly Saddle ee 8 po od SCA US oe Ia) ob cdagares iyae dagaae 


\o 


A 


10 


20 


25 


30 


jl Book Two, Chapter Tivo 


same], having that [previous] limit and measure. Rather, new dimensions, 
numerically different from those [previous ones], would have taken [their] 
place. These are the dimensions that belong to the category of quantity. 

(9) If it happens that a body—like the celestial sphere, for example— 
has one [set] of dimensions as a necessary concomitant, this does not belong 
to it inasmuch as it is body, but by virtue of another nature that preserves 
its secondary perfections. For corporeality, in reality, is the form of a con- 
tinuum that is receptive of the hypothesized three dimensions of which 
we spoke.? This meaning is other than measure and other than mathe- 
matical corporeality. For this body, inasmuch as it has this form, does not 
differ from another body in being larger or smaller and does not relate to 
it by being equal [to it], [or by being] measured by it, [or by] measuring it, 
[or by] sharing [something with it], or [by] being different [from it]. This 
[relation] would belong to it only inasmuch as it is something measured 
and inasmuch as part of it [is used to] measure it numerically. This con- 
sideration is other than the consideration of corporeality, which we have 
mentioned. These are matters that we have explained to you in a simpler 
way in another place,* which you [may] need for help. 

(10) It is for this reason that the one body is rarefied and condensed 
through heating and cooling so that, while its corporeality (which we have 
mentioned) does not vary and change, the measure of its corporeality 
becomes different. Hence, natural body is a substance having [such a] 
description. 

(11) As for our saying “mathematical body,” either one intends by it 
the form of [the above] (inasmuch as it is limited and quantified [when] 
taken in the soul, not in [external] existence), or one intends by it some 
measure that has continuity [that is] also of this description (inasmuch 
as it has a continuum that is limited and measured, whether in a soul or 
in matter). It is as though mathematical body is [something] that in itself 
occurs to this body we have explained, the surface [of mathematical body] 
being its limit, and the line being the limit of its limit. We will be clarify- 
ing the discussion of [this mathematical body] hereafter and examining 
the manner in which continuity belongs to it, and [also] the manner in 


which it belongs to natural body. 





+ lant ye ol gy OY 


Sob yy Sle olall 

Meals lb cisely abel aa MIE, Loe GO Gl gil gb (4) 
Shai 5 yo dab Kad 20 CVU HL slants mem 
Rabel Add oy sal 5 call Loy D0 abel 258 oy oli U tal 
Ty peal , HTL The BEV yy sied coe gel Ina gb 
Pee yale lily gle layla. J Shey ogden ol glen Sh wuly 
vay ob Sd Naud Ul al LoS Wy oda dve 5 Moe Soy yoda 
4 Ged Sigloy A aay 3 Lulany ul Laka 3 Lal 

ally eI By JAS vols LL SSL tidy (15) 
pent Say HSS YL SS ay kee Ane lake Ges 
eas as 

(or Lm 5 Ned gow dal Ld bend IB Lely (19) 


og Lal Jha 43 Le lade wy sea, gc gob ual « Lele een aes 


pooh tate gl [10] Toni] 3 SS jake ayo SLail ad tae ye ill \o 


OMA Ly alg latly ole Sa pe IY wd 8 ele a 
‘oldies KGS, YOR GS Lagi | Pes y aw Ppl cre guns 





Ce eee 


10 


20 


25 


30 


32 Book Two, Chapter Two 


(12) We first say: It is of the nature of bodies to be divided, but observa- 
tions are not sufficient for establishing this. For someone may say: “Nothing 
among observed bodies is a body that is purely one. Rather, [observed 
bodies] are composed of bodies. Unitary bodies are not perceived by the 
senses and cannot be divided in any manner whatsoever.” 

(13) [Now,] we have said [something] in refutation of this [view] 
through demonstrations pertaining to [natural science], particularly 
against the doctrine that is easiest to refute—namely, the doctrine of those 
who differentiate between [the indivisible bodies] in terms of shape.’ 
However, should someone say, “Their natures and their shapes are similar,” 
then his doctrine and his theoretical view must be refuted by what I say. 

(14) We thus say: If he makes the smallest of bodies indivisible both 
potentially and actually, so that it becomes altogether like a point, then that 
[indivisible] body becomes necessarily governed by the [same] rule that 
governs a point with respect to the impossibility of a sensible body’s being 
composed from it. If [however] this is not the case, but, rather, that in itself 
it is such that one part of it can be set apart from another part, and yet it 
does not submit to [any actual] division separating [those] two parts (whose 
supposition [as separated parts] in [such a division] is possible [only] as 
[an act] of the estimative faculty),® then we would say: 

(15) It is either the case that the state [obtaining] between the one 
part [of the atom] and the other [part]—[this state] differing from the 
state obtaining between one [atom]’ and another in that [the atoms] do 
not coagulate and the parts do not separate—is [either] due to the nature 
of the thing and its substance or [due] to a cause extraneous to nature and 
substance. If it is [due to] a cause extraneous to nature and substance, 
then it would either have to be a cause in terms of which nature and sub- 
stance are in actuality rendered subsistent (as with [the relation] of form 
to substance and of receptacle to accident) or a cause through which 

[such] rendering of subsistence does not take place. 

(16) If it is a cause in which [such] substantiation does not take place, 
then it becomes possible, in terms of nature and substance, that [among 
the atoms] there would be coagulation after separation and separation 
after coagulation, in which case this corporeal nature, considered in itself, 
would be receptive of division but would not divide due to an external 


cause. And this much is sufficient for our purpose. 





lest je oly oY 


WON LY, pats gl Lee pth y gh Yl yas (09) 
Dela pr Nee ot el Gaal hae Sls ld Gb SobaLal 
KY Wily Aenpeore 6 Rilo elie Gy colicl ye Bilge 8 ho Bye 
Sy Amy pets ol 
Jeol be Lepasty doandall tL lm Sle] le LASS vay (17) 
Gly Uetlle Sh: FB JG BB. SEV Yes HE 5s ane gay c La Cal 
Bl Ue lay ane fla jl Cay Sted alte (Kl 
55 > Sab Ysa Y Si3 LOM pe \ joe Blaged (18) 
pth Alt pee Bile SS ASW VS LIS 3B alan tite” 
F pod ke 2 I Ks Coo SB BIS US KS ly cae opel 
SA A A login d Ke ll aly Gill Jal ele, ph Ws 
o5hl oy ela a pail ow bd gg Ll dea Y (40) 
tll [1] hs | Spa Y endl jl glock Y hilo hl 
dada SF TE Le Oh Ob «ely Meld 35 TE ye a gl coptgrny 
(est Els dolls wal Jul ably decdel a ose Len Kgl WP ast 
4 pais Y Laue gl 
We OSGI ght, by dala Com ye lad a oY Le OS GB (09) 
ALI nd joel a inta}l ac a oF pay ee 


\e 


\o 


10 


20 


25 


30 


b3 Book Two, Chapter Tivo 


(17) If this cause is one through which each of the [indivisible] parts 
[or atoms] is rendered subsistent either in a manner pertaining to its 
nature and quiddity or in a manner pertaining to its actual existence 
[and] not to its quiddity (in which case there would be variance [between 
one atom and another]), then it would happen as a first [consequence] 
that these [atomic] bodies would differ in [their] substances. But those 
[whom we are refuting] do not uphold [this view]. Secondly, [it follows] 
that it is not the corporeal nature these [atoms] possess which [renders 
their divisibility] impossible; rather, this [divisibility] is impossible for 
them in terms of the form of [what differentiates them] as a species. 
This we do not disallow. For it is possible that something should attach to 
corporeality, rendering that body subsisting as a species receptive neither 
of division nor of contact with another [body]. And this is what we main- 
tain about the [celestial] sphere. What is needed here is [to establish] 
that the nature of corporeality insofar as it is the nature of corporeality 
does not prevent {the divisibility of bodies]. 

(18) We first say: We have verified for ourselves that corporeality inas- 
much as it is corporeality is not unreceptive of division, for it lies in all the 
natures of corporeality to receive division. From this it becomes clear that 
the dimensions and form of the body subsist in something. [ This is] because 
these dimensions are [either] the connections themselves or something 
that occurs to the connections (as we shall verify), and [because they] are 
not things to which connection occurs. For the expression “dimensions” is 
a name for the contiguous magnitudes themselves, not for the things to 
which connection occurs. The thing which is the connection itself or which 
is connected in itself cannot remain its identical self [once] the connection 
ceases to be. For, if the connection of every dimension® is separated, that 
dimension ceases and two other dimensions come to be. The case is similar 
when connection takes place—I mean, connection in the sense that it is 
a differentia, not an accident. This we have explained in another place.” 
For then another dimension! would have occurred and each one that had 
been with its special characteristic would have ceased to be. Hence, in 
bodies there is something that is the subject for connection and separation 
and for what occurs to connection by way of limited measures. 

(19) Also, body inasmuch as it is body that has the form of corporeality 
is something in actuality; and inasmuch as it is disposed [for reception], 
then in whatever disposition you wish for it, it is in potentiality. [Now,] 
the thing inasmuch as it is a thing potentially is not some other thing 





rect ea oly ov 


BE Les bebe Ge sols Sa pts coats gh GL Ul, (019) 
pnd 43 We Caled Jeo iF Su ogy Co Leg gl algal dank 
doubl dodo 5! Lit, a adsnY Vay «Al hl Bibs pli ade gl el Jy] 
Nest inne tom iy Wple Clb or Lily OS le oe SY Y 
JAY es LEB pach Al ors eS aed Sling gyms cull EY rig 
oe Wye al} clow oly lll 9 WB lday Sone SLAY Y, A ul 
Kn Race 9 3 pet Yd deb 

rb ed Rann gt am Se heed I LE OS AGL Jd (18) 
bape SN ae slab pLGM Jui laced pe IS id pL al 
rot 9) ell VLA go ola odes gl alla et bast ated, nt 
ad lb Lat DW] WY aye Lt ay Mylan be hee SL oy 
Sale sly Shai WE eye All LAN YALE LSS i al otal 
Shai Vl [ley] By care 92 da gl focnad wily fa’ll gh ad Jel gs 
dram I] WIS, ge Gly faery aad clld fle bail 15] [all] lait 
PL ae BL Ley aby aye Y fuad 0 gill ul Jat gel «Shall 
Cre PA LN Bol SO uel Slay oT oy ue a 
Bag0H\ yolall yo SLAW ay Uy SheeYly JLaisn 

‘Dll 4 sb hdl ped) mi toe ye mab gl Lally (14) 


Pee HAD GS Vy Sst go CLE shal gl alee gt am py 





led oe 3a Syd « fla, 


\o 


a 


15 


20 


30 


35 


54 Book Two, Chapter Tivo 


inasmuch as it is in actuality. Potentiality [however] would not belong to 
the body inasmuch as it has actuality. Hence, the form of the body con- 
joins something belonging to it which is other than its being a form. 
Body, then, would be a substance composed of something from which it 
has potentiality and something from which it has actuality. That through 
which it has actuality is its form, and that from which it is potential is its 
matter—namely, hyle. 

(20) A questioner, however, may ask and say, “Hyle is also composite. 
This is because it is in itself hyle, and a substance in actuality, and [yet] 
is also disposed [to receive form].” 

(21) We say, “The substance of hyle and its being in actuality hyle is 
not some other thing, except that it is a substance disposed for [the 
reception] of [such and such] a thing. The substantiality it has does not 
render it anything in actuality but merely prepares it to become some- 
thing actual through form. The meaning of its substantiality is nothing 
but that it is “a something” that is not in a subject. The affirmation here 
is that it is “a something.” As regards its not being in a subject, [this] is 
a negation. [The fact] that it is “a something” does not necessitate that 
it be a specific thing in actuality, because this is general, and a thing does 
not become a thing in actuality through a general state of affairs as long 
as it does not possess a differentia proper to it. Its differentia is that it is 
prepared [for the reception] of all things. Its form (which is thought of 
as belonging to it) consists in its being prepared, receptive. 

(22) Therefore, here there is no [first] true nature belonging to hyle 
through which it is rendered [something] in actuality, and {then} another 
true nature [that renders it something] in potentiality—unless a true 
nature comes to it from the outside through which it becomes [something] 
in actuality, remaining [something] in potentiality in itself and when 
considered in terms of [its] existence [as an] entity. This true nature 
would be the form. [But] the relation of hyle to these two meanings 1s 
more akin to the relation of the simple to what is a genus and a differentia 
than it is to that which is a composite of what is matter and form. 

(23) From this it has become evident that the form of corporeality 
inasmuch as it is the form of corporeality is in need of matter. And, 
because the nature of the form of corporeality inasmuch as it is the form 
of corporeality does not vary in itself—for it is one simple nature—it 
cannot become varied in species through differentiae that enter into it 





elect jo oly of 


Jello Veni SG cts bth pte y a Load 
HS digs aye Su Ib ST Ct Gyles pal By yuad 
5 Silly ype go Jail ag ad Gib, ail ad ace Hod jy cig as ot 
isda REL Gat a 

Ja en 3 Wealy AS Lal Jagd ey Jl ol flu, (1+) 
a ae sty al page 

Pe VI STS pd Boot Jal BS edd ee al S23 (19) 
SV US pCa] LAM ye CS fall Yad pad Waa hy 6 ace 
YG py Bed ol GIN Wate ce uly dan LE pal 9S 
File ghd pil he werey ootal ll, pial ety 
Jab Sol plat Ve Lt Jadl «pth pa ly cple Le gl Jul Leas 
sO ecaeresl sh Ae Naty aah kK Sales gaa 

YY Sagal gel aadny «Sudl W GSS Yoel dike bye yu 3b (11) 
999 AEs pel FSS y all ally aed Ey pe deka ale Le gl 
Kane, Atl pall pe I Syed deny iy geall 2 LAL cdny gdb «lg 
Byxey Bak Pe NSM hal 5 aby ee yo le Laan 

Aeros had 5 pe etm oy heedl by pe gl Ide Ge gh a (1) 
Vane ie te py gent BA dN 5, pall deb Vy vials Il 
PME Jeol Sale Flt I jyem pad ila Broly habe Ugh «SS 


\o 


a 


10 


15 


20 


30 


Wy) Book Two, Chapter Tivo 


inasmuch as it is [the form of | corporeality. Should differentiae enter into 
it, these would be things added to it from the outside and would also con- 
sist of one of the forms that attach to matter. The [rule] governing [these 
forms in relation to hyle] would not be the [rule] governing real differentiae. 

(24) The demonstration of this is that, if corporeality differs from 
another corporeality, this would be either because this [one] is hot, that 
one cold, or [because] this has a celestial nature, that a terrestrial nature. 
This is unlike measure, which is not a realized thing in itself so long as it 
has not become varied in species by being a line, a surface, or a body. And 
[this is] like number, which is not a realized thing so long as it has not 
become varied in species [such] as [being] two, three, or four. Moreover, if 
[measure] becomes realized, its realization does not come about through 
the addition to it of some external thing where there would be, besides the 
generic nature—such as “measureness” and “being numeral”—a sub- 
sisting indicated nature to which another nature is added and through 
which [the generic nature] becomes varied in species. Rather, the nature 
of “twoness” itself is the [characteristic of] “being numeral” that is 
predicated of “twoness” and is proper to it; and longitude itself is the 
“measureness” that is predicated of it and is proper to it. 

(25) However, this is not the case here. But, if another form is added 
to corporeality, then that form, which is thought to be a differentia, and 
corporeality would not, through their combination, be corporeality. 
Rather, corporeality would be one of the two that is in itself achieved, 
realized. For, here, we mean by corporeality that which is akin to form, not 
akin to genus. You have known the difference between the two in the Book 
of Demonstration.) Here you will have [further] clarification and explana- 
tion of this. 

(26) You have, however, ascertained through what has been made 
clear to you the difference between the two. In the case of what is akin to 
measure, it is possible for its species to differ through things that belong 
to them in themselves, whereas absolute measure does not have any of 
these things in itself. This is because no stable essence is realized for the 
absolute measure unless it is a line or a surface. Once it is realized as 
either line or surface, then it is possible for the line in itself to have a 
difference from the surface through a differentia that renders the nature 


of “measureness” realized as either line or surface. 





lect ea oll 00 


gor] bal 9S, Gale op Ml Bled ol GS pad Glos gl ane 
Asad! J yall Se Mee Se yy cds BLU yal 

SIV GS GAN tae CBE LL ge baghy (10 
[TS] Gedy tesla YY ally 2b dab Yoke gf cab ullty a,b oda 
Vedas gl let GS Sh pad Le heen bod bya eel all Slade 
goal FADE gl gel gts Lane CLE gh ed tl dG Les gl 
Reed Rerlall 9 Sy ye ye et dl Slag gh thet SY Jae lal 
Ve ped stl tebe lll lad Igl) Lt Rath ab lpg dial Ayal 
Aly ce aay ee Se Jt MN doaall oe Qed EM eb US 
Ne ue tiy (de JE Aig hlll ys ed 

ISEY gli, yo (apo ldpaedl cel 9 K0W ly lly (10) 
Laelia d SS tame Yolnd Keddy head i ay gall lh 
By ed NV yal ALY bye ci Ub Aaa, gents bands 
Dad Slay Cha ly Lily gly SOW B lye Glee 

GI pom JWI QS US « ype Byala ad edit atl Je (19) 
Ve 2 BAO SY gllell idly gid bY ype HS act pl 5 
BB lode gi las 9 SS ol Waite ld al Jean Y allel lait Wats, 
Sram ge Juan clan dle aad Lod 9K gh jhe eden yi las jad 
[Ve]. tedew gl les cy lal ats 


\o 


10 


20 


25 


30 


3S 


56 Book Two, Chapter Tivo 


(27) As for the corporeality which we are discussing [however] it is 
in itself a realized nature whose specific kind is not realized through 
something that joins it, so that, if we imagine!” that no [added] meaning 
joins corporeality but that it is [only] corporeality, [then it is not the case 
that] it would be impossible to have attained for ourselves [as objects of 
knowledge] anything but matter and connection alone. Likewise, if we 
affirm some other thing with the connection, this is not because the con- 
nection in itself is not realized for us except by adding and conjoining 
[this thing] to it. Rather, it is shown through other arguments that con- 
nection does not exist in act by itself. For a thing not to exist in act, how- 
ever, does not [mean] that its nature is not realized. For whiteness and 
blackness [are such that] each of them is of a realized nature as a specific 
idea in its most complete manner—which is [realization] in itself. [Yet,] 
it is impossible for [such a thing as whiteness or blackness] to exist in act 
except in matter. 

(28) Absolute measure, on the other hand, cannot be realized as a 
nature to which one points unless it is necessarily made a line or a surface 
in order that it would be possible for it to exist. [This is] not [to say] that 
measure can exist as measure and that as a consequence thereafter there 
would exist a line or a surface that constitutes a state of affairs that [could 
not] exist in actuality without [measure]. And even though [measure] 
realizes its essence, this is not similar to [corporeality]. Rather, corpore- 
ality is conceived to exist through the causes belonging to it ([causes] 
through which and by which it exists, being only corporeality, without 
[anything] additional), whereas measure is not conceived to exist through 
the causes belonging to it ([causes] through which and by which it exists, 
being only measure, without [anything] additional). For, this measure in 
itself requires differentiae so as to exist as a realized thing. These differ- 
entiae are essential to it [so] that, when realized, they do not require it 
to be [something] other than [that] measure. It is thus possible for one 
measure to differ from another measure in terms of something which it 
possesses essentially. 

(29) As regards the form of corporeality inasmuch as it is corporeality, 
it is one nature—simple, realized, with no variance in it. The pure form 
of corporeality does not differ from [another] pure form of corporeality 





rattle ole O71 


bet pe) hare dae Ya OP 2 AG SLI Ul, (rv) 

SIS Se gee ead Spas hl Laas J So ell ee ite es 
gel 3] IS «aid Jat, fale Y] Lal 3 haat 3K gl Ke heen 
eSBs at Cael YY feet Youd Jal gY ab ST Le Lal 
Jeb etl see VG ab codony Jail see Y LAM Sls sl poe 
dala parle lage ot SF slyly WALI GI dear’ fast Vgl ye bey 
io BY Jad seach jem Ved ail 8 ga sill east Ac Leela 
omg AAV les eb fas oh es ls adh Llc 

Mla veal gem sladll SIV ser Sl ple yes fo Lada gl las ayy ch 
Jbl go yl rey Yep alls gl fe ole Lule gl let 9K glace! 
whe ccey Gly yald Read) LMS jad Ua GB cll pao GS aly 
deny Al jyats Y gladly cial) hy Lab ae ty leds lp ves gl YS 
Choe SIA jaa 28 dak Wy Ladd sla gay body ly vey gla CLAY 
[WV] Sl fleet VMOU Iya ay Shands Lt ay fo ad 
Pol A pl blade HEY Lyla 9 gl june laill 2 Waad cs 
Aare tle olydeb gdm stim phedliy ye lly (14) 

PED fet hae ype aprbieon by yo yee HI Vy Yb OMY 


\o 


er 


10 


20 


30 


37 Book Tivo, Chapter Three 


through a differentia included in [the definition of] corporeality. What 
adheres to it consequentially is something extraneous to its nature. Hence, 
it is not possible that one corporeality should need matter and [another] 
corporeality should not need matter. The external things that attach to 
it consequentially do not in any way render it not in need of matter. 
[This is] because the need for matter belongs essentially to corporeality 
and to whatever possesses matter—and it belongs to corporeality inas- 
much as it is corporeality, not inasmuch as it is corporeality with a con- 
sequential [attachment]. 

(30) It thus has become clear that bodies are composed of matter 
and form. 


Chapter [Three] 


That corporeal matter 1s not devoid of form 


(1) We now say: This corporeal matter cannot exist devoid of form 
in actuality. One of the things that quickly clarifies this is [what] we have 
shown: namely, that every existence that has something in actuality exist- 
ing in it [that is] realized and subsistent and in which there is also a dis- 
position to receive another thing—[every] such existence is composed of 
matter and form, the last matter! not being composed of matter and form. 

(2) Also, if [corporeal matter] were to separate from corporeal form, 
then either it would have a position and a bound within the existence 
that it then would have, or it would not. If it were to have a position and 
a space and [hence] could be divided, then it would necessarily have 
measure, whereas it was postulated to have no measure. And if it were 
not possible for it to be divided, but it had a position, then it would nec- 
essarily be a point with which a line could terminate. [But,] as you have 
learned from several places, [the point] cannot exist [independently] as 
a single entity, separated spatially [in a confine all its own]. 

(3) If [on the other hand] this substance has neither position nor 
[spatial] reference—being, rather, akin to substances in intellectual 





rectly» olgyl ov 


BK Sodio. aed al Chaise \Gl Le pied Lil Yao ey gee 
Ve Veo El golly tole Maal ohm ey cil Sie Laue 
Bd Ny ded 9% Usalll Nae Wi gy cope dl Amy dolll Jae 5s 
PY hme ple pine ple phealy c JVisb 


[V¥] 5 yey foley Ripe Le gl gb BYY) (Ye) 


(atl Jail 
J-23(z) 


iygall oF GAS VaslLudtsalll gl 3 


OF Rye Jails nog 5] footy SLL dol oe gl GM Ugdly (9) 
shame Jail 43 rey d9my SGI by Ul isp US maby Uy «yall 
Boldly By yey ale ye Sy ope SI DS eT eb Jy olacul Lally «il 
Bypey idle yp AS ye pb 5S 
Id 0A YoRol L} soe Wl By pral 23,6 G] YL Lely (x 
pts I SENS rey ey WIS OB SKY dee Y gill elo 
£029 Wy cme ol Kel Gly «WY Blas Y po aby she Ol Dle Vg 
Ble NII OS ol jen Yy be |! i415) Keg tab dee Y gp 
gale geule ble 
Ayal al dS ee a gS gl bl, (1) 
TA alae JIS I go decyl Badd opal) Ladl wAdl ad ow gl Ul Jee 


\e 


oa 


10 


20 


30 


AS 
ionny 


58 Book Two, Chapter Three 


apprehension—then it would follow either [(a)] that the realized dimen- 
sion in its entirety would indwell in it all at once, or [(b)] that [this sub- 
stance] would itself move continuously toward the perfection of its 
measure. [But] if measure indwells in it all at once and [this] necessarily 
comes about with the [substance’s] acquiring of measure in a specific 
spatial confine, then measure would have encountered it as [something] 
having a specific confine—otherwise, no one confine would have been 
more appropriate for it than [any] other. [Measure] would have then 
encountered it where [the specific confine] became related to it. Hence, 
[measure] would have necessarily encountered it while being in the 
confine it is in. That substance, then, would have been in a confine 
(although, perhaps, a confine not experienced by the senses) when it was 
supposed to have had no confine at all—and this is a contradiction. Nor 
is it possible that its occupying a confine should have occurred to it all at 
once as a result of the reception of measure. [This is] because, if measure 
were to come to it when it was not within a confine, then that measure 
would have connected with it in no confine. It would, then, not come to 
it in one specific confine from among the various possible confines to 
which it may belong. [Measure] would, then, have no confine—and this 
is impossible. Or, alternatively, [measure] would exist in every confine 
that can possibly belong to it [and would] not [be] confined to some 
specific one—and this is also impossible. 

(4) This is seen more clearly [when, through exercising] our estimative 
faculty, we think of the matter of some clod of clay that is separated 
[from its form], the form of that clod occurring in it thereafter. [The 
form] cannot occur in it when [the clod] is not in a consigned place, nor 
is it possible for that clod to exist in every confine that is potentially a 
natural confine to that clay clod. For, being a clod does not render it an 
occupant of every confine of its species, nor does it render it more fit to 
be in one direction of its confine than another. It can exist only in one 
specific direction within the general totality of the confine. Nor can it 
come to be in a specific direction when there is no circumstance specify- 
ing [such a direction], for [here] there is nothing except the connection 
of a form with matter, and this has the common possibility [of occurring] 
in any of the natural directions of the parts of the earth. [Now,] you have 
known that such an occurrence in a direction of the confine takes place 
in the way it does only either [(1)] by dint of its occurring close to 
it through the compulsion of a compelling [agent] that specifies that 
proximity, directing it through uniform motion to that very confine, or 
[(2)] by its coming to be there initially. With [its initial existence] in this 





less ye lg OA 


CPpare jm Boyd ao Hla Y Lary debs jlaill a} Jo ob dled Je 
BB p> ge dale IT] Kil Vy Gee LL shill dole 3 3K 
PSO GH 8 pty Sale ALYY 9 SG cal] GLE Ce jill dole 
yh PP aby Lee GY gholae all Wclpace jal alld 9S cad 
cjaell yd Godel fam od oct GR Gl jor Vy ce wcll oe. 
Patle Roly em PV 4 ore soil 955 > 8 ot paly ably gf pla sy 
‘Naw Way De Ve S so AIS pigeyaso 
Slow Lal aay cates porary V4 oKal Kee Ko! 
Med ram pf ay ob Liye Jae Lang od ST Lib ela Lay (€) 
Me $5 Gh see Vy ge a dy Uo fet al bape 8 call LM iy ype 
JR AELE Yost Vaal 5b dyad Garb po stl p> PG fet sll 
ee BV oes ol gee Vy he ayo be hee Gal WAY, ches p> 
aes Yy chee pate ye 3 parti I jee Yy GAN tlae oy hee pase 
Pd perdd LAM AT te clldy cdake dy pe GLP VM yed 3} SLAY ye le 4 
Pdpabl Us fe gl cube ody eM ee Ladd old pp cite Ul 
Lad yall pa Laer] Cyl by ee VE LK UL GL ee 
MOY dabgam gh AU LY aw EU NS I [VE] asl Gal os 
FPS at eth dy gaess UI BE Je ab 4 By gl yal ull Alls 





Pir (aus tres 


red 


\o 


on 


10 


20 


30 


40 


59 Book Two, Chapter Three 


proximity, or with its occurrence, [then] through being transported by 
a transporter, there is specification. But we have spoken fully about this. 
Hence, after abstraction [from form], the matter that belongs to the clod 
does not become specified [with a consigned place]. Moreover, the form 
of being a clod is not in any [specific] direction unless it has an appropriate 
relation to that direction. It is due to this relation—not, first of all, to its 
actually being matter, nor, secondly, to its actually acquiring form—that 
it became specified with [the direction]. And that relation is a position 
[of a kind]. 

(5) The case is similar if the reception of measure in its entirety [by 
the hypothesized formless matter] occurs not all at once but in a spread- 
out fashion—where whatever is such that it spreads out has directions, 
and where whatever has directions [also] has position. That substance 
would then have a position and a confine, whereas it was stated that it 
had neither position nor confine—and this is contradictory. 

(6) What has necessitated all [these absurd consequences] is our sup- 
position that [matter] separates from corporeal form. It is thus impossible 
that [matter] should exist in actuality unless it is rendered subsistent by 
corporeal form. For how can an entity that possesses a confine neither in 
potentiality nor in actuality [be such as to] receive measure? It has become 
evident, then, that matter never remains separated [from form]. 

(7) Again, either [matter’s] existence would have to be the existence 
of a recipient (in which case it would always be receptive of some thing [or 
another] that it is never deprived of receiving), or it would have a special 
existence” that is subsistent [to begin with], which it then follows that it 
receives. [In this latter case] it would, in its special subsisting existence, 
possess neither quantity nor a confine. Corporeal measure would then 
be [the thing] that occurred to it, rendering itself such that it potentially 
possessed parts—[this] after it became due for [corporeal measure] to 
render subsistent a substance that in itself is without a confine, quantity, 
or receptivity of division. 

(8) If its special existence? through which it subsists would basically 
not endure when [it became] multiple, then to that which subsists in being 
without a confine and which is divisible neither in estimation nor in sup- 
position, it would happen that that through which it is rendered subsistent 
ceases to be due to the occurrence to it of an accident, even though that 
unity [hypothesized for its special existence] is not due to that which ren- 
dered prime matter subsistent, but to something else. Then that which 
we have supposed as a special existence for it would not be a special exis- 
tence through which it is rendered subsistent. Matter, then, would have 





ret ow ol gy o4 


SAI Weer yale p< oye am ads Vaya Dog laa 
LST wid Ys Gl doe WS uid Y al ol igh ol ale 
we peg all ally fy creas Lit sy pall 

Fol fey Ll Yo yp ciads VALS habla, G6 Gl ws (0) 
PRIA 3S oy gb ge ole dl LS ole ald bee gh al yb 
AS Nay sm Vy dl aog YBy Sy aay \3 

dog Sl Glad cheb yall Byli l LO a Vda col gilly (4) 
Jl DY bell BW p> VOB GS GS LL ayy ligt VY jell 
Blin 25 Vaslll gl no SS 

WE Lsl> 9S «ht gery Leayey OS GI LL ES Y gb Lally (Vv) 
tl ay Gout cpgiie old agery WaKol Lely Md alyd Ge Syn Yea 
IBN ISS [V0] 5B by sd ye ppt yall Langey GK J 
SND STL ay ebyal sgl ad toe ls org S25] Gill ye lead 
eed S95 Vy RS Vy 5m gd pb Aa lam 95 

LI eel SOI ace Gas Ya pst gall oth aageny gS (4) 
pate Leas So Shab som [ool] « cae pe, Vy cal joe Vash pgele g 
AY ad p28 UY Sle Sb i gly cade aslo ayy) badly a 
She GSD cesta Lele boyey ad al Lelt Iayory cng bg Ky 51 








FUP 6? Pally ylly ae ae 


\o 


Qo 


10 


20 


30 


35 


60 Book Two, Chapter Three 


a form that comes to it through which it becomes one in potency and act 
and another form coming to it through which it does not become one in 
potency and act. There would then be something in common between 
the two things—namely, the one recipient of the two states of affairs, 
[a recipient] of a nature [such] that at one time it would not have the 
potentiality to be divided and at another time [it would have] the poten- 
tiality to be divided. [By potentiality] I mean proximate potentiality that 
has no intermediary. 

(9) Let us now suppose [such] a substance and [suppose further] 
that it has become two in actuality, each numerically different from the 
other and each governed by the rule that it [can] separate from corporeal 
form. Then let each of the two separate from corporeal form so that each 
of the two would remain one substance potentially and actually. Let us 
[now] suppose fone of the two] in itself not to have been divided, except 
that corporeal form has been removed from it, so that it remains one 
substance potentially and actually. It would then follow that that which 
has remained a substance ([although] not a body) would in itself either 
be similar to that which is akin to being part of it and which likewise has 
remained separate [from corporeal] form or [would be] different from it. 
If [it is] different, then this would be due either to [the fact] that this [one] 
has continued to exist while the other ceased (or [to] the converse of 
this); or else [to the fact] that both have continued to exist but that one 
has been specified with a quality or form that exists only for it; or [else to 
the fact] that, after their agreement, the two differ in surpassing [each 
other] in terms of measure, quality, or some other thing. 

(10) If one of the two remains [in existence] and the other ceases to 
exist, the nature [of both] being one [and the same] and similar (where 
only the removal of corporeal form has rendered the one nonexistent), then 
[this removal of form] must [also] render that very other as nonexistent. 
And if one is particularized by some quality—the nature [of the two] being 
one [and the same, with] no other occurrence taking place except the sep- 
aration of the corporeal form and no new occurrence taking place with 
this state other than that which is a necessary concomitant of this state— 
then it follows necessarily that the state of the other must be similar. 

(11) If {to this] it is [then] said, “The first two, while two, are united 
and, hence, become one,” we say: It is impossible for two substances to 
unite. For, if they were to unite, each of the two [still] existing, then they 
would be two, not one. And if they were to unite, one being nonexistent and 
the other existent, then how would the nonexistent unite with the existent? 





eles oy oly 7. 


oS Wp doyle gsi ry «Sadly Bk Oly OS lp Lyle 5 po soll 
LS oe pW lll a Ao ‘st ol op OSS. ally Spb Oly pe 


say oh cen SIS dy Ooh iey gad GLB ly bye preg 


Ng Aanly YI 
7b daadl, age oly $y cpl Jal jlo aby poh Ine Mi oo el (4) 
ABDI pall Leger oly FG jab ALL pl dla alasey « 5 
Sal ay ain aa yidy «Jelly Spd Lol Iya lage wal) Bd 
GOI UL see 8 lly HY Lael, Lynsey o> SL pall ae 
AM APS go Sa fo ase gh cance gb gay ase ott SOIL Ne ay 


wllsy a Le OY 9S gl LL gee ib ade 3b [VI] fade gl clo oes CIS 


Vinge gl aS lig AS Sy - Le 08 LOK | (Salk 5! ps 

BS ob RAS gh all GUY om Sylidl GUE | — GBI Y) ug 

pel Ul Aplin irely dedally SW prey Loved i gb (1+) 

Ie Ges Sly ee Nd 55 paw Gl ond ASL 5 pal poy Lesa 

9 omy Aland li, gall Blea YY be bad oly taoly decay aS” 
AS SN Se Sol ond BL ade oh be YL 

Jhomey 1 Jytd rely Glad Glance ell berg geil gl sf ob (19) 

Oly rely Y SLE Lb apm ge Lage aly SG ASI GL Lgl clpagee aed gl 


Awe Bog : ae { y 
bee lus ily Sage gl 0 OS crab ore Vy pyres Lares last! 


\o 


or 


10 


20 


30 


40 


61 Book Two, Chapter Three 


If both, by their union, were to become nonexistent and a third thing 
should come into existence from the two, then they would not be united 
but would be two corruptible things, and between them and the third 
[thing] there would be common matter. But we are speaking about matter 
itself, not about something having matter. [On the other hand,] if they 
differ in that [the one] surpasses [the other] in measure or some other 
thing, then they would necessarily have to exist devoid of corporeal form 
while yet possessing the form of being a measure. But this is contradictory. 
As for the two not differing in any respect [if this were so] then the rule 
governing [the one] thing (if that which is other [than it] were not sepa- 
rated from it) would be the very same governing rule when it has dissoci- 
ated from [the] other—[this] when its rule governing another and the 
rule that governs it alone are one and the same in all respects—and this is 
contradictory. [By this I mean] that it is [contradictory] for a rule govern- 
ing part of the subject and for the rule governing all of it to be one and the 
same in all respects. I mean that a thing would not decrease when some- 
thing was not taken away from it as it would if something was taken away; 
and the self-same rule would govern it, both when something was not added 
to it and when something was added to it. 

(12) In brief, there is in the very nature of everything that at one 
time or another can become two a disposition toward divisibility which 
cannot separate from it. It may happen that it is prevented from [dividing] 
by an accidental occurrence other than the disposition of its essence. And 
this disposition is impossible except through the conjoining of measure to 
the essence. 

(13) It thus remains that matter is never stripped of corporeal form. 
And, because this substance has become a measure through some quan- 
tity that indwelled in it, it is not in itself measure. Hence, it is not neces- 
sary for its essence to be specified with the reception of one particular 
dimension rather than another and with one magnitude rather than 
another, even though the corporeal form is one. The relation of any 
quantity whose existence is possible to that which in itself is neither 
divisible nor quantified and which becomes divided and quantified only 
through another is one [and the same]. Otherwise, it would have a quan- 
tity in itself corresponding to that which equals [such hypothesized sub- 
stance], not to that which exceeds it. 

(14) From this it becomes evident that matter can contract through 
condensation and expand through rarefaction. This is something observed 
by the senses. Indeed, its specification with quantity must be necessarily 
due to a cause that decrees that quantity to be in existence. Either that 





elect! sy oly AN 


SU ey lagna «gamed fy parnde po Lae Lge CI et Suey ole 
gM WLS SL Ly tole gd ed bY Goll paid 3 Wy Ste ol 
ipo lady Ril 5 po beg pay US Gls alld pe yl Las G 
ogill Se Sam 9K cope gl yaey WAY gl Ul, bs aay caylae 
pe epics a ania Xe gaan las da, 
pS OK ol eel AE Ue chal, IS te I yey rey [W] Sry 
DOS SBA sel ee Fy Lely Koy pyball sow 
Sot allay Soy eter BIBS tee Tasty dy gl 
tg 4) Geel 23, 

gee cit er GION yoy 3 iy gt PULL, (sv) 
coll lated 5 Bale We pt Ly dha gl gm plat shania ald 
OAM slaall Glee Y] Slee slo wll, 

dhe Ui] abi ia ly Rada wall ge shed Y'[oolll] glad (01) 
a9 ioe ab J 1d 8S Sl pl cally SS ab cal "[ Lae] ws 


Ya Bie yb gt hy Barly Reed 8, pall CK Gly C08 O99 yy jab V0 


Beds head 03929 byem slate oh Sods Ky lyon Ul lb 3 oS 
Ade Joes Le yr dryly be jill ald b lade ab Yl, 
ay JAS Sy BEL Ul asa gl Se al Ie ye pd (14) 


[VA] lls oye 3h od pala Cee Ye Sladll od GK GI ween bh Ct genes 





B98 cslaes lag soll alll" J S49) 85! 


oa 


10 


20 


25 


30 


35 


62 Book Two, Chapter Three 


cause must be one of the forms and accidents that exist in matter, or [it 
must be] an external cause. If it is an external cause, then either [(a)] it must 
bestow that measured amount through the mediation of some other thing, 
or by reason of a special disposition (in which case the rule governing this 
and the first alternative [above] becomes one and the same, reducing [to 
the fact] that bodies have different measures due to their different cir- 
cumstances); or [(b)] the bestowal is not due to this [external cause] and 
its mediation (in which case bodies would be equally deserving of quantity 
and are [all] equal in size, which is false). 

(15) Also, in addition to this, it is not necessary that from that cause 
there should proceed one specific size rather than another size, except 
by reason of something. By this “something” I mean a condition that is 
added to matter, rendering it deserving of that specific quantity [that it 
has]—not by its actually being matter, neither by its being matter that has 
[a giver of forms] that informs it with quantity, but in that [the] matter 
will have something because of which it deserves to be informed by the 
[giver] of the form with that size and quantity. It is possible for [matter] 
to differ absolutely in species, and it is possible for it to differ in being 
stronger and weaker ([while] not [differing] absolutely in species), even 
though the difference in being the stronger or the weaker may be close to 
the difference in species. But in the difference between [one matter and 
another] in terms of absolute species, and in the difference between [one 
matter and another in terms of which is] the stronger [or] the weaker, 
there is a contrariety known to the perceptive examiners. For it is known 
that hyle in itself may be disposed [to receive] different measures. This 
is also a principle of natural philosophy. 

(16) Also, every body is necessarily specified with one spatial confine. 
It does not have this confine proper to it inasmuch as it is body; other- 
wise, each body would be thus [specified with the same spatial confine]. 
Hence, it is necessarily specified with a confine by reason of some form it 
has in itself. This is evident. For, either it is not receptive to varieties [of 
shapes] and to differences in detail so that it thus becomes [receptive of 
these] due to some form—not in that it is receptive of [them] inasmuch 
as it is body—or else it is [in itself] receptive of them, either easily or 
with difficulty. Whatever the case, [body] would possess one of the forms 
mentioned in the natural sciences. Hence, corporeal matter does not 





elec) oy oll vy 
DiS AM AeMy spall ol gKol LLY PEt] ely. baal 
Joergy alll jloall WS ade gl bbe i Le ob wey as heal 
px bel INI pel Kay Ie Se GS ek sei ae gh aT y 


lS oe BOL SGV gl Lily c Lays SS Yel Corts LoS gl Ul 


OT Lay cpl VN dagltny SI Glia NI yl lee 3S deg, 
S92 om pe Gel US Ge jonas SI Com gad Lal lls aay (40) 
cggall jloall gD a soll Okay byt NI by arly AW ae 
dle + pb dala 9S ASI ype IY sole $0 Lal Y, dole YS We! Y 
cUales Py ESS gl bens ASI y pb! elds) yal Lapa gl gece 
Grcily EN GIS oly «les ply pd Gea, AY GSS gl bony 
a2) DEY yyy ler prt GHEY gy SS cpl! G GST lb 28 
pli ecm Lg 08 load Gl ple aid gaya ase dagle WLE Gersil, 
hada la om Vey Aa 
5B ely GLAM ge es lee Y pate eur Lally (19) 
Ba yal Ay ade Dhow Y yal yb MS ar SON, ne 2 Lew eth 
OSB [VA] Cr vettlly OAS PBF OSGI LIAB. gy aay cal bb 
spot WB GK gl Lely ca Jb ance gt Le PAL] CUS je Le by gee 
GU G31 obardall 95) SN jpall gaol le of gb GS paw 





ce Oy aaa eee eer 


\o 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


63 Book Two, Chapter Four 


exist separate from form. Matter, hence, is rendered subsistent in act 
through form. Thus, when matter is abstracted [from form] in the esti- 
mative faculty, then what was done to it is [something] that does not 


hold in [external] existence. 


Chapter [Four] 


On placing form prior to matter in the rank of existence 


(1) It has thus [been shown] to be true that corporeal matter subsists 
in actuality only with the existence of form and, moreover, that corporeal 
form does not exist separated from matter. It follows, then, that between 
them either there must be the connection of relation—where the quiddity 
of each is only conceivable as predicated with respect to the other—l[or 
not]. But [the first alternative] is not the case. For we apprehend intel- 
lectually many of the corporeal forms, but we must [exert] strenuous 
effort in order to establish that they have matter. Similarly with this 
matter, we apprehend it intellectually as the substance disposed [for the 
reception of form]. But from this we know only through investigation 
and theoretical reflection that that for which it is disposed must have 
within it [that] from which something [comes to be] in actuality. Yes, 
inasmuch as [corporeal matter] is disposed, it is related to that for which 
it is disposed, the connection of relation obtaining between them. We are, 
however, speaking about comparing the essences of the two, apart from 
what happens to them or [what] necessarily adheres to them by way of 
relation. You have known the manner of this. 

(2) Furthermore, we are speaking about the state between matter 
and form inasmuch as [the latter] exists. Disposition, however, does not 
necessitate a connection with something that inevitably exists, although 
this is possible. Hence, either the connection between [form and matter] 
is the connection between cause and effect, or else the connection between 
the two is between two things equal in existence, neither of which is the 
cause or the effect of the other, but where, however, the one will not exist 





ectl oy oly vr 


13] BUI yd) By grab: Jal pga Le} 95] salle 5) gall Bybee reg V Read 


[At]. 2eegl paw ch le Jo a coagll boa 


[el pel 
}.23( >) 


resi Dialll Je 5 pall eae 3 


Ob Maly ype ayy ae Jail pg WI Lad all gl eee ab (9) 
Dall We byes OSG gh Loa I dol Lee rag cud alll By gull 
Sins Bb WIS uel STN ON LL ayes YY ge wey Saal fia 9 
MS cok Y gle > wat GK BI hess ABD wall ye 1S 
DGS Sl cod ad LST AM yp he Vy acedl jagh! Yas caslll 
emt Sh eae Bae Bam gt Cd «ey Coes Yl] Jail (du 
OF bed yb ay9 gl gy Le Reale Od LO SS LENIN Bae Lge 
Na GS ede aby c lagly gl BL] 
By PLS y Lyall yy doll oy JULI b LOS Gb Lal, (1) 
[AV] 59m OS Gly ALY ayege ye tt oe BE Coe Vole, 
GS Gl bly Sahay Abal gy L wae Lye Ld! SF ol LL vw as 
YS, 5U Vyle Vy dle Lanscl ual agen he yl didhe Lage MDL 


\o 


er 


10 


20 


30 


35 


64 Book Two, Chapter Four 


unless the other exists.! With any two things, of which neither is the 
cause or the effect of the other [but] which have [the above] connection 
between them, it is not possible for the removal of the one inasmuch as 
it is an essence to be the cause of the removal of the other. Rather, [the 
removal of the one] would be something that [comes about] with it— 
I mean a removal that has no alternative but to be with a removal, if at 
all, not a removal necessitating a removal. You have known the difference 
between the two aspects, having known that the thing whose removal is 
the cause of the removal of the other is its cause. This has previously 
become clear to you in detail in [several] places and will become [yet] 
clearer in the course of what we are explaining.” 

(3) But now you have learned here that there is a difference in say- 
ing about a thing, “Its removal is the cause of the removal of [another] 
thing” and saying, “It is inevitable that, with its removal, the removal of 
[another] thing takes place.” If, then, the removal of [either] one of the 
two things mentioned above is not the cause of the removal of the other, 
yet it is inescapable that with its removal, the removal of the other takes 
place, then it follows either [(a)] that the removal of one of the two 
removed [things] would necessitate the removal of a third thing other 
than [these] two;? or [(b)] that [the removal] of that very thing is neces- 
sitated by the removal of a third thing such that, had no removal of that 
third [thing] occurred, the removal of this one would be impossible; or 
[(c)] [that] nothing of the kind takes place. If nothing of the kind takes 
place—where “this” is only removed with [the removal] of “that,” and 
“that” only with [the removal] of “this,” without a third cause other than 
their two natures—then the nature of each one of the two is connected 
in existence in actuality with the other. This [connection] would, then, 
either belong to their two quiddities—in which case these [quiddities] 
would be related, when it has been clearly seen that they are not related— 
or [it would be found] in the existence of [each]. But it is evident that the 
like of [these] is not [in itself] a necessary existent (being in its quiddity 
a possible existent), but [that it] becomes a necessary existent through 
another. However, it cannot at all become a necessary existent through that 
other; this we have shown. In the final analysis, it and its companion 
would have to become necessary in existence through a third thing (if 
we ascend in terms of causes). That third thing, inasmuch as it would be 
the cause in actuality for the necessary existence of the two, [would be 
such] that the removal of [either] one of the two would not obtain except 
by removing [this third thing’s] being the cause in actuality. These two 








rletll sy oll ava 


Sao) Sel ie in BN Sieg 
col pom y sil bide Larvorl 3) GS gl yen, 0b MDM de Lge 
ony Lb) Y ads ee Ul ge Ley 9 eh ae ol VK 
Ady Sill 4 AN SI Sb ob ped on Sp cde By 0 Vy SSL 
slajmany Jratll le cel 9 JS ull a gh wb cle 4p sl 2 Bi ile 
aoqeils Nee tates 
He and) hielo Sle ghey Ob al lye cous ue MILL, (1) 
Joly OO ot Bob HOKSl pay lesley 8) 
Ha SM pi Nandy OKT yy a Ve FT BY ale yy Sl go ttl ye 
of oe gh laa ct st thy rn lee Pal ob VK Gl Le) slow 
OSV 3 laa ody Ke tt aS ore by Wal Zo cot » 
Fo Wea ee Velldy cd VY) de ay od OO LS] pd OB lb 
PM JAB cage Ba age oely Shaded Lage yb 2 
Ly Shae ad Upl gh oy lan 5 5 Lyall US 5K gl UB Lav] 
Cah 35S resol g SY be fh gl ns Lene 2 KG 
SS Coy pra GIES jm. oye Coy wht ts SS) coe gl SKE 
Fl paar okey yp syed oly pra Sl cond lhe bey odd S 2h ubsy 
Ae em oe SHEN ett tS Sy UE te lal LT BL 


rt SSE) 





\o 


10 


20 


25 


30 


65 Book Two, Chapter Four 


would then be removed only by the removal of a third thing.* But we 
[have] said that this is not the case, [that] this is contradictory. Hence, 
this [alternative (b)] is false,® and it remains that one of the two other 
alternatives is true. 

(4) If their removal is caused by the removal of a third thing so that 
both are its effects, let us then examine the manner in which the essence 
of each, when connected with the essence of the other, is related {to the 
other]. For it then follows either that [(d)] the existence of each is neces- 
sitated by the cause, through the mediation of its companion, whereby 
each would be the proximate cause for the necessary existence of its 
companion (which is impossible, for this has been shown to be impossi- 
ble in [various] past statements of ours), or that [(e)] one of them in 
itself would be closer to this third thing, becoming thus the intermediary 
cause, [with] the second [becoming] the effect. [In this way,] the true 
[alternative] division would be the one in which we stated that the con- 
nection between them is a connection through which one of them is a 
cause [and] the other an effect. 

(5) If [as in alternative (a)] the removal of one [of the two things] 
necessitates the removal of a third [thing], the removal of which neces- 
sitates [in turn] the removal of the second of the two, then one of the 
two becomes the cause of a cause. But the cause of a cause is [itself] a 
cause. Hence, in the final analysis the affair is settled by having one of 
the two [be] an effect, the other a cause. 

(6) Let us now consider which of the two ought to be the cause. As 
for matter, it cannot be the cause for the existence of form. For, first of all, 
matter is only matter because it has the potency to receive and to be dis- 
posed [to receive]. But [that which is] disposed [to receive], inasmuch as 
it is disposed, is not the cause for the existence of that for which it is dis- 
posed. If it were [such] a cause, then that [which it receives] must exist 
permanently for it without there being [any] disposition [for its reception]. 

(7) Secondly, it is impossible for a thing’s essence, when still in 
potentiality, to be the cause of something in actuality. Rather, its essence 
must have become actual, becoming thereafter a cause for something else, 
regardless of whether [its] priority [to the effect] is temporal or essential 
({by essential] I mean that it would not exist at all unless [it exists] as a 





+ \entdl ea oll 10 


SIbe BS. ail We Sp YY Lave by maar Y  lamayey ceed Jal 
A900 Soe ab BS Ne IIS a LB oy SI oe ay lay 
EM Gpendll nol ght 
AS asl Alar Le US So IE at by a baed GBI (4) 
SRSA VEG. ToS lis Gh Lee oly Sob 5 gl 
alll 92 Lager Jordy SGD cole dhol tll 500 yy cow Lage ely 6 
7 the Lb ote Da gl gb ab Slee Lay ele ayey Oye Rayll 
Aaa Aa ye pad LIU he OSI ae lem 9% GF LL, « bbyt 
Ve SADE Lage otAT GL HG sill aah go GLI Sy cll ga pty 
[AY]. Vylee My the Lave! 
lage Sl oy ay 56 Com Sl ose bevel e oS yl Lb (0) 
IS Ne ST 3 yy yAlly he Ubilale, call dle Lasel Le aid 
Us SN Vylo larel 
PISS ol jee ial UB. Ler ald gS gh as gl SN eb (4) 
chal, Jail 55 WY gY cake > Ui aslll g56 YL Ul cay pal se) dal 
ON d bm IE By cA role gL a) Le SY sale ga Le ac ly 
salut ob saat ly alld voy 
Ae ty ae 2t bo 6 tlh ols GS gl focal spall UB LL, (vy) 
OT ele ete La gle gl Jal ole 54515 SS gl ow Sasa 


\o 


10 


15 


20 


30 


66 Book Tivo, Chapter Four 


cause of the second [thing] and unless the second [thing] was essentially 
rendered subsistent by it, [the first thing] being, for this reason, essentially 
prior) and regardless of whether that [first thing] which [constitutes] a 
cause [for the second] is connected with its essence or is separable from it. 
For it is possible, in the case of some causes of the existence of a thing, 
that there might exist, by [the cause], only a thing that is connected with 
its essence; and [it is also possible,| in the case of some causes for the 
existence of a thing, [that] only a thing that is separate from its essence 
would exist thereby. The mind does not shrink from allowing the possi- 
bility of this, and, moreover, investigation necessitates the existence of 
both alternatives. If matter, then, were to be the cause of form, it would 
necessarily have an essence that in actuality is prior to the form. We have 
denied this as impossible, not on the basis that its essence can necessarily 
exist only [when] conjoined with form, but on the basis that it is only 
through form that its essence can exist in actuality. There is a distinc- 
tion between these two. 

(8) Thirdly, if matter were the proximate cause of form, and [if] 
matter has no variance in itself, and [if] whatever was necessitated by 
that which has no variance has no variance at all in it, it would then nec- 
essarily follow that corporeal forms have no variance in them. If the vari- 
ance in [the corporeal forms] is due to varying things in the states of 
matter, then these things would have to be the first forms in matter, and 
the discussion reverts anew to what it was originally. If [on the other 
hand] the cause of these varied forms is matter and some other thing 
with matter that is not in matter—so that matter alone is not the proxi- 
mate cause, but matter [in conjunction] with something else—then, if 
that other thing and matter join together, some specific form in matter 
comes to be, and, if something other than that [former thing] combines 
with matter, a form other than that specific form comes to be. But then, 
in reality, matter would possess the receptivity of form. 

(9) As regards the particular property of each form, this would be 
due solely to these [external] causes. [Now,| each form is the individual 
{form that] it is solely by virtue of its particular property. Hence, the cause 
for the existence of each form in its particularity would be the external 





PABA} Ba oll “4 


Ys SO sy Whose I Kal dy gel otal gl gly pot Via 
Ghia oe gt be Ee geny tty Late g Gelily cosh soa psagl 
W359 il etl apey lull om 3S Gl jee Ab Gh Ble gS sla 
ot ey OK Ul etl ogey lel vary lal bali OS topes 
item 2909 ay Cou at SN jot Ge packs ed fall GIB cad gle 
capa ga5l Jal O15 Y OS SI Coed byl Le alll GIG Lae 
WN Vole LAE] aera gh SS Vall gf le ably ad Lee Lae bese 25, 
OP gang onal V atl Kgl laoey bacenslls gl de cipal 
ety sally «3, all Ag dbll a sol KIL Ab OE LL, (A) 
Show GS Cth ad EY AS SOY il ttl oe ooh ey «Wg 3 
cola Syed ye ASS yal XS gO yb. yd MEI Y Ast pall 9G 
ile SSG) ede abel, 15 sey GUS INI gall os ppl 5 
so SS Y gm cial Baal eT ty sol ALLEL yao dyes 
Lao, SM «281 alls Go eT oot Ul gl all ge Lasy 
Cry AM ali bt OG, talll Bie Liye fae lee Luce 
3) gall Jy VA Pill GS teal spall Pipe chan isle 
Pre SoS Uy Mulall 56 3S Wipe Fie Ul (4) 
SKY, TOE tll st elk typ SF o9ry tle 9S Yoo Ca 


aa 


20 


30 


67 Book Two, Chapter Four 


thing, matter having nothing to do with the making of this particularity. 
That form exists as it does only through this particular property. Hence, 
matter would have [contributed] nothing in the making of the particular 
existence of each form, except that [matter] is inevitably [needed] for 
form to exist therein. But this is the specific characteristic of the receptive 
cause. Thus, there remains receptivity alone [for matter]. It thus becomes 
false that matter, in any respect, is the cause of form. It would thus 
remain that form alone is that through which the existence of matter is 
necessitated. Let us, then, consider whether it is possible that form alone 
is that through which the existence of matter is necessitated. We say: 

(10) As for form whose matter is [never] separated from it, this is 
possible. But as regards the form that separates from matter, [with that] 
matter continuing to exist with another form, this is not possible. This is 
because, if [as in the latter case] this form were alone in itself a cause, 
matter would cease to exist after [the form] ceases to exist and the com- 
mencing form would have another matter that comes to exist through 
it. That matter would then be originated, and [this origination] would 
require another matter.® It is thus necessary that the cause of the exis- 
tence of matter is something conjoined with form, so that the existence 
of matter emanates only from that thing. But it is impossible for the 
emanation of that thing to be completed without any form at all. Rather, 
the state of affairs is completed through both together. 

(11) Thus, the connection of matter in its existence would be with 
that thing and a form in whatever manner it proceeds from [that thing] 
into [matter]. Hence, [matter] does not cease to exist with the annihila- 
tion of form, since form only separates from it to be [replaced by] 
another form which acts with the cause (from which the principle of the 
existence of matter derives), performing the same act as the first form. 
Inasmuch as this second [form] shares with the first in being a form, it 
[also] shares with it {the fact] that it assists [the cause] in rendering this 
matter subsistent,’ but differs from it in that it renders matter in actu- 
ality a substance that is other than the substance enacted by the first. 





rettl i Ly Ww 


CApelL ML, Lao yoy 855m ye By gual US CL pre Kelhl alk 3 soli 
Ble eV YIY [00] ype Soprphnepas pisldi eo VS 
Sh fla ob LB BNP 2d AMM AIL ele cy cosy pall wos 
Bp esy dy pall 9S ae by 0093) Gp dm by pall dle doll 5 SS 
cone sll gp bary inal 9S gl Ke fo fou soll dey com |p 
ye doll gm, 
Sys May yall Lily cg gle hdd ole BEY Maya UE (ve) 
Cay pall sd SY lag BOYS jr IB «oye ly yas S0ge ye Halll 25g cl 
ati palh Sey eleae sas pared BUN IE cals YIN Loney Cig 
geliok \B clon Gy Bole soll lb GI, pe veg esl aol 
yan Ulislll 9S fo ype Ut Gall oyey tle GSS gl yal ns 
Ul RIT aye Dh ae wad JK GT nn 0. ttl alld ye Lage, 
lace ay I 
AS sedi IT ASG gary + gt Uy Lar gery diol gle 9K (19) 
AN ~ Adee Jal 5515p WAG WW V5, pall 3} 5) gall papa 9 
SMA Lets St Ue gl Lab SM ay yal adh IL — aol Ssgealnales 
Sal Joon alley Ley cialll ods [AN] Atl lo aga cl Silty cipal 3 


SN alae, GO gall aghl 2 Lage jaa 


\o 


or 


10 


20 


25 


30 


68 Book Two, Chapter Four 


(12) For many an existing thing is only completely [realized] through 
the existence of two things. Thus, light and illumination come about 
from an illuminating cause and from a quality that is not specifically the 
[only one] that renders the illuminated body receptive to having the ray 
penetrate it without being reflected. This quality sets up the ray possess- 
ing a specific quality other than the specific quality which some other 
color quality would set up. You ought not to debate [further] what we have 
uttered concerning the ray’s penetration and reflection, once you have 
perceived the objective. It is not unlikely that, after reflection, you may 
arrive at more suitable examples for this. Nor would it harm you if you 
did not find an example, for it is not necessary that for everything there 
should be an example. 

(13) Someone, however, may say: If the connection of matter is with 
that thing and with form, then their combination is akin to the cause [of 
the connection]. If, then, form ceases to exist, then this combination, 
which is the cause, ceases to exist, and it thus follows necessarily that the 
effect ceases to exist. 

(14) [In answering this,] we say: The connection of matter with that 
thing and with the form is not by way of the form [having to be] a form 
of a specified species, but inasmuch as it is [simply] form. This combina- 
tion does not cease at all. For that thing and the form inasmuch as it is 
[simply form] will always exist, so that, if that were not to exist, there 
would be no matter; and, if that form inasmuch as it is form did not 
exist, there would be no matter. If the first form were to cease to exist, 
[but] not because of the successive second [form], then that separate 
thing would be alone, and that thing which is form inasmuch as it is form 
would not exist. It would, then, be impossible for the existence of matter 
to emanate from that [separate] thing, since it is alone, without a partner 
and [without] that which fulfils the condition [for the emanation of mat- 
ter from it]. 

(15) Someone, however, may say: The combination of this—the cause 
and the form—is not numerically one but one in a general sense. But the 
one ina general sense is not a cause of what is numerically one and of what 
is like the nature of matter, for it is numerically one. 





elec ye oll “A 


My LEN 3 cyt ayey oF Liga sll SI. SG (11) 


es YM yall al Jak Ye YEAS oy cr ge ae ye had Ui 


eh ob Halk Je Platt eb LAST oll WSS See Vy plat ad 
Platt Si ye ay bad Loa 25 ls Yhcony oll yy gol aS a 
asl ital og af gl - cb bh — oY, joa mlell caval, 
2S pd NS Sl coy ped Sib Lead oY jh Spins Vy oR y 

ISB tyes (oti We UU gs GIT oLal dye gl By (01) 
one Mall ye gal Female fas 8 gall clay Uoly cal ALE Lage game 
Jglebl fog oI 

be idl yy iy pally + tll lly Bol Ghd Gad ails Jyed (10) 
Who 9S A I flog a 6 eel Ia ype Atm yy oll ew 
Nb Kio) SSG IN] ype pe cam pe iypally cf AILS bogey 
cll Jy BUS inne tee yirpall Sol i SBM ISG ol «gal 
OK Yy corey blu + tl US 9 GS SN is ey VSS iy pal 
YAS oy Gants jl nn 5.5 go Pm by pall go Gall etl 
Alay Ly] byt army y2 5] cialll ogny 

(Sad lols uc by pually Ald! Ul pyaree GI se gl fd Sy (0) 
Ne Sy ccaadly sot dle gS Yell Gaal dalgly ple gat soly 
» dal Broly [pls Soll 





\? 
jJ°d 


\o 


a 


10 


20 


30 


69 Book Two, Chapter Four 


(16) We say: We do not disallow that the one in the general sense 
which preserves the unity of its generality, in terms of what is numerically 
one, should be the cause of that which is numerically one. And this is the 
case here. For, the one in species, preserved by the one in number, is the 
separable [thing]. That thing would, hence, necessitate [the existence of] 
matter. Its necessitation, however, is only completed by one of the states 
of affairs that conjoin [with the separable thing], whatever [form] this 
might be. As for what this [separable] thing is, you will know it anon. 

(17) Forms, then, are cither forms from which matter never sepa- 
rates or forms from which matter separates but of whose likeness matter 
is never devoid. 

(18) [In the case of | forms that separate from matter to be succeeded 
[by other forms], that which places [the successive form] in [matter] 
perpetuates it by rendering that form the successor. In one respect, then, 
form becomes the intermediary between [this] retained matter and that 
which perpetuates it, and [in another respect it becomes] the intermedi- 
ary in substantiation. For its essence is first rendered subsistent, then 
another is rendered subsistent by it in an essentially prior manner—[the 
latter] being the cause that is proximate to the thing retained in existence. 
If the [first form] is rendered subsistent by the cause that perpetuates 
matter through [the form’s] mediation, then subsistence, deriving from 
the [celestial] first principles, belongs to [the form] first, then to matter. 
If form is not subsistent through that cause but [is subsistent] in itself— 
matter becoming subsistent through it thereafter—then [form’s priority 
to matter] becomes more evident. 

(19) As for the forms from which matter does not separate, it is not 
permissible to make them caused by matter whereby matter in itself 
determines and necessitates them. For [matter] would then be necessi- 
tating the existence of that through which it is rendered complete, 
becoming a recipient inasmuch as it is rendered complete and something 
that brings about existence inasmuch as it necessitates it. It would then 
necessitate the existence of something through which it itself acquires 
form. But a thing inasmuch as it is receptive is other than [a thing] inas- 
much as it is necessitating. Matter would then possess two states of 
affairs. With one it becomes disposed [to receive], and with the other [it 
becomes] that from which something comes into existence. Of the two, 
that which is disposed [to receive] would be the substance of matter; that 
other [state] would have to be something additional to its being matter 
that conjoins it and necessitates in it an influence—as in the case of 





elects ye old 44 


tent Bony Bio ll ola gall so GS gl iY UL dyad (99) 
doy Barrens — gh sol yl il MST bys foadh vel fl dle sal Key 
ron Velen cs Vy cial Cony « tl all OFR9 -Gylall ya = sacl 
we Aaland ttl Nhe be Lely eat Ul cal 

925 Vy OW YEE ype Lily cao) WL Vise Ul ypallb (Vv) 
{ee oe soll 

ent Meme Led pies 5 Sle SN aol Sys cl opalle (SA) 
[AA] «Mtn ey Blind BaULl gy Alaaly doy 5 y pall KS Fy gall wll 
Abad ty coll sland a psin ad cal WL alb cpydll 9 ala ly 
WrlSb « lenly doll Rell ald oi IG b og AON ay 
Ne SoU el oF ad fp eA AL, YAS CIB GL, Salad AGL AI 
«ed gel ullis 

BES fo irl dle pe Gl jou alll WY gyal Uy (4) 
Se Pp GS cay SSE Le ay mye SF cMpey ory nad soll 
pats det 9 rh OS hey Me Com py lb a IS 
1 SS ae steep onb chb patam pee ctl $a ype 
IP Magee saan GS et ps tee TL, cued Lael oul ald 


\o 


on 


20 


30 


70 Book Two, Chapter Four 


nature with respect to motion in matter. [This latter] would, then, have 
to be the first form; and the discussion reverts to what it was originally. 

(20) Form, therefore, is prior to matter; and it is not permissible to 
say that form in itself always exists in potentiality, becoming actual only 
through matter. For actuality is the essence® of form. 

(21) As for the nature of that which is potential, its receptacle is 
matter. Thus, it is matter that is properly said to exist in itself in poten- 
tiality and in actuality through form. And even though form does not 
separate from matter, it does not become subsistent through matter 
but through the cause that bestows matter upon it. For how can form 
become subsistent through matter when we have shown that {form] is 
its cause? Cause is not rendered subsistent by effect. [In the case of any] 
two things, neither one is rendered subsistent by the other in [the sense] 
that each bestows existence on the other. The impossibility of this has 
become evident. Moreover, the distinction between that by which a thing 
is rendered subsistent and that from which it does not separate has been 
made clear to you. 

(22) Form, then, exists only in hyle, [but] not in [the sense] that hyle 
is cither the cause of its existence or of its existence in hyle. This is sim- 
ilar [to the way] in which cause exists only with effect, not in that the 
existence of the cause is [either] the effect or its being with the effect. 
Just as [with] the cause [which], when it is a cause in actuality it follows 
necessarily that the effect [exists by it] and that it should be with it, [so 
it is] similarly with form: if the form is an existing form, it follows as its 
necessary consequence that it renders something subsistent, that some- 
thing being conjoined with it. It seems, then, that of the things that render 
a thing subsistent in actuality, bestowing existence on it, some bestow 
[this existence] while being separate and some bestow it while being con- 
nected with it, even though not a part of it (as in the case, for example, 
of substance [in relation] to accidents which it renders as its sequels or 
its necessary concomitants,® and as in the case of the temperaments [in 
the human body]). 

(23) By this it becomes evident that every form that exists in corporeal 
matter exists through some cause. As for [form] that temporally comes 
to be, this is obvious; and in the case of form that permanently adheres to 
matter, this is because corporeal matter has been specified with it by a 


cause. We will explain this more clearly in other places. 





eledsl Sa ol gy ve 


dad Ul ad cm giy le tole Se Uhy Lpal i alldy cdolll page 
Lede ISI oymy LV Spall 92 eptll old 5 KS cial LB Ba 

sagem ae pants By pal | Sl gl jem Vy sadly pail by pall od! (>) 
Jedd 2p payee GY doll Jad pat Lily « Lile aya 

Med ches Ap bolll gS cial Yous GB adh bab Ul, (\) 
iyyally [AN] ciygeall Jad Yly cdo geye GSS adh Quad 9 WG Y Sle gl 
AS Joodl bl eaLNAL Je c Sandl pth ald Vol Syl VE GL, 
rst GUtl Glin Vy cls pt Vabdly SUple Wi Ey By Dyed yall pst 
alg y HeMaLal gh ob aogey SII ack bee vol Sb ST Lael 
«AB yh Y Soll guy bl 9s Call op Gal 

PVE SN ddl rr geny de IY dad 2 Wang Vaal (11) 
eas) Sg ya lal ay gl Y cJglall ae Y] veg Y ala SIS) Jol 
MS Mya LOST Gly Sahel les i Jal tle C5815] ala gt UST J al 
glad glee «23 US LS Ob Gl ler ph doe ys ype CIE Ud] by pal 
Py woes Le aang cule yy odes Lee ager adciny «all Lt ph b OS 
ley «ly gt eek I ele pad fae oe Gal Gly dob 

BLU as Ltled chemo dale 3 re $ ype KO! Be cny (1) 
vibe) py anes LiL ASL! Jyogl QE doll) RDU Ll 4d pal wos 


Se ely DBI Le gees 


J KOS 





\o 


10 


15 


20 





BOOK THREE 
Consisting of ten chapters 





Chapter [One] 


On indicating what ought to be investigated regarding the state 
of the nine categories and about their accidental [nature] 


(1) We say: We have clearly [indicated] the quiddity of substance and 
have shown that it is predicable of the separable, of body, of matter, and 
of form. As regards body, there is no need to establish [its existence as 
substance]. Regarding matter and form, we have already established [the 
existence of both]. As for the separable, we have established [its substan- 
tial existence] in the potential [manner] that is close to act, and we will 
be establishing it [further] hereafter. If, however, you remember what we 
said about the soul, the existence of a separable substance other than the 
body becomes true to you. It is, hence, [only] appropriate that we should 
now move on to ascertain and establish [the existence] of accidents. 

(2) We say: Regarding the ten categories, you have come to understand 
their quiddities in the introduction to the Logic.! Doubtlessly, the relative 
among them— insofar as it is a relative—is something that necessarily 
occurs [as an accident]? to a thing. The same [applies to] the relationships 
that fall within [the categories] of “where” and “when” in “position,” 
“action,” and “affection.” For these are states that occur [as accidents] to 
things in which they inhere as an existent in a subject—unless one were 


~7J71[—- 





PULWIP PSE 
Smad pie \ydy 


[Jel eal] 
p23(1) 


ee oe ech OV gall Jie ye we ni gl ga vay o 


hey BM he Dyes Ugl beny cpagbl dab by od Je [40] (9) 
QB iy pally ball Ly cae pea GLB eal Leb 5 yally cdslll Joy cea 
Bey re gage goiy chal yy Rall aydb oI a Gy Ll, Latch 
SPUD peer pb Oyler oyery lb Coo cil 3 old bb SE gl et 
ABUL al eM git JLT Jes 
Yoo glad cI lab cag ob stall YAU LI 28 (1) 
sbyyya tgth Bylo yl — Shan pace oy — Wee ge Glall gl belts 
CSet icy «pally By «ao gd> by «Saks Kd 3 Ue SI atl LUG 
FE si IM pall eyo gll 3 oe lO 2 LV doy be Jel ib 


_y\_ 


a) 


10 


30 


7? Book Three, Chapter One 


to say, “[ This] is not the case with action. For the existence of action is not 
in the agent, but in the patient.” Should [someone] say this and it is con- 
ceded him, this does no harm to what you are after—[namely] that action 
exists in a thing as an existent in a subject, even if it is not the agent. 

(3) Hence, there remain two of the categories—the categories of 
quantity and quality—where a difficulty may occur (namely, [the ques- 
tion of ] whether or not they are accidents). 

(4) Regarding the category of quantity, many people judged it [fit] to 
render the line, the surface, and corporeal measure within [the category] 
of substance, and—not restricting [themselves] to this—to make these 
things the principles of substances. Some have adjudged this regarding 
discrete quantities—that is, numbers—and made them the principles 
of substances. 

(5) In the case of quality, others among the natural philosophers held 
the view that it is not at all predicated—[maintaining,] rather, that color 
is in itself a substance; taste, another substance; odor, [yet] another sub- 
stance; and that from these [qualities] the sensible substances are consti- 
tuted. Most of those who uphold the doctrine of latency? maintain this. 

(6) As for the doubts of those upholding the substantiality of quality, 
they are more appropriately discussed in natural science; and it seems 
that we have done this. 

(7) One of the upholders of [the doctrine of] the substantiality of 
quantity, who maintains that continuous [quantities] are substances and 
principles of substances, said: “These are the dimensions that render 
corporeal substance subsistent. And whatever renders something subsis- 
tent is prior, and that which is prior to substances has the greater claim to 
substantiality.” And he maintained that, of the three [dimensions], the 
point has the greatest claim to substantiality.® 

(8) Regarding those who uphold [the doctrine of the substantiality] of 
numbers, they have made these [numbers] the principles of substances, 
except that they have made them composed of unities, so that unities for 
them became principles for the principles. They then said: 





SB onal 9 dp SOW! BEA] Gad Jail opery lb UI od Jal g] 
Pea D oer Jal Sl ye Mead Lb pe pel ca lang cll J 
Jel D ud a aly peal 

come el sh Bye am Leahy JEL AS ah ball 3d (1) 
ASI A yng Sa gee 2 gt ge 

Slay Glandly LL Jar gl gly ell + SG SKA UL] (6) 
lhl cgale LS ade Joo Jp cll le pale Vgly Gad y Glut 
spall gale Yay alae gl ahaidl LS 3 lb ly agony 

Gap CD apo od pl geal Oy eT gh 0B GILL, (0) 
ll ald obey Sly GAT ae SSI Gel ae rally <Aeniis pg 
13a Nerd Gy Sd lonely char gandl 

cll 2 os SNe SANG ASN yay Jydll clewel IKE Lb (1) 
25 Lhd 23 UY « anda 

ple poral gl loss 5b Slaysee Jal obuel Uy (Vv) 
pate oe bey c glad age da gell obeS 2 ods Gl JB A pale goley 
SSO yl Hatt Jury adh Il oe pl dl y pal Ly pail 9b gil 
[49] Ap dh 

‘iy Legler gl Yc salah taal a (ghar pb condi Gleel Uy (4) 


ASB Goluall ole Ole oyle fe cledgl 


\o 


oar 


10 


20 


30 


73 Book Three, Chapter One 


(9) Unity is a nature in itself [and is} not connected with any one 
thing. This is because unity is in everything, being in [a particular] thing® 
as something other than the quiddity of that thing. For the unity in water 
is other than water; and in people, other than people. Moreover, unity 
insofar as it is unity does not need to be any one thing. Each thing becomes 
[the thing] that it is by being a specified one. Hence, unity becomes a 
principle for the line, the surface, and all things. For the surface does not 
become a surface except through the unity of its proper continuum. The 
case is also the same with the line and the point, [each of] which is a 
unity that has come to have position. Unity is, hence, the cause of all 
things. The first thing that comes about and originates from unity is 
number. Number is thus an intermediary cause between unity and every 
thing. Hence, the point is a positional unity; the line, a positional duality; 
the surface, a positional trinity; the body, a positional quadruplicity. These 
[philosophers] then proceeded to gradually render everything originat- 
ing from number. 

(10) First of all, then, we must show that measures and numbers are 
accidents and then proceed thereafter to engage in resolving the doubts 
of [the above philosophers]. Before this, we must make known the true 
nature of the [different] species of measure. And what is foremost [in 
importance] for us [to do] is to make known the nature of the one. For it 
is incumbent on us to make known the nature of the one in these places 
in terms of two things. One of them is that the one is very closely related 
to the existent, which is the subject of this [metaphysical] science. The 
second is that the one is, in some respect, the principle of quantity. As 
for its being a principle of number, this is easily seen by [any]one who 
reflects [on such a matter]. As regards [its being a principle for] the con- 
tinuous, this is because the continuous is a unity of sorts, [the one] being 
as though [it were] a formal cause of the continuous; [also] because 
measure is measure inasmuch as it is something measured. And being 
{what it is], inasmuch as it is quantified, consists in its being [something 
that is] enumerated; and its being [such as to be] enumerated consists 


in its being such as to have a [numerical count of | one. 





o\ecs| of oll vy 


sao GN bby CLE ye opt WGlb bikes F debesregl gl (4) 
ost ob ce gill UAL pb oe AN dire SOK, Ht Fo 
BK GN ge aan tay oe a cll pb lal dy coll pb ol 
GES oboe Lely GS Gh ge be me UB Ht IG LAY 5 
bail irs Yl Lele SCY laadl gb eet Sy chenlly Last Lye isons 
Maly tb Fale io gb poy Y gle inny Lal daitly Lb lS, «th 
oth BE tgay tell cy Alas dle sadlb . oadl egll ye Goa OK L 
AE) madly Rainy AIM Clemlly Aniry igh Lbly Racy irrry dlessld 
- soa ge Vole eg Kiser Gl Ul Leal d Shaey 
US a Jeti tc alel sbaely yolall gh: ga gly! tbe Cad (+) 
by INly AS plgl die SS gl Cae lb by M59 GU ACAI 
pels ode oval deb yi gl Le gow b's [atl] mea 
Ell 8 62 ge g Galo yr pall Rell ya eal Gh c Leave nee 
ae yb onal Le KFUPM] ASU ary Le vols gl sty 
SlOall SY qr Meat ays le Gc igony SLA GG hata Uy AC 
Soe BS com, Care OS 92 jal ere Sy cl Ceoe al ge la OS 


[AV]. Lael gl cee SS oe 





ecvelsl b> 3h 


\o 


10 


15 


20 


25 


74 Book Three, Chapter Two 


Chapter [Two] 


On discussing the one 


*l in [several] senses 


(1) We say: The one is spoken of “equivocally 
that agree in that they partake of no divisibility in actuality insofar as 
each one is what it is. But this meaning is found in them in terms of pri- 
ority and posteriority—this after [the meaning of] one by accident. 

(2) The one by accident consists in saying that something united 
with another thing is [that] other, and that both are one. This would be 
either [(a)] an accidental subject and predicate, as when we say, “Zayd 
and “Abdallah’s son are one,” and “Zayd and the physician are one”; [(b)] 
two predicates of a subject, as in our statement, “The physician and 
“‘Abdallah’s son are one,” since it so happens that one thing is both a 
physician and the son of “Abdallah; or [(c)] two subjects [having] one 
accidental predicate, as our saying, “Snow and gypsum are one” (mean- 
ing [one] in whiteness), since it so happens that one accident has been 
predicated of both. 

(3) But the one which is by essence includes [the] one in [terms of ] 
genus, [the] one in [terms of] species (namely, the one in differentia), 
the one in [terms of] correspondence, [the] one [in terms of] subject, 
and [the] one [in terms of] number. The one in number may be in [terms] 
of continuity, and it may be in [terms of] contiguity, and it may be [in 
either of these two terms] by reason of its species, and it may be by rea- 
son of itself. The one by genus may be [in terms of] the proximate genus 
or [in terms of] the remote genus. The one by species may likewise be 
[in terms of] a proximate species that does not divide into [lower] species, 
or it may be [in terms of] remote species so that it accords with one of 
the divisions of the first classification,” although here there would be a 
difference in considering [them]. 





rlactdl oye oly Vv 


[Ul Jed] 
ibhed (VU) 


soljh BOK Y 


Med aad YAGI 8 Ges Gla le ASL Jl vel sl gh de (1) 
an ly ly pay Vb vey gall a SS ge ge ely Pte ys fail 
eph vols! 

Lagly eM geal eT Lt a leet taal a yeylh wetgly (1) 
csonly Al Ace yy Lag ot IS 96 Ipeeey Pye Ul elby vel 
AB aoe oy 92 oll UE copings Myre ily $aely olay Lay oly 
Spo BSlepey gl fall ae ly Leb oly ot Sal ye SL vel 
eo Shee BS etd Bul oely gably lS aye wel, 
- doly 2,6 lagde 

Do\3l gay Fell roly dey «ably roly are lh gill Lgl SI (1) 
[MA]. say rely deny choo gh roy Arey Aunty rely ary « ail 
18 465 Jo IS by crldh 3K ody Shad GK 8 sual oly 
all pel GS by at ehh GK pebl Lgl ab VS 
isd so fy GK by cplol When Vas pe 0K fb US ll alsly 
Eo OMEN Shs SK Gly JN GU peed vel 


\o 


Gr 


10 


20 


30 


75 Book Three, Chapter Tivo 


(4) If it is one in species, it is inescapably one in differentia. It is 
known that [what is] one in genus is many in species, and that the one in 
species may be numerically many, and that it is possible that it is not 
[numerically many] if the entire nature of the species is [included] in [only] 
one individual. For, in one respect it would be a species and in one respect 
not a species, since in one respect it is a universal and in another not a 
universal. Reflect on this in the place where we will discuss the universal, 
or remember places [where this matter] previously occurred to you. 

(5) Regarding the one [in terms] of continuity, it is that which is one 
in act in one respect but also has multiplicity in [another] respect. 

(6) As for the true [one], it is that which has multiplicity only in 
potency. This is either in lines, being the [line] that has no angle; or in 
surfaces, being the plain surface; or in corporeal bodies, being the body 
encompassed by a surface that does not have a forking [to form] an angle. 

(7) Coming after [the true one] is that which has multiplicity in 
actuality, except that its extremes meet at a common limit—as, for 
example, the two lines that together surround an angle. And following 
this is that whose extremes are contiguous in a manner akin to what [in 
locomotion] is the continuous in the necessary and consecutive move- 
ment of one part to another, whereby its unity is as though it follows the 
unity of motion because there is fusing there, as in the case of members 
composed of members—those that have precedence being [the ones] 
whose fused connection is natural, not artificial. In general, unity in this 
is weaker and moves out of [the category] of continuous unity into that 
of combinative unity. Thus, continuous unity has the better claim on the 
meaning of unity than the combinative. This is because continuous unity 
has no multiplicity in act, whereas combinative unity has multiplicity in 
act. Thus, in [the latter] there 1s multiplicity® over which unity is super- 
imposed, [but] which does not remove multiplicity from it. 

(8) [In terms] of continuity, unity is considered either in connection 
with measure alone or with some other nature that would be something 
like water or air. [Also,] being one in subject happens to the one [in 





rest ole vo 


pobh lst gl play «pad vel dle Y epesth Lal gh bly (€) 
SSAY Sh jam aby 24dk LS GK Gl ern od adh el sl oly cdl 
SY Re yey 63 Me OS rely att 2 WW Ell eb | 
RG gl [eal] 2 1 Selly ad Ne es Sey we Sl les 
eile ebly $5 yl SI Jes 
BS aby cdg Ge Jail: Lely GS gall a SLAY wets Ll, (0) 
Age gies 
sogehl 3b Ul gay Last adh 3501 48 SS GH og awd LI (A) 
Ga peek tolenenll by «lanl Lal Lal cantly cal ayly Y gil 
iggy Le CB AD yd cla ay Loe 
dhe fo Ate am xe ek WaLbl gl Vl pdb Sa oS bak (¥) 
Beal ait LE aL GI LNI 9 SS l adey [88] Aaylyy gla dl glad! 
ells, Lact Shes gV SL iam det YO Yrs 9K sand (plan Sp pp 
be gly Lelie Y lank sale gS Le ls gly clael ye Adsl! Lac 
ose AelaV res JUL sos ge cely deal ode GALL 
Sal Goa VALAV sre Sl glalldy cing pec dolioaM je Jyh diel 
ASS lps jus Vinny Yte ES Alig. Jada adele ine gly 
Selb 6 GS gl lly LB Lill wire Ll LAV egy (A) 
Ere sll B Lely GK Sl JLATY LW Gayny ele gh LOS gl 





pes pel 


\o 


Or 


20 


30 


76 Book Three, Chapter Tivo 


terms of] continuity. For the continuous subject is in reality a simple 
body, coherent in nature. This you have learned in the natural sciences. 
Thus, the subject of the unity of continuity would also be one in nature 
inasmuch as its nature does not divide into various forms. Indeed, we say: 
The numerically one is undoubtedly numerically indivisible inasmuch as it 
is one. Indeed, any other one is indivisible inasmuch as it is one. But this 
must be looked into with respect to the nature which [became subject] 
to the occurrence of unity.® Thus, the numerically one would include that 
which, in its nature ([as subjected to the] occurrence of unity), is not to 
be multiple—as, for example, the one human. And it would include that 
in whose nature it is [to become multiple]—as, for example, the one 
[body of | water and the one line. For the one [body of ] water can become 
[many] waters, and the line [many] lines. 

(9) [In the case of] that whose nature [does not admit of multiplic- 
ity], either it becomes multiple in a different respect, or it does not. An 
example of the first [alternative] is the numerically one among people. 
For, when divided, {the human] does not become multiple insofar as his 
nature—that is, insofar as he is a haman—is concerned, but [the human] 
can become multiple in another respect: when divided into body and soul, 
he would have a body and a soul, neither of which [by itself] is a human. 
As for [the second alternative] that does not [become multiple], it is of 
two divisions. Either it [falls under a division] where another nature 
exists for it, even though it is not a divisible thing, or [it does} not. 

(10) If, with [its being something divisible], it has another nature, 
then either [(a)] that nature is position or that which corresponds to it, in 
which case it would be a point—and, since the point is divisible neither 
insofar as it is a point nor in [any] other respect, there would then be a 
nature other than the above mentioned unity—or [(b)] it would not be 
position or what corresponds to it, [in which case] it would be [some- 
thing] like intellect or soul. For the intellect has an existence other than 
what is understood by its being indivisible, and this existence is not a 
position and is divisible neither in its nature nor in any other respect. 

(11) As for that which does not possess another nature, it is like the 
very unity which is the principle of number—I mean, that which [is 
such that] if something else is added to it, the combination of the two 


becomes number. 





elects ys ogy v4 


Clo po cae aby ell ite ba eer LLY Ll pa ll 
pet Var gle je dedal 3 Lal lols SLY brn 6 92 ye WK 
pir iy sad aude pe al LS Y sah sels obs fp fAaS ye 
4d ea hee Sosy etm iy pede tely go lag Yy cael 
Pe ed Lette saath sol GSS ae Gaye dela oe 
solgl UG als ob yy bay caelgl gly tf SG slasedl Y yee 
[Yor]. Ueges Ldly bole Ul a, Sab volt LL, 

OF bly Slory oy 5S 8 9K of UB ab oy ul ally (4) 
Bh dade tom ep SAYA cll go oul ang Sh nee 
es onl Mad BL eel age yy SG SI og Bgl pe 
Ls pad be 9 5 SY gil Ly glail age ao acy uty ped g Kd 
KY oI My ep thib — ees bi tilee dle Kgl 

iP delall We 9S o| LB Gel dab bs ad loses gS GL os) 
Oy Med oom yp dake Y abet, dad 9 Ss , (2d al Ly pag 

‘Awl bey ao si OK Y gl Ul, $5) 5401 Bo gh yb kab thay col age 
wa pba i sh gb age Jill ily Ji are 
SAN By Cale D pes ly cay dog] bls 

sad be Go Mite gl iS ott b Sheng KY sll Uy (99) 
Ide lege pene sho Lane My! Gul 3} 3) el 


\o 


20 


30 


77 Book Three, Chapter Tivo 


(12) Hence, among these types of unity there are those [where] what 
is understood by them is not divisible in the mind, to say nothing about 
material, spatial, or temporal divisibility. 

(13) Let us [now] enumerate [the components] of the part that also 
becomes multiple through unity with respect to the one nature and with 
respect to continuity. This includes that whose multiplicity is in the 
nature that, in itself, is disposed toward a multiplicity [emerging] from 
the one. This is measure. It [also] includes that whose multiplicity is in a 
nature which has [that] unity disposed toward multiplicity only through 
a cause other than itself. This is the simple body, such as water. For this 
water is numerically one in being water [but] has it in its potentiality to 
become numerically many waters—not, however, by reason of “water- 
ness,” but because of its connection with the cause: namely, measure. 
These numerically multiple waters would then be one in species and also 
one in subject, because it is of the nature of its subject to unite in actu- 
ality as one in number. 

(14) [But] this is not the case with individual people. For it is not by 
virtue of a number of subjects among them that they become united as 
the subject of one human. Yes, cach one of them is one in [terms of] its 
one subject, but what accrues of the multiplicity is not one in subject; nor 
is its state the state of each particle of water. For [the latter] is one in itself 
through its subject. The aggregate of [water particles] is said to be one 
in subject, since it is the function of [such particles] to unite as one sub- 
ject through conjoining, whereby its aggregate then becomes one water. 

(15) Each of these two divisions, however, is either [such that there] 
is realized in it all that is possible to belong to it or not. If [realized 
therein], then it is complete and one in terms of completeness. If not, then 
it is many; and it is the custom of people to make the many other than 
the one. And this unity in completeness is either by supposition, estima- 
tion, and situation (as with a complete dirham and a complete dinar) or 
in reality—this either by way of art, as, for example, the complete house 





Plat ye oll vv 


Mead Pil Bagge pens V Laon gl ge Gl ei ole Gab (11) 
Fay GR Gali 

Lee Gp bde Sh vel Ral Loe yy Li SS sill eal andy (4) 
BoB Ge 5S tae WGI Lo deeded Ba GK gl abd gad Jad 
jal sam  UL[ VV] dace 3 0 SS SK gl Ud ey Sylaill ya Lay 
sad aay ell ag Ul fe bet dt ye lldy «ped pb eee SU 
GaN come Bylo ASW Jo Y saad 9S Laer poren GE SB cody ole gay 
SY cppo shh Lad brelyy Gpll srely saul 5-50 oli ell 9 SC . jladll yo 
ral Maly Gall dock a ron cby 

Sh pe henge Bae GLE Ge pad WB eHltl LEST US, (14) 
pt Ky seh ae yoy toly lpr ely Kips rely gli pyey voce 
Body Gd cL ye dalad Fle dle judy cp polly oly oy peau 
Sl Ble oy SLE ye Sh eppogll barely Gl Jletdly  benogs bud 
laely ele Mam Upham yb JLT Lael lepoye vec 

SNE L ge adhe Kol bl geeitl ghey ely BM (18) 
BL yey 5 9 Kael Sly pl relay ot we SSOP OMY dK 
sly 2ydh GSS Gt LL RAL cre gl okay edge SI Ljlew gl td 
SIT Re lal Lady ALALL gS gl Ly cpl glans (bi pay Real 


\o 


10 


15 


20 


30 


79 Book Three, Chapter Tivo 


(for the incomplete house is not said to be one house), or by nature, as 
with one individual human with complete [bodily] members. 

(16) Because the straight line is receptive of an increase in a straight- 
ness that does not exist for it, it is not one with respect to completeness, 
As for the circular [line], inasmuch as it is not receptive [of increase in 
circularity]—its surrounding the center [equidistantly] from all direc- 
tions occurring to it naturally—it is complete and one in [terms of ] com- 
pleteness. It seems as though, among people, each individual is also one 
in this respect. Hence, some things have completeness as a necessary 
concomitant (as, for example, individual [humans] and the circular line), 
and some do not have completeness as a necessary concomitant (as with 
water and the straight line). 

(17) Regarding the one [in terms of] equality, this is by virtue of some 
“comparative similarity,”” in that the state of the ship, for example, with 
respect to the captain and the state of the city with respect to the king 
are one. For these are two states that correspond to each other. The unity 
of the two is not by accident. Rather, the unity of whatever is united by 
the two is accidental—I mean that the unity of the ship and of the city 
through the two [states] is by accident. But the unity of the two states is 
not the unity that we have made a unity by accident. 

(18) We thus say once again that when® there is unity, it is either said 
of numerically many things or numerically one thing; and we have shown 
that we have encompassed the divisions of the numerically one. 

(19) Let us [now] turn to the other respective standpoint. We say: 
Regarding the things that are numerically many, they are only spoken of 
as one in another respect by reason of an agreement they have in meaning. 
Their agreement would be either in some relation, in some predicate 
other than the relation, or in some subject. The predicate would be either 
genus, species, differentia, or accident. It would be easy for you from this 
place to know that we have ascertained the divisions of the one. And from 
what you have learned you would know which has the higher claim to 
unity and the precedence for being deserving of it. You would thus know 
that the one in genus has a higher claim to unity than the one in compar- 
ative similarity, that the one in species has a higher claim than the one 








| 
! 





PAV BOA] Ba oll VA 


dorly Shes es tF dads Ly rely coe a Sle, Y sdb tl gB < 
[Vit]. elas ¢t 

lb Al bag ye Coed all 8 salyy a ob tell LA GY, (99) 
BoA YN aca ad chm Je Wb pe SIG patel Ly pL gee je ody 
PSL op Gard Sal 9S gl tay cplTh elgg we ke Sy Hh 
c patel Lably LBV GL aajh LAV ae (SG al obey laely 
spiel Lh, WS pitt ach Y \pany 

Su jhae [Achat] Me Gl Pactra eal ll iL 
Sb pth Legoey gedy glade Gio gals lb drel, WM xe dyull Jley 
Ll, cepa samy Ce ep Really Stl aay gol cepll Lp oo bea 
Ppl dae Valle Jive gl cal GL taoey 

sad ES esl le SUE gl Llane gt IOUS! A sel) ye dyed (14) 
- da Lgl pludl yar tl ky by caval ely ot le Jl JI 

lay UB sah 550) LEM UY, 225 ee M ALL Jab (18) 
PR DBL OK Sl LB eB ley DV nels Ble y VY 
Uy [VF] op Lily epee Ld Ipatly -ppoee Gd bly hell pe Jpere 
phil Laie 3 Ci ys 3} pet Van ge Le gee SOD ee Ley « rad 
Gb yaid Ap Blind gunly sregh, Jal Ugh edge 8 aye oily cell 
21S je Mol psd els gly chebdl lglg Re gk Yt pebl sols! 





Jlyd Anaad. yet 


\o 


QO 


10 


15 


20 


30 


79 Book Three, Chapter Three 


in genus, that the numerically one has a higher claim than the one in 
species, that the simple that is in no respect divisible has a higher claim 
than the composite, and that the complete among divisible [things] has 
a higher claim than the incomplete. 

(20) The one may correspond with the existent in that the one, like 
the existent, is said of each one of the categories. But the meaning of the 
two differs, as you have known. They agree in that neither of them des- 
ignates the substance of any one thing. This you have known. 


Chapter [Three] 


On ascertaining the one and the many 
and showing that number is an accident 


(1) What is now difficult for us to ascertain is the quiddity of the one. 
This is because, if we say, “The one is not divisible,” we will have said, 
“The one is that which necessarily does not become multiple,” [in which 
case] we will have included multiplicity in the explanation of the one. 

(2) As for multiplicity, it is necessarily defined in terms of the one 
because the one is the principle of multiplicity, the existence and quiddity 
[of the latter] deriving from it. Moreover, whatever definition [we use] in 
defining multiplicity, we necessarily use in it the one. [We are speaking] 
of this [sort] when we say, “Multiplicity is the aggregate of ones”; for, we 
will have included unity in the definition of multiplicity. And, moreover, 
we will have done something else—namely, we will have included “the 
aggregate” in its definition where “the aggregate” seems to be multi- 
plicity itself. And, if we say [multiplicity consists] of “unities,” “units,” or 
“ones,” then, instead of the expression “aggregate,” we will have used 
[these] expressions when their meaning is understood and known only 
[in terms] of multiplicity. If, moreover, we say, “Multiplicity is that which 
is enumerated by [means of] the one,” then we will have also included 
unity in the definition of multiplicity, and we will have also included in 
its definition enumeration and measurement—this being also under- 


stood only through multiplicity. 











rlecdl oy oll v4 


op Aah tery pales Y gill Lamely cpl aol gl ye Isl oath aeLsly «pad 
BU 5 Bal pe Gall ply SG 

Mya yp oly Fe Sl sols gl CB ognall jill 8 welgly (1+) 
dorly Jan Val 3 lity «A — cae Le le — Lageadee SS cage lb” 
[\°%].cls cule v3, > Hgts Pym he lage 


ene 
$3(¢) 


L2F svall SHELL, SSL vel sl ga 


solgl og}: WS Ib) Cala, vol ghaal GW aise bbe Cares silly (1) 
Ske A WEB Gye SOY gall pe antl GL LB AB uk Y gull ys 
5A ely 

409 BS age sels M coolgh af ghana all gos QSU LI, (1) 
CS Gb iy dh veh Ad Ulan Say Lore ae lel YLaley bogey 
Lhe aS ne dares Uae XB heyy elodl pil gl lye b 
Wet 59S) OSG ately Lae 3 ecoll sl thay STL 
Ys «Baal Lae abl Lod Jy bag! oi EW gl ole lolol 5 Ui bl, 
BSS oot gh os SI 5ST gh: LG BL, 3 S0L Y oye Y, ole oti 
UY Alby « polly sal Lae (8 WSIS Lal 9 Sy cre gl Se 3 tic 
[20]. Lia 5 5SSL agi 


\e 


\o 


a 


10 


20 


29 


30 


80 Book Three, Chapter Three 


(3) How difficult it is, then, for us to say something that is reliable 
on this topic! 

(4) It seems, however, that multiplicity is better known to our act of 
imagining; unity, better known to our intellects. It seems that unity and 
multiplicity are among the things that we conceive a priori.’ However, we 
imagine multiplicity first, whereas we apprehend unity intellectually, with- 
out a [prior] intellectual principle for its conception; but, if [a principle] 
is needed at all, it would be imaginative. Our defining multiplicity in terms 
of unity would, then, be an intellectual definition. Here, unity is taken as 
conceived in itself and as one of the first principles of conception.? [On 
the other hand,] our explaining? unity in terms of multiplicity would be a 
directing of attention‘ wherein the imaginative course is used to hint at 
an intelligible [which] we [already] have but which we do not conceive to 
be present in the mind. If they say, “Unity is the thing which has no 
multiplicity,” they indicate that what is intended by this expression is the 
thing which for us is an a priori intelligible that opposes this other or is 
not it. It thus draws attention to [what is already in the mind] by negating 
[multiplicity] from it. 

(5) One is astounded by those who define number and say, “Number 
is a multiplicity composed of units or of ones,” when multiplicity is the 
same as number—not as a genus of number—and the reality of multi- 
plicity consists in that it is composed of units. Hence, their statement, 
“Multiplicity is composed of units,” is like their saying, “Multiplicity is 
multiplicity.” For multiplicity is nothing but a name for that which is com- 
posed of units. 

(6) If someone says, “Multiplicity can be composed of things other 
than unities, as in the case of people and beasts,” we say: 

(7) Just as these things are not unities but things constituting the 
subject of unities, in a similar way also they do not constitute multiplicity 
but only the subjects of multiplicity; and [moreover] just as these things 
are ones, not unities, similarly they are multiple, not multiplicity. 








vay ola, Cb OUI Noe Bdge gl ele peel US (1) 

ye cael ively SE we yel Lal aS 3S gla aS (4) 
59S SL clay apes A aol BPS, ne dT GSS gl ty « We 
Jb Vy OOS! yield ba ey lid oly Ay! YS 
oy Wily Bynes Bog DSF hay « Ute lays io Sh ST Lane OK 
hee SUI aa a Jac es ASIN te ys Gy nel J 
pod Gall ctl Ct aml GL ASB I. pall (8 Lele oy pat Y bce Jee 
Sh SS lin ites coSll bay Gace geal ett dled ody ob ll gl cle Lys 3543 
AE VB ches Ake Aad yh pl 

opt Ra BES sxa5 gf peed srt ree pt cea (0) 
Ses Heal pe a th ee Shae Sl ao yl elie, 
cha aey ye Rae FES Gf tg yad olaiey op Rly ils, 2S 
Sle gl pe gall Late YY) ceed SSO GS 8552S GL he 

cdl See clasll ab HLL ye Gigs 23 5°51 gL: PB SB 3 (1) 
ped clgally 

Clam Ae yo ye rath by cclaey ceed LLY che gl LS] (V) 
A LAW alli gl Sy a Sb deep Lal SG 2 ced Lal OUST 
[V0] 8S 5S 8 SS cohey Yobely 


\0 


10 


20 


25 


30 


81 Book Three, Chapter Three 


(8) Those who believe that they then escape from this [difficulty of 
circular definition] once they say, “Number is a discrete quantity that 
has order,” do not escape it. For the soul’s conception of quantity requires 
that [quantity] be known in [terms] of part, division, or equality. As for 
part and division, these can be conceived only through quantity. As for 
equality, quantity is better known to the unclouded intellect because 
equality is one of the accidents proper to quantity, [an accident] in whose 
definition quantity must be included. 

(9) [To this] it is said: Equality is unity in quantity and order, which 
are also included in the definition of number. It is one of {the things] 
that is understood only after number is understood. It must, hence, be 
known that all these are acts of drawing attention—similar to the atten- 
tion drawn by examples, names, and synonymous terms—and that some 
or all of these meanings are conceived in [terms of] their essence.® They 
are indicated by these things only in order to draw attention to them and 
to differentiate them. 

(10) We now say: “Unity” is either said of accidents or said of sub- 
stances. If said of accidents, it would not be a substance; there is no 
doubt about this. If said of substances, it would not be said at all of them 
as either difference or genus, since it plays no part in realizing the quid- 
dity of any one of the substances but is only a necessary concomitant of 
substance, as you know. Hence, its being said of [substance] would not be 
that [said] of genus and difference, but [its being] said of it would be 
accidental. The one, then, would be a substance, and unity [would be] the 
meaning, which is the accident. For, the accident—which is one of the five 
[predicables], although an accident in this sense—is allowed to be a sub- 
stance. This is allowed when it is taken as a composite, as is the case with 
“white.” But the nature of its meaning in the simple sense is inescapably 
an accident in the other sense, since it exists in the substance but not as 
part of it and [since] its subsistence would not hold true separate from it. 





led 5 oly AN 


Wo 5g Old dete OS saad gh Lgl 1 oil Gammon, pil (A) 
PY ys ol SL pill ype Cpe ASI Gb MyaldS LS Le op pal 
SB all Ul, ASI, Leyes Ke UB Qual, opt Ul stg gl aoa, 
oe MAS Lol Biel pa Lt gy pall lad ae pe oe LS 
AS lee 2 veg gl 

aoa am 2 3h iN fly ASI LAN po gladl gl s Std (4) 
Cll So lees Ws gl abe gl cod sal ag oe Magis) ga «Lal 
das Lily WELD) pow 3I WS Eyes Gl ade gly <Adsi fl LUM, aA 
AB jk, ple aed Lav oby ee 

de dls gl Ly eyalpell he JUS gl Lil reat! ol sg Jes (\*) 
BES Hily Ald BLY, Lage 9S 9b Yel eM fo chs BB pal gb 
Pariah gat dso V a) Ctl ee Vy Lad Ile J Ca pi hl 
J We WP 35 OSE cake 5 LST papel BY pl ge J cals 
SA gall pitty Lage sls] OSS «26> JB pail) pol 
~ pall Bs Lege ASG Gly — Rad sol ye call Yall gb cueyall gs 
inh Ll, aS Sy 1 13 US jee Ll, yay oKol ANS 5 yor, v8 
PAN 2m 5) ST eal Bye De Yb [VV] ae dell call 
1) lin mas pr Vy ace 20S pu 


\o 


Q 


10 


20 


30 


82 Book Three, Chapter Three 


(11) Let us, then, examine the unity existing in each substance which 
is not a part of it which renders it subsistent. Would its subsistence, sep- 
arate from substance, hold as true? 

(12) We say: This is impossible. This is because if some unity were to 
stand stripped [from substance], then either it would have to be simply 
[a something] which is indivisible (there being no nature of which its 
indivisibility is predicated), or there would [have to] be another nature. 
The first division [of the disjunction] is impossible. For there must at least 
be an existence, that existence being indivisible. [But] if that existence is 
necessarily an idea other than unity and [something] that is indivisible, 
then that existence is either a substance or an accident. If it is an acci- 
dent, then unity is necessarily in an accident, then [subsequently] in a 
substance.” If [that existence, on the other hand], is a substance, unity 
never separating from it, then it exists in it in the way [a thing] exists in 
a subject. If separate from it, then, if the unity separates from that sub- 
stance, it would have another substance to which it comes to belong, having 
toward it—if the existence [of the unity] is supposed—a connectedness 
with a substantiality. That substance would [then] be [such that,] if this 
unity did not come to belong to it, it would have no unity, [which] is 
impossible; or else it would have a unity that had been and a unity that 
follows, [in which case] it would have two unities, not one unity. As such, 
there would be two substances, not one substance, because that substance 
would consist of two ones—and this [too] is impossible. Moreover, if 
each unity existed in another substance, then one of the two substances 
would not be the one to which unity transferred. The discussion would 
revert back to the original question regarding that to which unity trans- 
fers and [which] also would become two substances. And, if every unity 
is in two substances together, then unity would be a duality, and this is a 
contradiction. It thus becomes evident that it is not in the nature of unity 
to separate from the substance in which it exists. 

(13) We begin and say: If unity is not simply that which is indivisible 
but is an existence that is indivisible, so that existence is included in unity 
(not being a subject of it), then, if we suppose that this unity separates 
from substance, then if it can exist in itself it would constitute a bare 





elec ye ole AY 


de ghe he Py Coed gl aye Sd e gllne gl bl ee’ (19) 
5 Pool lee Wel coe Jo cl 

SIV Joa pldayaee Say Sat 3) WV by arene a gh ed (09) 
GSS 3) ped Y GI ele Intl otek Se ply sees Vl ee 0S 
MB coyey De GK [GH 5 BIVAB See SW eudlly geting ate 
ces asly Saal ob uae Dee Y sesh tld SG cpus Y oye gl 
Yee pio sh los gob Los 9S gl lee oe Sul gS Gl LB 
based ye oP — Byli Vino sly — lee sol re Sill 
Wa — phi alld cab BL — RS GSS 25 lee I oly Sp oall 3 
~ PANE Sey yah Byles Laryery 928 1] 6 ley all pad eT page 
hin a gsc) es lay cary dl SS ogee ad! pai a! J 
BV crely pager Y Slee KD chasy V sling Wl gS ch ings 
sob Sl ae piney SEI gb Lay Slew lay eGlely paybl all 
dhey ise a3) Jel Ld ede KN ley [+4] je lall Jog gad 
War has bog 4 lene yr gdl binny BIS Gly uyrge Leal 
Ad PCM abl G15 Gl Wit oe alta! SY ieee 

IE ly ees Y Updo ed IO GL al etd eatdy (V1) 
Shee DB poy Vio gl dels a8 VK co mais Y logey 
pets V lagery CIE Ugly vel 3} Ks 2283) rgb ne dhede cd b od 


\o 


QQ 


20 


25 


30 


83 Book Three, Chapter Three 


existence that does not divide and would not be an existence that only does 
not divide.’ Rather, unity would be an indivisible substantial existence 
[only] if that existence does not subsist in a subject. As such, accidents 
would in no respect have unity. And, if accidents were to have unity, their 
unity would be other than the unity of substance, “unity” being said of 
them equivocally. There would, thus, also be those among numbers that 
are composed of the unity of accidents and those [that are] composed of 
the unity of substances. Let us, then, reflect to see whether or not the two 
share the meaning of indivisible existence. 

(14) If the two do not share [this meaning], then the unity in one of 
them would be a divisible existence, but not so in the other. This [how- 
ever] is not what we mean by the unity of accidents or of substances, [for 
this] would lead us to mean by unity—in the case of one of the two— 
something other than its being an indivisible existence. If [on the other 
hand] they share in that meaning, then that meaning is the indivisible 
existence, the very [thing] we mean by unity. This is the more general 
meaning than the one we have just previously mentioned. For it is neces- 
sary for [the former] to constitute a substantial existence in addition to its 
being an indivisible substance, since it is possible to suppose it separately. 
This meaning, if [unity is] a substance, by necessity does not occur to an 
accident. [From this, however,| it does not follow that we should say that, 
if [unity] were an accident, it would not occur to a substance. For the acci- 
dent does occur to the substance, the accident inhering therein; but the 
substance does not occur to the accident so as to be subsistent in it. 

(15) Hence, inclusive unity is more general than this meaning, and 
this is what we are discussing—and [discussing it] only inasmuch as it is 
an indivisible existent, without anything additional. And [this meaning] 
does not separate from its subjects; otherwise, it would become that other, 
more specific meaning. For it is impossible for unity to be an individual 
existence in [both] accidents and substances and, with [all] this, to be 
permitted to separate. For then [it would be the case] that [either] sub- 
stance occurs to an accident [as something that comes to inhere in it] oF 
that the unity in substances and accidents differs. It is, hence, clear that 
the reality of unity is a meaning [pertaining] to accidents? and one of 
the necessary concomitants of things. 








ret ye LY AY 


OS ly - ess ye Amy dary Lal oN SS 9b rey BY osha 9b 


Aiyatth Yle SE aN Ky Sadlirey 2b Yrs 3K oy 265 

pH ae Soy SLM inn oy alt L slacil or bal 3S tl 
SEY eis GH oe swe BOO be ed valdlne, 

tA By La bases bps Gino gh gS Kea IS’ (06) 


ined egnel 8 ae se cals al dl gl Gale ney Go lealy is” 


FN 9 gall ld «gall bd 9 Tht gly pad pb opey dle Lt 
OM JB $5 gill pall ye Bel all ull, im Sh gt oll Sil eed pal 
BSL Wawa SSI pelts Y ogaey OS pe [V4] ap ges 5b 
vals ell bye laa SUSI Tbe Y gall lay clopee and Ke Gh 
Spots Pal oye ash ob «sal tym ol Loe SS OL AL Ist gl gh 
ADE IS cm abl d ow Y Sully coll 
Pm 9 Med Ly all US oy cl dedb eel gil (10) 
sal alls jlo Vy dlepoy dythY els, «Se 15D15 Wy Laid eas Y ayeny 
omy UA Le Baar oe bogey ine gh gS SIE 6b. a 
PAN Fille Me IS Shh oy ae Lae 9K Sys glas v 
AN pill le yy oy ae Phim tae gl gd al eV 


\o 











on 


20 


25 


30 


84 Book Three, Chapter Four 


(16) It is not for someone to say: This unity does not separate in the 
way in which general ideas do not separate, subsisting without their dif- 
ferentiae, as [with] humanity [that] does not separate from animality. The 
impossibility of this separation does not necessitate accidentalness. Rather, 
what necessitates accidentalness is the impossibility of a separation per- 
taining to the realized, existing, individuated meaning. 

(17) [To this] we say: This is not the case. For, the relation of what 
we supposed as more general to what we supposed as more specific is not 
the relation [that obtains] in what is divisible in terms of a substantiating 
differentia. For we have shown that unity is not included in the definition 
of a substance or an accident but is a relation belonging to a generic nec- 
essary concomitant. And if we have pointed to a simple individual instance 
of it, then it is distinct in essence from the specification associated with 
it—not, however, as with “being color” that is in whiteness. If, then, it is 
correct that it is inseparable, then it is correct that the predicate—which 
is a general meaning of a necessary concomitant, nominally derived from 
the name of a simple idea—is the meaning of unity. And this simple [idea] 
is an accident. If, then, unity is an accident, then number, which is com- 


posed of unity, is an accident. 


Chapter [Four] 


That measures are accidents 


(1) As for continuous quantities, they are the measures of continuous 
[things]. As regards body which is quantity, it is the measure of the contin- 
uous [thing] that is body in the sense of form, as you have known from sev- 
eral places.” As for body in the other sense, which is included in the category 
of substance, [it is something] of which we have concluded discussion.” 

(2) [Now,] it has become evident that this measure is in matter and 
that it increases and decreases while substance continues to exist. [Mea- 
sure] is, hence, necessarily an accident. But it is one of the accidents that 
attaches to matter and to something in matter—because this measure 
does not separate from matter except in the [mental] act of estimation 
and does not separate from the form that belongs to matter.‘ [This is} 








PAV WOA)| ai oly At 


Ye Je he Gy Y ire ode lye gh LD yay (99) 
plmaly Roly Sl GLY GLE VS Ngrad yy ASB ALA SL BLS 
Goel SR Byles plead oll Cee Ul) opi Coy VB ylll oka 
oper ners 
pal ead be SN pcloleod bat gb IS MN yl 228 (\v) 
J pp oe Bae pb bso SI LSB ke ea Nh eadell i 
AGN pc [V+] gas sory esas J] byt ly ple VL eceye 
Se Byles Pal ee Bb PLN S AIC 0 eit easel ge 
dy Bae SN ge gt dames ne weal eel Ste ole oY sae 92 Call J gas 
[SNS] Lye Bae jo All sade Lege eT ly eye Lt! 


[esl pel 
Jp22( >) 


aiel plillgl 3 


28 (SI 98 gall edt Ul oral oles og thetll OLS Ul, (9) 


pat! LI Cole bne Pade le le Byypall pat medl so cill pall aie — 0 


er lobo pAlde 3 Joull oT all 
FF 98 GL ably attny ayy aly dole bail gh ob pleall aay (1) 
Ya ae GY caalll Ce gt g alll ale aL ehh 5 aS, callow Y 


10 


20 


30 


85 Book Three, Chapter Four 


because it is the measure of the continuous thing, receptive of such and 
such dimensions. This [measure] cannot be without this continuous thing 
in the same way that time exists only through the continuous—namely, 
[in] the distance [that is being traversed]. This measure consists of the 
continuous [thing] being such that it is surveyed with [such and such] a 
thing in some manner: once [terminally] or [where] the surveying would 
be interminable, if [the continuous thing] is estimated to be infinite 
through [sheer] estimation. This [measure] is different from a thing 
such that it is receptive to the postulation in it of the above mentioned 
dimensions. For one body does not differ from another in this. As for its 
being surveyed [with something] in a manner once or its being surveyed 
[with something] without at all dispensing [with further surveying],° this 
[is something in which] one body may differ from another. This [latter] 
meaning, then, is the quantity of the body, [the former,] its form. This 
quantity is not separable at all from that form in the “estimation,” but 
both it and the form are separable in the “estimation” from matter. 

(3) As for surface and line, it is proper that they have [both that] 
consideration which [renders them] a limit and [that] consideration which 
{renders them] a measure. Also, the surface has the aspect of being 
receptive to the postulation within itself of two dimensions having the 
description of the above-mentioned dimensions—I mean, only two dimen- 
sions, interacting at a right angle. Moreover, it is measured and surveyed, 
it can be greater and smaller, and [it is subject] to postulating dimensions 
within itself in accordance with the differences in [geometrical] figures. 
Let us, then, reflect on these states within [the surface] and say: 

(4) Regarding its receptivity to the postulating of two dimensions, 
this indeed belongs to it because it is the limit of the body receptive to the 
postulating of the three dimensions. For, a thing’s being a limit to what 
is receptive of [these] three [dimensions] is so [only] inasmuch as it 1s a 
limit to such a thing, not in that it is a limit absolutely, demanding as a 
requirement of it that it be receptive of the postulation of two dimen- 
sions in it. In this respect, it is not a measure. Rather, in this respect, it 
is a relation; [but,] even if a relation, [one] that can only be measure.° 
You have known the difference between the relative in the absolute [sense] 
and the relative which is a category and which cannot, as we have shown, 
be either quantity or quality.” As for its being measure, this is in the 
other respect whereby it is possible for it to differ from other surfaces in 
measure and area. It can in no way differ from them in the first sense.” 
In both respects, however, it is an accident. For, inasmuch as it is a Jimit, 





lec ea oly! AO 


WoSY sb gl LS pal + gill 8h GSI Ke Y tiny « \S alal La 
ci [1S9] WS png toe all gS ga shail ay BLL ge ccilh pal 
PP Setar NSS) Ae Nay Lag ok pS ns baal ea 
[1055] VS eng al Ly py peor aod dy YS fb sy Sl aled 
Ie ENVY] ery pene ad Cale it XI IR drew gin Vail I bye 
Pal 2 iypall DE Gye VEL oda, yy Ady mod AS ge all 
Pgh Pialll BW by pally oe Sat 
‘shake dl Lely AGA! eld oS gl gL bby asi bly (¥) 
gee gel i) SiN sla aise Ge 43 jam op La al Leer cient! Lal 
aly «eel, nlzel OKy Tons al Lay Lol dyl; a oLble, Ls 
2th ab Myo ode pels SKEW Sys ey lel Even 
Stel 8 5 sil abl Ay aNd als Lib yam ged ald Ul (€) 
Ulery cl Yas fay pa tom 5 SOK POA «ptt gS Satst 
AE ee 8 pclae AGLI ay 9 Guely «pat Gay Ul GK gl '[olatie] 
Gig Ulla Stall oy Syd ode dy Liab Wa SY ble gh oly clan 
al Ul, Was ade aS gl clay Le he chy YN atl ye ctl Lal 
olally saill Pe slentl pone Bly gl Ke ly Te SMALL yp lal 
Sm AB ee bene Ly AS Saag J eal Wee gl SY, 
UT ALB By alga ps Vy die SOS ayeye AY lead Byle AY) ge 


thats alanieg pay NSy US rie Sy SM 








\o 


a) 


10 


20 


30 


86 Book Three, Chapter Four 


it is an accident occurring to the finite because it exists in it as a part of it 
and does not subsist without it. And we have said that it is not a condition 
for the thing existing in another that it should coincide with its entity, 
(As to where we said this, it is in the Physics. Let it be examined there, 
should a perplexity occur in this respect.) 

(5) Moreover, [surface] is an accident inasmuch as it is measure. If 
surface were such that postulating two dimensions in it were something 
that belonged in it in itself, then, to that thing, the relation of “being a 
measure”! in the surface would not be the relation of “being a measure” 
to corporeal form. Rather, the relation of that meaning to being measure 
in the surface would be that of differentia to genus, the other relation being 
that of accident to form. This you will know by examining the principles. 

(6) Know that the surface, by reason of its accidentalness, is that 
which comes into being in the body and ceases to exist through connec- 
tion, disconnection, difference in shapes, and intersections. A body’s sur- 
face may be a plane, then cease to exist inasmuch as it is a plane, [giving 
way] to a circular [surface] that comes to be. From previous statements 
you have learned that the one surface is not, in truth, subject in existence 
to sphericity and “being a plane.” Hence, [although] the one body is sub- 
ject to the differing dimensions that occur successively to it in actuality, 
such is not the case with the surface, whose dimensions are negated if it 
is divested of its shape. This is only possible by cutting it; and through 
[such] cutting [comes about] the negation of the one form of the surface 
that is in act. This you have known from other statements. You have [also] 
learned that this is necessary in the case of hyle, whereby the hyle for 
continuity would be other than that for discontinuity. You have learned 
that, if surfaces are constructed and connected with each other tn a man- 
ner that negates the common boundaries, the resulting existent would be 
numerically another surface. If changed back to its first composition, it 
would not be numerically that same surface but one similar to it. This is 
because that which has ceased to exist is not brought back into existence.” 

(7) Since you have known the state of affairs concerning the surface, 
you will know it [in relation] to the line—make [the connection] by com- 
parison [of the one] to [the other]. It has become clear to you that these 
are accidents that, in existence, do not separate from matter. Moreover, 





le8S| a oly AN 


JO colada 8 (he LB gl Ly call lla gle iegsie NS 
[YY] Age Ahh ode jp Ceoye | Tle 

0b Py tore chat SUT gy ee pr hie ptm yp Lal, (0) 
‘bill i Vol gl cat paybillis $F Io pa Pier 
SS eae ue pri macht 8 gall 
Sel fo Ls ph aly By pe I eyle Rud oS cy «pace 

Shas, JLeiyt ida aie, (1) 
Pee Jad les padl Ghee 3S ody ca blttly IS Got, 
Hiab seg easly yp Ble Ld cae by yah ad 
AU ead NS pd ally opedl Pele ASD eye KY 
Fo MSE ie 5} 15] claatl WIS cole ohh Jad lal OEY Leo y 
Abts cleatl Spe Marl aadll by valet VOUS Se YB soled las 
ISS F> Ded Beh Y oe gl cules ccs sl Sigh yp be cade why {Jail 
Uae yam rons Tyla call IS] ail cule U8 «JLaio Lye SLA Sel 
pds aad ace gc sadly ST bales s1t GOLAN aga hay Lash 
[\VE] . abe Y pyanll GY dy «sad abe oT oodl Jal qantl ls 

LAS Lb fciy lb lel 5 Jl pe chy 5 (V (Vv) 
Oye Y gl Wal bey clayey dll SY alyel ode gl a gd ad le 


\o 


QS 


20 


25 


30 


87 Book Three, Chapter Four 


you have known that, in the estimative [mental act],!* they do not sepa- 
rate from the form, which is also material in its natural characteristics. 
It remains for you to know how one ought to understand our statement|[s] 
that “the surface is separable from the body in the estimative [mental 
act],” and that “the line is separable from the surface in the estimative 
{mental act].” 

(8) We say: This separation is understood in this place in two respects. 
One is to postulate, in our estimation, a surface but no body and a line 
but no surface. The other is to direct attention to the surface and, basi- 
cally, to pay no attention to the body as to whether it is with it or not. 
And you know that the distinction between the two things is clear. For 
there is a difference between considering a thing alone, even though it is 
believed to be with another that is inseparable from it, and considering it 
alone with the condition that it is separable from what is with it, adjudged 
[in the following manner]: Just as you have confined attention to it alone, 
so that, in your estimative faculty, it stands alone, in addition to this it is 
[such] that a distinction can be drawn between it and the other thing— 
with the judgment that that thing is not with it. 

(9) Whoever believes that the surface, the line, and the point can be 
thought of in the estimative faculty as surface, line, and point with the 
supposition that there is no body with either surface, line, or point 
believes what is false. This is because the surface cannot be postulated in 
the estimative faculty singly, without [its] being a limit to something, 
unless it is thought of in the estimation in a special position—being 
thought of as having two directions that lead the one going to it in such 
a way as to reach two sides that are [the limits of] two other [things], as 
you have known. But, then, what has been thought of in the estimation 
to be a surface would not be a surface. 

(10) For the surface is the very limit, not that which possesses two 
limits. If, in the estimation, the surface is thought of [as] the very limit 
beyond one direction only, inasmuch as it is as such, or the very direction 
and limit (except that its disjoining is in another direction), then that 
which is its limit would be thought of, in the estimation, as being with it 
in some respect. The same state obtains with the line and the point. 

(11) What is said regarding the point—that through its motion it 
draws the line—is a matter that is said for the sake of the imagination and 
has no possibility [of actually] existing. This is not because one cannot 
hypothesize for the point a contiguity that transfers [from place to place]; 





a ea oll AY 


phd Ae BS hs ol ge ld Lal Leng tle Wel 3 oe May pall 
ag Canty Lal gly «Lag ead Syl ast gh 3 
vy Gl lense! “One Se ee sll Ne 9 ig 1B LM odds Gh 2 Syed (A) 
leEhY, chet eth gl Ay depts ety cepa 3 
Ned rsb pba Mo dalglaw cil. Ane el gas dl eal qed 
pear all tes ol iy Ble Vand ae al ladiae 6 aly ory ttl I ley 
dy PAIK peg Meal SEL ale LV Kew cae pa LS by 
NPP Pieri crea 
tai, Las balan nays gl SK ababll, Lal, ola tigh yb 5s (4 
Vel cb ob a Al ey bl Ys Clallam Vg! Ol eee 
AE aos ee pass gl Y VAN el oye pal} claatl asin gl SY 
BES cele IS aye Sle Ah, Vad al) flail phos alge a cry 
[NYO]. chow sb Vola ele Norm 
RS pi Clas nag Sly cab 93 Y abl oo cleat gb (\*) 
A dbesl YS! fe - ably cit uit JUS ye em Gy bid isoly ye of 
Aes LA) SILT, «arya Lash go byh— geliye y 
GAY, LSU Mi lath Lab Shou ans adsl) J ily (9) 
Se Gla 08 OB cali ale aye ol Se Vall VY cal oye, 


\o 


or 


10 


15 


20 


30 


88 Book Three, Chapter Four 


for we have shown that this is possible for it in some respect. But, since 
contiguity is not permanent, and [since] after contact the thing does not 
remain except as it was before contact, then neither would there be a point 
that remains as the starting point of a line after contact, nor would there 
be an extension between it and parts of the thing contacted. [This is] 
because it became one point, as you have Jearned in the Physics, through 
contiguity—and no other thing. If the contiguity ceases through motion, 
how would it remain a point? Similarly, how would that for which [the 
point] is a starting point remain a drawing that remains stable? Rather, 
this is something that belongs only to estimative thought and imagining. 
Moreover, its movement takes place when there is necessarily an existing 
thing around [which] or in which motion occurs. This thing is receptive 
to having motion take place in it. It is, hence, a body, a surface, or a 
dimension in a surface—namely, a line. Thus, these things would exist 
prior to the point’s motion; and the point’s motion would not, hence, be 
a cause for [these] to exist. 

(12) As for the existence of corporeal measure, this is evident. Regard- 
ing the existence of the surface, this is due to the necessity of the finitude of 
the corporeal measure. As for the line’s existence, this is by reason of the 
possibility of the intersection of surfaces and the postulating of lines in 
them. As regards the angle, it has been thought of as a continuous quan- 
tity other than the surface and the body. We ought, hence, to examine the 
matter regarding it. We say: 

(13) It may so happen that measure, whether it is body or surface, is 
encompassed by limits terminating at one point. Then, inasmuch as it is 
between these limits, it would be something having an angle, without in 
[any] way considering the state of its limits. It would be as though it is a 
measure greater than a dimension terminating at a point. If you wish, 
you could call this the very measure, inasmuch as it is thus an angle. But, 
if you wish, you could call the quality which it possesses—inasmuch as It 
is as it is—an angle. The first would, thus, be like the square, the second 
like “squareness.” If you apply the name in the first sense, you would 
[speak of ] an equilateral, acute, and obtuse angle in itself, because its 
essence is measure. If you apply [the name] in the second sense, you 
would say that [these properties] belong to it by reason of the measure 
in which it exists, as with “squareness.” [Now,] because it is possible to 
postulate three or two dimensions within that which is an angle in the 
first sense, it is the measure of a body or of a surface. 





elec w oll AA 


SOS Waatlias tl eV 5 oS YI WL SS cy 
pcr Slated gins Vy AusLalt de das Ne ek tad She 9 SS 9b Lula 3 
Charl cake WSinely dha obo Lil abt als GY LLM oho yey 
Br SMS, aes 2 45 GS TL LL ely Ibo. pe Yall 
SSS WSi> SB Lal, Li LS, pag) bul UJ TEE Lyd lee a 
Bp SY JIB + tlh eldy 14d shale L195 ayey opt thay cll 
tage Sea Sob lat ot lla 3 al sila glee ad 
[9]. pas Mae dail So 55 ye alas Se Js 
PE cpr gh chal oye, Lily « alls Glad jill sey LE (11) 
uly. 2g00\ sally slentl pad lye nd | dary bly c glad Lal 
‘athe lal 9 Jao pnd ped clas ba gl poh adbayi 
FEW i bbe SK ghel oye ad blew lye jhallgl (07) 
Ba) ob oy yl BLE OW ea gy gt Cae yy 3 KS ely dad ws 
Sra a Sales soe fe ae ST a IS aye oy Ul Je I 
Se MES oe OL ly claghy IS ya tam yj) Vas pat 
JM all de al caidgl gf eS 0, pS GK €dayhy We yo 
urell fe cats sly « jlad Later SY ani lly adhe gly 
Asi il My «apf US AS go oi lh ay Ye res St 
Tee pe sale i clam TAD sbal UL aa aye gl Se J ell 


QO 


10 


20 


89 Book Three, Chapter Four 


(14) It is [an erroneous] belief of the one who says: “A surface comes 
to be only if the line that enacts it in estimative thinking moves with both 
its [end] points so as to bring it about. It would thus, in reality, be moving 
the length sideways, so that a width occurred after the length. Thereby, 
length and width would come into being. However, the line bringing 
about the existence of [an] angle moves neither in length, as it is alone, 
nor in width so as to bring about the surface; but it moves with one of its 
[end] points, and thereby an angle comes to be.” [Such an individual] 
would thus have made the angle a fourth genus of measures. 

(15) The reason for [all] this is his ignorance of what we mean by our 
saying, “In order to become corporeal or have a surface, a thing has to 
have either three or two dimensions.” Since now you have known this, 
you know that that which [such a person] has said does not necessarily 
follow. The rational person ought not to listen to this. This is only but an 
indulgence on the part of that person in that which is none of his business. 
This unaware, perplexed person may go on to hold that the surface is in 
reality the square or the rectangle and nothing else. His words are not 
worth attending to. 

(16) You have thus known the existence of measures, that they are 
accidents and that they are not principles for bodies. For the error in this 
has occurred for the reasons you have known. 

(17) As for time, its accidentality and connection with motion have 
been previously ascertained for you. It remains for you to know that there 
is no measure beyond these measures. We [thus] say: 

(18) Continuous quantity is either something settled, occurring in 
existence in all its parts, or it is not. If it is not, but has renewed successive 
existence, then it is time. If it is settled and it is measure, then it is either 
[(a)] the most perfect measure, being the one in which it is possible to 
posit three dimensions, since it is impossible to posit more than these— 











etl je Oley A 


2 ol Joli LIAS 13 Llaw 9% UL al sda ad idly (V6) 
Died Heath Leys Jaa son ab GS fo cased fo ached OK pag 
ooeny Jail 2 Yash Godt Lb Syorael by fe ey Seb GS Sb ow oye 
dal 300d uly ool 2 Ly (ae Soy Sm ayll Vy ge 
[SV]. yolall 5. ia Sn ias 
> gi 3h abal Ro etl) WS puede Ube dally (18) 
Yy gh YB sill be gl ede WS cde 5B bk dL XS 
Whey An Y Ld SLM OU Ge Pat go Lily colic all Bll 9 SS gl ay 
lab Y pea Teall RELY clastt gl  Ca od ol dh sala 
A JR ab a 
Sh cpl Si cgole cod Vly eel Why LB opey cde ob (01) 
. 6 Ub eye Li ls 3 Lala 
ON Ab he WSL alley aye Ni 58S gual Ul, (vv) 
| 1 Js « yall oe ge Lye jie Ya abs 
“Abel gare axl pole WB aS al LL ses Y Jacl Sigh (44) 
OF aby sbi ae et an LE age gh one Gi Kab oS yl 
ub 31 RDN shal 28 4.3 Ke il gay yall Ala Sal Ub  slaill ay 16 


10 


20 


30 


90 Book Three, Chapter Four 


and this would be corporeal measure; or [(b)] one in which only two 
dimensions are posited; or [(c)] one having one dimension only, since 
every continuous thing has some dimension either in act or in potency, 
And inasmuch as there are no more than [these] three [dimensions] and 
no less than one, then measures are three and the continuous quantities 
that are connected in themselves are four.'* It is [sometimes] said of 
other things that they are continuous quantities; but they are not. 

(19) As for place, it is the surface. Regarding heaviness and light- 
ness, through their motions these necessitate measures in times and 
places. It is not for them in themselves to be divided by a division that 
enumerates them. And [it is not for them] to be compared in terms of 
equality and inequality by postulating a limit for them that corresponds 
to a homogeneous limit, whereby that which follows the limit would cor- 
respond, in terms of what is homogeneous to it, to that which comes 
after it; [consequently,] the second limit would be applied to it so that it 
would either equal it or differ from it, becoming unequal but greater. For 
this is what we mean by the equality and inequality that make measure 
known.'® As for the division that occurs to lightness and heaviness, 
whereby one weight is half [another] weight, this [comes about] because 
[one weight] moves half the distance in [the same amount of] time or the 
same distance in twice the time, or else [because] the movement of the 
greater [in weight] downward through an instrument of motion necessi- 
tates conjointly the movement of the lesser [weight] upward, or some 
similar thing. 

(20) This is similar to the heat that is double [another] heat because 
it acts doubly or because it [occurs] in a hot body twice [the size of the 
other] that is similar in temperature. The same is the case with the small, 
the large, the many, and the few. For these are also accidents that attend 
qualities in the category of relation. You have attained to discourse 
[explaining] all this in another place. 

(21) In short, quantity, by definition, is that wherein it is possible to 
find something that is appropriately one [thing] that enumerates—this 
being [so] in itself, regardless of whether “the appropriateness” is exis- 


tential or suppositional. 





elect! ys oly 4. 


Lab Slat Ad 2p Gl Ly cael Jl 2 aay Id 09 05 2k gl K 
Y oF Uy casi 3) Jab Ue ab fade S3] bib vol ad KI ly 
She By de yl Yl Lal OLS, Bo ola Si ais Yat y Si 
[VYA] WS cody hee OLS lel Lash 

Ble Ym cos WALL JL, hat og gli Ul (94) 
i gly gladly le Gly « Loven eyee 12 GT lets 3 WY gud ASM, eed 
ah ede arab glee So cate be le gles ue Y be gh 
GA OD cyl, bc gglen ALS gl glind SV abl ade jlard Anite 
Sly AW Syd SN ape Uy gall Nie gla 5a wey Lall, aly Ll 
Ball (9 gl HLM Canal Gli Apacs AY oS Gb IF sd J XS Gh 
Jade we he Tp el yea Z | gyi as 
GR Be gen UE Lp gl Su 

Jana 3 pi Wl Va Di aed 9S cua di yd (16) 
Sy Sy rail Jo ISG Hb) Sale Ui ti ee BW 
OS chen woth, shall ob pp OLS gos Lal al ele gk. Lal, 
. ieee Geer 

Oats Wee at Med tore oh SS Ugh Cs be by LS (19) 
[VA] doy gl aaa gong dove IW el pee calla ONS Ky « le pear a 


\o 


oa 


10 


20 


30 


91 Book Three, Chapter Five 


Chapter [Five] 


On ascertaining the nature of number, defining 
its species, and showing its beginnings’ 


(1) Itis important that we should ascertain here the nature of numbers, 
their properties, and how their state and existence ought to be conceived. 
For we have moved away from them, [turning] hurriedly to the continuous 
quantities, because our purpose necessitated this. 

(2) We say: Number has an existence in things and an existence in 
the soul. The statement of one who says that number exists only in the 
soul is not something reliable. But should he say that number stripped 
from numbered things that are in concrete existence has no existence 
except in the soul, this would be true. For we have shown that the once is 
not stripped from concrete things, subsisting by itself, except in the mind. 
The same applies to that whose existence is structured on the existence of 
the one. On the other hand, it is undoubtedly the case that there should 
be numbers in existing things, since among existing things there are units 
[over and] above a unit. 

(3) Each single number is by itself a species; is one in itself, inasmuch 
as it is that species; and has, inasmuch as it is that species, [special] 
properties. [In the case of] the thing that has no reality, it is impossible for 
it to have the properties of precedence, of being composite, of complete- 
ness, of being [subject to] augmentation, of being [subject to] diminution, 
of being squared, of being cubed, of being irrational, and the rest of the 
forms that [number] has. 

(4) Hence, for each of the numbers there is a reality proper to it and 
a form in terms of which it is conceived in the soul. This reality is its 
unity, by virtue of which it is what it is. Number is not a plurality that 
does not combine [to form] one unity, so as to say, “It is [simply] as an 
aggregate of ones.” For, inasmuch as it is an aggregate, it is a unit bear- 
ing properties that do not belong to another. It is not strange for a thing 








elethl ye oly 4\ 


[El jail] 
Jr22(s) 


Ye spcagh en tS: Leb, slack bya gens hs St (9) 
AM poe 9S tea yd Yc lone ete LS pe WT AGS Lao gong 

7 OF ey ell B apeay LEM UD ayy od sol gh 1d28 (1) 
agony Y soa gh 2S GL Ul cay ate gts ill b Wad ageey Y sanll gl sd 
gl egy 2B UD em gg c patel OO WG LEM 9b SU layed Ge layone al 
Bo 02 gry SS, ISS § ja5ll bands Ls gle ge oes Ye lyl 
POSTS] BLY yl bid srelobe ll GOS GI Ul wetgloey 
aly 352 Dlrey Wd 9> oll 

PEE Aad Dooly gy cand 6 wb slp aely SG (1) 
gl Slow ab dake Y (ll tilly «UAle Gell ald 2 Cae Ge ay opt US 
Noah ghapaltt ghana JL HAS LIS als a gS 
[V2] ISM Sly peal gl SS 

ctl Bee nel iypey Madd Kae alas yp ely SI g3b (€) 
‘Wee Fo bang BALA VES sacl ely ge le go lp Hse BALI ok, 
say See oly Jeloy Lely pe pigeons gh bom pe ANB oleT epee all 





us a3} 


\o 


Qn 


10 


20 


92 Book Three, Chapter Five 


to be one inasmuch as it has some form (for example, being ten and being 
three) and yet possess plurality. For, with respect to being ten, it is what 
it is by virtue of the properties belonging to ten. As for its plurality, it 
possesses only the properties belonging to plurality in opposition to unity, 
For this reason, then, ten, in being ten, does not divide into two tens, each 
of them possessing the properties of being ten. 

(5) It must not be said that ten is nothing but nine and one, or five 
and five, or one and one and one and so on until it terminates with ten, 
For your statement, “Ten is nine and one,” is a statement in which you 
predicated nine of the ten, conjoining the one with it. It would be as 
though you had said, “Ten is black and sweet,” where, by the descrip- 
tions, the one conjoined to the other must be true of the statement; thus, 
the ten would be nine and also one. If, by the conjunction, you did not 
intend a definition but [instead] intended [something parallel to the 
statement], “Man is an animal and is rational”—that is, “ [Man is] an 
animal: that animal which is rational”—it would be as though you had 
said, “Ten is nine: that nine which is one,” and this also is impossible. If 
you mean that ten is nine with one, your intention being that ten is the 
nine that is [conjoined] with one—so that, if nine is by itself, it would 
not be ten, but, if it is with the one, that nine would be ten—then also 
you would have erred. For, [whether] nine is by itself or with whatever 
else that is with it, it would be nine and not at all ten. If you do not make 
“with” a description of the nine but of that which is described by it, 
where it would be as though you have said, “Ten is nine, and together 
with its being nine it is also one,” this would also be an error. Indeed, all 
this is metaphorical utterance, leading to sophistical error. Rather, ten 
is the sum of nine and one when taken together, from which [as a result] 


there comes to be something other than either. 











lett Oley ay 


AIDE ge AN Liye dl ee oy Lely tll 9S I oe Gels 
God oO), ee Shelly pe bay a ek aS a, 
GE Dept Beads Vaptall GB Waly dae gh Aull 3S Ji pot di 
| yt yale lige tools J 

iad gh coelgy deed Ye cpu) Spt jh Sls Gl Gem yecly (2) 
jptell OU lb Spall gl 6S > US elgg velgy ely gh Laney 
Ey cred abe cdlary pte be dani ad lm IB comlgy deed 
cde laslae| Saal! sland abe Gad Gl coed ghey opul dytall gf es 
cee liga Gladl, of gb GB laay Lally Read ball 9 ge 
SIT SS gb yo sill ght alld glee Gl ably gle glu gl dle 
28) jy c(otn La) Way cooly 8 Aaa ON Ol Gea 3 tall ol ac 
SE AN Ra po ipa gl aol GI Caely go dead Spal gl [WV] 
ull CT al oe CITB aybe SG ol Ley dee I | Se coely 
Me SS ot glee gl eae CI ale GB. Lal collec | i ate da 
Gye gall dent Ree dam at gb MN ihe GSS Vy Med OK Yh 
Wal ld Coy Lal ots YS pay hed Stall gf 1b EG SK oly 
WET 15] soll ancl pyaane Byatt fp Lelae Leal lee AB tis fp las 
Laat 6d lagen jhed leno 


\o 


ea 


10 


20 


25 


30 


93 Book Three, Chapter Five 


(6) The definition of each number—if you wish true ascertainment— 
is to say: “It is number [formed] from the combination of one and one and 
one,” mentioning all the ones. This is because it is defined by number 
either [(a)] without reference to its composition in terms of [the con- 
stituents] that composed it, but only through one of its properties (and 
this would be a description of that number, not its definition in terms of 
its substance); or [(b)] by reference to its composition in terms of [the 
constituents] that compose it, if reference is made to its being composed 
of two numbers rather than some other two—by making ten composed of 
five and five, for example, this would not have precedence over [its] being 
composed of six and four, and the attachment of its haecceity to one of 
the two has no precedence over [its attachment] to the other. [Now] inas- 
much as [the number] is ten, it is one quiddity. But it is impossible for it 
to be one quiddity when that which refers to its quiddity, inasmuch as it is 
one, [consists] of different definitions, 

(7) Ifthis is the case, then the definition [of such a number] is in terms 
of neither the one [pair of numbers] nor the other, but only [in terms] of 
what we have stated. And if this is the case, and [if such a number] has 
had [the characteristic] of being composed of five and five, of six and 
four, and of three and seven as a necessary concomitant of [the definition] 
consequent to it, then [these characteristics] would be descriptions of it. 
Your defining [the ten] in terms of five [and five], however, requires 
defining the five. All this would then reduce to ones, whereby what ts 
understood by your statement that ten is [composed] of five and five ts 
what is understood by your statement [that it is composed of ] three and 
seven, and two and eight—I mean, if you take note of these ones. But if 
you take note of the form of the five and the five, and the three and the 
seven, then the consideration of each would differ from the other. The 
one essence does not have realities that differ in what is understood by 
them; it is only that its necessary concomitants and accidents become 
multiple. For this reason, the foremost philosopher said: “You must not 
think that six is three and three; but it is six [all at] one time.” 

(8) To consider number in terms of its ones, however, is among the 
difficult things for [both] the imagination and verbal expression, so that 


one resorts to descriptions.” 











eles py ol gl ay 


sae 6] le gl ge — Gael al gl — ska ys ely Kory (1) 
dow Sl Ul Sha VA blag YS SAV Siig caetyy arly vey pce 
OR wale yee J ar SG LASG SI bea gl pb y sual 
stl SB ose Sy ASG BL btn gl Ly capa gp ode V saad ol pee 
Sap henty bat SF pital bt gh SN ayo gore ASG 
Me 89 FM ye sl eno AS ys Sel ely chard S$ ye yl al 
See hale de dan by ae) Hal SS gl Jbey oly Lab ate ys 
[SV¥] Adler spur drools oo 

MS GT 1S] — Gy UB Le fp cL Vy Uap jad v0 WU GO Lae (V) 
Chany BN py Ray ly Kae yey Ratty dead pp Sia GOS, — LHS 
WF te deed Dane Sh fe A Leger od 5 Kc Lely GU LY 
Bana ye Spall GLU D pspir GSS dey oe J) AUS Jord Rau 
lb Lao 5] sol cgytly Ady Anny BE 5 ON pple gh ashy 
dP MEL GS cally SHY) Laney dened 3) uo clad! 3] Lid. ole 
Me slgey yeahs SCS LL be coleggall Se Glin rel gl oll july 55) 
Bey i Le go AD, BE Le gh yd Ys all Spall JBL My 

hall hey Joc be Cae, Uaslel toe yp oaall eel Sy (A) 
sel jh jhes 


\o 


Q 


10 


20 


94 Book Three, Chapter Five 


(9) What is incumbent [on us to explain], and [one] of the things 
necessary to investigate regarding the state of number, is the state of “two- 
ness.” For someone has said that “twoness” does not belong to number— 
this because “twoness” is the first even [thing] and “oneness”? the first 
odd [thing]. And, just as “oneness,” which is the first odd [thing], is not 
a number, similarly “twoness,” which is the first even [thing], is not a 
number. He further said [that] this is so because number is a plurality 
composed of ones, the smallest [collection] of ones being three, and 
because “twoness,” if it were a number, would either be composite or not. 
If it were composite, then that which is other than one® would enumer- 
ate it; and, if it were a first number, then it would not have a half. 

(10) Those who follow the truth do not occupy themselves in any 
manner whatsoever with the like of these things. For unity is not other 
than number because it is either odd or even, because in it there is no 
separation into units. Nor, when they say that [plurality] is composed of 
units, do they mean what the grammarians mean by the expression 
“plural”—that its minimum (even though there has been disagreement 
[on this]) is three. By this, rather, [those who follow the truth] mean that 
which is more [numerous] and in excess of one. This has been their cus- 
tom in this, giving no thought [to the notion] that there does not exist an 
even which is not a number, even though there is an odd which is not a 
number. Hence, they are not imposed upon to pursue the quest of an 
even which is not a number. Nor do they set as a condition regarding the 
first number that it should not have a half absolutely, but [rather] that it 
should not have a numerical half insofar as it is a first. By the first, they 
mean only that it is not composed of number. 

(11) What is meant by number is that which has discrete [compo- 
nents] and contains a one. “Twoness” is thus the first number, being the 
limit® in numerical fewness. As regards numerical plurality, it does not 
end at [any] limit. The fewness of “twoness” is not spoken of [in terms] 
of itself, but only in relation to number. 

(12) If “twoness” is not greater than any [particular] thing, it does not 
necessarily follow that its fewness is not relative to another. For it does 
not necessarily follow that that which has a relation to something that 








lets yo oly! at 


aid 8M Sle sas Je ye ace Lome gh Coe Uy cell ay (4) 
Pies SM gail oie Moby coud y Cad sg gl iapcen JB 
5SN ISS core [VT] ad SQV opal Go Al inegll gh LS JAI aa 
YSl eM, oY 5 8555 oul GN, : Sy sae ad I cil ga 
EEE OSG Y 1S OSS gl U lane C6 GL Ls Vag Vy ade 
hati Wi IKI Vl ae CB ly cael pe [Lad] aS 

AB coped pars Lela SOL ght baeell keel Ul, (9+) 
Yy hey sls Shel VY eey5 sl op Wl Jed 20 bie NS oI 
BOE Al gly ad yy Seyret daa be le ate clans ye AS 1b ISL 
Wy (oly Bale Oye by ely yy oily STs Gye ced DEM ae 
Val ol ple G22 LS Sam poh ab ay Oly cose dg aed lout 
Ulan ad Gna VG SI IM ool Bagh Rts dy am pel zy cle p 
£225 5 Sy nb ail SVL yes Ul Sal ge tee yp lane ad ual Y 

9 cool SshigVG ety 0d ey Shadi ad be oul aw Lily (19) 
cad 5g My ee hg WE sacl GS Ul, oadl baal pall 
[YVE]. sol J Lab Jee ly Si 

MES SS YSIS Se om ty SS SG SL ey (01) 
OS Sl ek et ABLE] oye 9K al oe gel Le Lal 





ole «lad. ed” 


\o 


Oo 


10 


15 


20 


30 


95 Book Three, Chapter Five 


occurs to it must have another relation to something else that conjoins 
that [previous] relation. For, if some one thing becomes subject to the 
occurrence of two simultaneous relations—a relation of paucity and a 
relation of numerousness, where, just as it is few in relation to one thing, 
it is numerous in relation to another—it does not necessarily follow that, 
with every relation of fewness that occurs to something, there must 
[also] occur with it the relation of numerousness. {This does] not follow 
in the same way that it does not follow that, because someone is both 
owner and owned, there would not be someone who is only an owner, or, 
because something is both a genus and a species, it does not follow that 
there should not be something that is a genus alone. For, that which is 
few is not rendered few because it possesses something which is also 
numerous, but [simply] because the thing in relation to it is numerous. 

(13) “Twoness” is, then, the fewness which is smallest. As for [its] 
fewness, this is in relation to every number, because it is lesser than every 
number. As to its being the smallest, this is because it is not many with 
respect to number. If “twoness” is not compared to some other thing, it 
would not be few. 

(14) Plurality is understood in two senses. One is that, with respect 
to [the numerical] ones, a thing should have that which is more than one, 
this being not at all in relation to something else. The other is that the 
thing should have that which is in another thing and more. This [latter] 
is the [plural] in its relation to [another]. 

(15) The case is similar with largeness, length, and width. Plurality 
in the absolute sense stands opposite to unity in the manner in which a 
thing stands opposite to the principle that measures it. Plurality in the 
other [sense] stands opposite to fewness in the manner of a relation. But 
in no respect is there a contradiction between unity and plurality. For 
how can this be, when unity renders plurality subsistent? We must [now] 
ascertain this. 








lett oly! 40 


op gh OS UBL Com gad Ob LOY lls gt, oT et gel ele} 4 
Jb al LS GK sm — iS Le|, ds BLE] cGlBLeL A aye LEN 
ib Fo glad y phd Tt dele Sw otal 
oS yiby Tie ge eds GO USL ed Al LSS Nae a Gages td ey 
ee POV Sl hess wee et gl ey Se 2K! 
Be pS ease La ge Ct al gl Je Us Jat ple Ud a Ob fares 
AS ad! LBL ec US gall sl 

Cone Soe yaed WY one SlurLdlea Ll asia 2a 2b (91) 
ALS SEY oT eb glad a Bly 26 ace 3K cand SOAS UL, 

Bp LEN ye ad + ttl OK GI Lael tole le pe SU (16) 
re Bead MGS) AV, Ka STH LBL Gad lay sels 
[NYO]. celidl gill a Lay Gals ot 

ge rsh aabis iam gl lei Halen BSI . 2 ally Jl, plas US (V2) 
Sy sre gl oy alec Vy Glalla ti ala pls oS MEST, al call iar 


[YY] 1a oS il ges I ony TEN ps Samy AS copes aor 





\0 


Qo 


10 


20 


30 


96 Book Three, Chapter Six 


Chapter [Six] 


On the opposition of the one and the many 


(1) It behooves us [now] to reflect on how the opposition between the 
many and the one takes place. For, with us, opposition was of four kinds. 
This has been ascertained, and we will be ascertaining hereafter that the 
form of opposition necessitates that its kinds are of this sort. Included in 
this is the opposition of contrariety. It is impossible for the opposition of 
unity and plurality to be of this sort. This is because unity renders plurality 
subsistent, whereas none of the contraries renders its contrary subsistent 
but, rather, annuls and denies it. 

(2) Someone, however, may say: “This is the case with unity and 
plurality. For it must not be said that the contrary annuls the contrary 
in any manner [whatsoever].” Indeed, if he should [continue and] say, 
“If the contrary annuls the contrary by inhering in its subject, then it 
pertains to unity to annul plurality by inhering in the subject belonging 
to plurality—[this] according to your permitting the [same] subject to be 
[such] that it is subjected to the occurrence of [both] unity and plurality 
within it,” then, in reply to this person, we would say: 

(3) Just as plurality is only realized through unity, similarly, plurality 
is annulled only through the annulment of its units. Plurality is not 
annulled at all in itself in a primary manner, but it would first occur that 
its units would be annulled, then its [own] annulment would occur to it 
[concurrently] with them as a result of the annulment of its units. Hence, 
if unity annuls plurality, it does not annul it through a primary intention. 
Rather, the units belonging to plurality are first annulled from their 
state of actuality so as to become potential. [From this] it necessarily fol- 
lows that there would be no plurality. Hence, unity first annuls unity, 
except that it does not annul unity in the way that warmth annuls cold- 
ness (for unity is not contrary to unity) but only in that there occurs to 
these units a cause that annuls the coming to be of this unity.2 This [takes 


place in a way] similar to the annulment of surfaces. 








rlecsl ea oll a4 


[ ro ledl \coid |] 
j22(5) 
Sly we tsh ple 3 


HO 6 odd sotgly 0 gp MU g 4 GF PE gl edhy (9) 
FHMC ape gl Lead ae Gfameany ld Git oy dayl lel Jo base 
SSS! Ke dy aba Jl US oy GS Hal abe le salvo! 5% I 
Spt Vy BS Lagee reg gl lldy clade he he BS bast oy ll 
| Aadeay Allan, cone pg shail 
: Sta Gl coe dO LGLS eS, seg gl dae gl ol (1) 
AS yoy D Jou gh wall flan acl gS ol gS GS wall og acl | 
Song be de 5S illo all JF gh 550) Jles GI LE yp Laie sb 
2 LAY os lye 3 Jed BS, Hold ed Pye sll OS 
cWlaoy Grllag le Us ST MG ive gh Jat Ul Yl SESS GL (17) 
SNP eyed Shas gh) long gop Je Uy toa, (glad la SS gles 9, 
Nfld IYI ail, ld 5 STI cla I3]ie Sly SS. lary grlled yer les 
CAD Bd ad [VYV] GI al Wee je 55 A olan gl Yy) les Ui 
WS arm gh les cond Ug be tae gt yl flag Uae gl gh SG Y gl 
Wem cle gl all gl le fp dant las Vise gl gb doy ll ahd les 
Tole [WS] bby ire gh ode as Sad jb fla 





\o 


er 


10 


20 


3O 


97 Book Three, Chapter Six 


(4) If it is because of this succession over the subject that unity must 
be contrary to plurality, then it is the more fitting that unity should be 
contrary to unity and that unity does not annul unity in the manner in 
which heat annuls coldness. {This is] because, if the [newly] occurring 
unity annuls the first unity, it annuls it through that which is not the self 
same subject of the first unity. It should more properly be thought of as 
part of its subject. As for plurality, it is not annulled by this unity in a pri- 
mary way. Indeed, it is not sufficient that there should be, as a condition 
of the two contraries, one subject over which the two succeed each other, 
Rather, in addition to this succession, the natures should be mutually 
exclusive and remote from each other, where (due to the essential differ- 
ence between the two) it is not for one of them to be rendered subsistent 
by the other, [and where] their exclusion of one another is primary. 

(5) Morcover, someone may say, “The subject of the one and the many 
is not one. For it is a condition of the two contraries that to both [of them] 
there should belong a subject that is numerically one. But for [any one] 
specific unity and [any one] specific plurality there is no subject that is 
numerically one, but [only] a subject that is one in species. How could the 
subject of unity and plurality be one in number?” (But,] from what you 
have previously come across, knowledge of the true nature of this—what 
it entails, and what is for and against it—will not be hidden from you. 

(6) It has thus become manifest and clear that the opposition between 
the one and the many is not the opposition of contrariety. Let us, then, 
consider whether the opposition between the two is the opposition of form 
and privation. 

(7) We say: This would first necessitate that privation in the two 
[alternatives above] is a privation of a thing that pertains? to [the] subject 
[of the thing], its species or its genus, as you have previously encountered 
on the subject of privation. It is up to you to contrive a way whereby you 
would render unity the privation of plurality in that [thing] which, in [the 
nature of |? its species, would become multiple, and to contrive another 
means whereby you would render plurality the privation of unity in things 
whose nature it is to be unified. But the truth [of the matter] is that it 1s 
not permissible for each of [any] two things to be both privation and pos- 
session? in relation to each other. Rather, of the two, the one which is 
[by] possession is the one that is itself intellectually apprehended, that in 





LAN oy» OLY Ay 


Pee Ke Slee ppedll ge A Ala ode Jo gh 5b (4) 
ine fh las Cad ONG SG GI ley Reg! Se NGS GI LNB aS 


ped Lee Mfllad SM sue gh cla a alba sae gh oY caogy last lla! 


Seals SN Ul, argcoy sl gaol GaN bene eye y aan 
res GS ool abil Lt 9 Kyl Ul Wola tan glo ge es 
ciae\ Se Kale GLa — CSL a ae — GSS Gi Comb cad GUS Lael 
Ugh lg ali oly Ld Fl OEY eT yt gl Lael ght y al 

Lot 5B Lely Sly volte poy pod Sl Js gl fb Lal, (0) 
Mec 859 Nem Bod ely Holy Pye ge sundl, lee GedH OK gl yale 
Aine Nee y SRS -gylb sels [ppoe] fe susll oly yoy 
Aly Mey a ey Ve Red OGL U ld gl bbe Gade Ve Soul Lely 

Bec. Lal ply pad Sy vo gh oy Gall PLE GI Gb y eo (1) 
[Y¥A]Spowly By quail ls lags pelt fo 

OBST yy 1b poe Lge pall Kgl al Iyl sh sl N83 (¥) 
Mera Jeu ol lly pal pl eel pier BG lo aaah lac gl sippy 
ee Fl Nery Jot Gly SG ghasys Lt Lda pre toga jae 
Ot aKdl oY HS sos ol Gab oll pres es 
SAU eens Soda Lge SS STI ola Klay pre lager sory SO 





Gl Prey Ley oF 


\o 


10 


20 


25 


30 


98 Book Three, Chapter Six 


itself stands firm. Privation [on the other hand] consists in not being that 
thing that itself is intellectually apprehended, that in itself stands firm— 
[not being, that is,] among [the things] whose “role”® is to be’ [such that}, 
as a consequence, [a thing]® is intellectually apprehended and defined 
only in terms of what it possesses. 

(8) As for the Ancients, a group [among them] rendered this opposi- 
tion [between the one and the many] as belonging to [that] of privation and 
possession, making [this latter] the primary contrariety. And, [subsumed] 
under possession and form, they placed, in rank, the good, the odd, the 
one, the limit, the right, light, the stationary, the square, knowledge, and 
the male. And, within the bound of privation, [they placed] the opposites 
of these, such as evil, the even, plurality, infinity, the left, darkness, the 
thing in motion, the bending, the straight, opinion, and the female. 

(9) We, however, find it difficult to identify possession with unity and 
plurality with privation.® To begin with, we are here defining unity as nei- 
ther being divisible nor having a part in actuality, while including divisi- 
bility and having parts in the definition of plurality. We have stated what 
pertains to this. Secondly, unity exists in plurality, rendering it subsistent. 
How, then, can the quiddity of possession exist in privation such that 
privation would be composed of possessions that combine? Likewise, if 
possession is itself plurality, how, then, would possession be composed 
of its privations? Hence, it is not permissible to render the opposition 
between the two as the opposition of privation and possession. 

(10) And, since this is not permissible, it is not permissible to say that 
the opposition between the two is the opposition of contradiction. For, 
that which pertains [to contradiction] in [the realm of] verbal utterances 
lies outside [any] correspondence with this [thing] being considered; and 
that which belongs to it in [the realm] of common things belongs to the 
genus of the opposition between privation and possession—nay, it is the 
[very] genus of this opposition. For, alongside the affirmative statement 
stands existence, and alongside the negative statement stands privation. 
In this [situation there] would then come about, [in terms of] what is 
impossible, [exactly] what we have said.! Let us, then, consider: Is the 
opposition between them the opposition of relation? 

(11) We say: It cannot be said that unity and plurality have in them- 
selves the opposition of the relative. This is because plurality [by definition] 
is not that whose quiddity is only intellectually apprehended with respect 
to unity, so that it would be plurality only because there is unity—even 














i 
i 
i 
i 
| 
i 
t 
t 
i 





etl» oly AA 


Lad ily all aeady gall ga ll «AN ls BSLY gh oe posi Lily fad, 
BY roe Jew WSS gS glals y 

jolall 2 leony «Sly pall jo pe Va Lye pid eLeaill ly (A) 
aay Gracy Rlgelly ells opilly pH 5 gray SUMS Lytyy cS 
Cody pAIS oe Wks pall jm By | SHly ably ugly eelly SL 
FM, Gilly Loy oll, Apacll, Ally Lal, Algal, 25S 

PIS Jat, rod ge BU Jad ol tbe Care a gos Li, (4) 
[WA] cal +551 pare sl Lad pay Best aoe Lage UB gl LI peal 
Be SN Gb LE Ly Lie 3 LUG by aN ue 3 opel, plc Set, 
SK FH pall J ioe SW Lal 9S GS Yes Biryey 
SF OK SSIS 2 SU i 5) OLS Set OL y i ut 
Sy pasll ALi Lage ALL Jat hye pal Slyelacl oy a 

c PABLCN A Mee oo Lage aU 5] Sli Gl jee ped Ibe gyre Vly (9) 
29M bas gS ley UES Dale Gece Pb Satis y gL gh 
Ao shl ely glo pl lie yee ge ASLy pall pls acm ye @ Rela 
Al eli WB LS aya LUBA ISB ayny egal QL Hay cy 
Sobel te Lage Ueto 

aT JE Lagilb 3550p am doy SL: SM gl Se ped 4 (99) 
PVS PUSS so tvo $i JL oAah eal Jas Ul la gV ath, 


\o 


Oo 


10 


20 


30 


99 Book Three, Chapter Six 


though it is plurality only dy reason of unity. In the books of logic you have 
learned the difference between that which exists only through some- 
thing and that whose nature is predicated only with respect to another,"! 
Rather, plurality requires that it be understood that it derives from unity, 
because it is in itself an effect of unity. And the meaning that it is an effect 
[of unity] is other than the meaning that it is plural. Relation belongs 
to it only inasmuch as it is an effect. Being an effect is a necessary con- 
comitant of plurality, not plurality itself. Moreover, if [plurality] belongs 
to [the category of] relation, then it would be the case that, just as its 
quiddity would have to be predicated with respect to unity, the quiddity 
of unity inasmuch as it is unity would have to be predicated with respect 
to plurality, in accordance with the condition of the reciprocity of the two 
relations. [As such,] the two, inasmuch as this one is unity and the other 
is plurality, would be equivalent in existence. And this is not the case. 

(12) Since all this has become clear to you, it behooves you to affirm 
conclusively that there is no opposition between the two in themselves. 
Some opposition, however, attaches to the two: namely, that unity, inas- 
much as it is a [unit of] measure, is opposed to plurality, inasmuch as it is 
something that is measured. For a thing to be unity and a [unit of ] meas- 
ure is not one [and the same] thing. On the contrary, there is a difference 
between the two. It happens to unity that it is a [unit] of measure, just as 
it happens to it to be a cause. Moreover, it happens to things, by reason 
of the unity found in them, to be [units of ] measure. But the unit of each 
thing and its [unit of] measure are of the [same] genus. Thus, among 
lengths, the one unit [of measure] is a length; in widths, a width; in cor- 
poreal [entities], a corporeal; in times, a time; in motions, a motion; in 
weights, a weight; in utterances, an utterance; in letters, a letter. 

(13) Effort may be exerted to render the one in all things the smallest 
possible [thing] so that the discrepancy in it would be minimal. The “one” 
of some things is supposed as natural, as with [an individual] walnut or 
[an individual] watermelon. In some, the “one” in it is [conventionally] set 
down,” such that whatever exceeds that one is taken [as] more than one 





: 


elacsl ye oll 44 


Grill dell OS cule By Bam I aes BS go Li GO ly cinry Shes GI 
5S ECA Wt LAN CAL SE Y bcs ots Wa SY logy 
et Age Gl aey AGI Snel dee A ro gle Ml Wetec gl 
aS pyre] AV Alslally Agha Lm ye gs Ly BLAM, aS Ugh 
pK ira sl Molal Ys b Sts S GS Shall pci SS) sy 
celal PR bpd Joi MN pWbiney odie pinegl ial Jy 
AUS aN acts cb fS Clty tay od tee sors oo GI tis, 
Sy eid 9 les BEV Sli 6A a pee Ol gh ob (1) 
NS ASE ISN HENS a tem je iro Sh ay ll Logie 
bed BS logs Jp lool Lb MS Sy city + tl OS ly 
cet — Wee LAY tale oS SI aye gl IS MS 555 ol 
eee ‘ot Fooly SLi 9K gl - WP re 8 plane gl 
RM By meone Slamenll by 2,6 yey ull Bo Sb IEW YB voll 
"Sym ay diy dad BUN 3, (39 dla dy Se STL By gly 
Salil 9S SG Ue eel ot So sold Jew ol ogee oy (19) 
Cele Byam 5 fhe alll Loses say 9K LAN and VK L plas 
by red yo Sach selglals Je aby lo £2 sh ely Ab 2 yh Lipany 





\o 


Qi 


10 


20 


30 


100 Book Three, Chapter Six 


and what is less than it is not taken [as] one; rather, the one would be 
that which is postulated in its completeness. This “one” is also made from 
what stands out most among the things that belong to that genus. Thus, 
the one in lengths would be a span; in widths, one span by one span; in 
solids, one span by one span by one span. Among motions, [the one] would 
be a quantified, known motion. No motion having this description is found 
common to all [motions] except in [those] motions that are naturally 
quantified—particularly those that do not vary but proceed uniformly 
so as to remain one in every measurement, [and] particularly those that 
represent the smallest measure of motion. 

(14) That which has the smallest measure of motion has the least time. 
This is the movement of the celestial sphere, which is very fast; whose 
extent is determined with precision, because the circular [movement] is 
neither increased nor diminished; the smallness of whose measure, which 
is known through the rapidity of the return, is not one of those things 
whose renewal is expected for a time [only], but in every night and day 
a rotation is completed—[a rotation] close to existence,'? renewal, and 
also to being divided in terms of the motion of the hours. Thus, the motion 
of one hour, for example, would be the measuring unit of motions; simi- 
larly, its time, the measuring unit of times. One may postulate in motions 
one motion according to distances, but this is not used and does not take 
the place of the first postulation.* 

(15) As for weights, we also suppose the weight of one dirham and 
one dinar; in music intervals, the flattening of a note by a quarter-tone or 
what is similar to it among small intervals;!° and in [verbal] sounds, the 
shortened long vowel, the geminated letter, or the short syllable. 

(16) It is not imperative that each one of these posited [measures] 
should necessarily take place, but they would take place by supposition. 
It is possible to suppose the “one” of each category as being lesser or 
greater than what had been [initially] supposed. Yet, it is not necessary 
that, if there is among these things a “one” that is postulated [as a unit 
of measure], everything of that genus should be measured by it. For it is 
possible that [the measurement of some] other [member of the genus]! 
is different from all that which had been initially measured. For here there 
would be a line different from a line, a surface different from a surface, 


| 
t 
t 
i 
t 





PAV eA) a oly Vee 


dell Tae Jury cal ey sill Ihe ol S SS Jy cle ly Sp al ace Gal 
Bs ot SIL oe veg [009] ott US 3 LA bly Lal 
OTB By ot BBB ot tld by ot Bt rae yl 
itll SAY ene dealldy Se eG Wy del iun So 
call Bp iets AT fo is XE EE YI Lepasty chell 
Bi jade Bh oe Sl Le pasy 

Voor Aaypall ASU GLI yo Ning ULey BY ge Me hae BYE (4) 
BF yay lade yao pglall gas Vy cade aby Y yall gi Loud by all 
‘Lae S] DAB B99 0 yo Io de cae Sarat oa Ud ogal 
PMG oly dole So 9 SS ole ope Lal Spec ly warily 
broly Soe OL 3 oye aby RM MIS ily MIS, LI IK 
Jol eal Bx Sly ry faten 2 ul IY] BLN Cosy 

sbal Cy Lal sel) slang pao fit Lal uae JAI Ul, (00) 
<sbeall tell oy Lalo on sl goo tot Del [HEN] el 
ITY] spate ate gle SE abt gh spall pall SLI lpi joy 

Cb yall Lily ploy 8 ye ly SOK Seem ely (19) 
Be ey BU ily atl go LOL Sp welll opis Sl Key yo ll 
NS op ol er a KG egy ane vols Lt sha 3 gS til om pal 
CE le bas yg aol ISU SS babe ye GS ST jg lb fed 





ls cele)! ace ee 6p Co gegh »dpshl 


\o 


or 


10 


20 


30 


101 Book Three, Chapter Six 


and a body different from a body. And if [one] line, surface, and body differ 
from [another] line, surface, and body, then [one] motion could differ from 
[another] motion. And, if this is the case, then [one] time and weight could 
also differ from [another] time and weight. For, as this [thing] differs 
from that, it is possible to have yet another thing that differs from it— 
all this you have learned in the mathematical art. 

(17) If this is the case, then the “ones” postulated for every genus of 
these [kinds mentioned above] are numerous, almost infinite. If, then, there 
is a “one” suitable for measuring something, then there would be things 
measured by it that are almost infinite. And, since the measuring unit is 
that in terms of which the thing measured is known, then knowledge and 
sensation have been reckoned as the measures of things; for these latter 
are known by them. Hence, a certain person said, “Man measures all 
things!’ because he has knowledge and sensation, and with [these] two he 
apprehends all things.” It is more fitting, however, that knowledge and 
sensation should be measured by what is known and sensed, and that [the 
latter) should be the basis [of knowledge] for him. But it would happen at 
times that measure is also measured by the thing measured. 

(18) This, then, is how the state should be conceived respecting the 
opposition of unity and plurality. 

(19) What may become problematic in the case of the greater and the 
smaller is the manner of the opposition of the two to each other, and the 
manner in which the two are opposed to equality. For the equal is opposed 
to each of them because the equal and the greater cannot but be different, 
and, similarly, the equal and the smaller. As for the greater and the 
smaller, if the two oppose each other, then this would be within [the 
category] of relation. As such, this [thing] would be greater with respect 
to what is smaller. The equal [in being equal] is not being related’* to 
either of the two, but only to that which is equal to it. It has also been 
thought that, where there is a greater and a smaller, it is not necessary 
that there should be an existing equal between them. This you have 
learned in another place.'® 

(20) If, then, the matter rests at this, it is proper that the first opposi- 
tion of the equal should not be to the greater and the smaller, but to the 
nonequal, which is its privation in [whatever] thing that is of'a nature that 








relly» Ol gy vey 


lane Ls pal clas, LEI 38 bly pote tle etry «qld he Chae 
Lal Jelly glage US Gh aly 355) gu oes Midi Was Lodow, 
2By US yb ole ND ols Sill Id SSG Sl joey « Leal JI, SL gly 
ple dele 3 Lae pa Cale 

Oba it pe SS yh A oles! 35) 9 5 US YS BL (1V) 
6 HL tl Kd 8 JS hay oly Mea GK by. alts Y gl 95 5” 
J2OE by lel 26 «ISU 4 oye, NSM GSU, 4 IEG GY ates Y GI 
chy pd dM Ht SIS SLM GI pq SUB. Lag pla YS Las 
Sy rps poll GS ably bt GS Gl ce bly 5 Kyas logy 
met Lal ISU IK gl eb 3 a adbel wld 6K 

[VPT] 8 pS, bac gh Abie 3 JUL ges gl Com UK (08) 

Orble BS dul AS Lgl rely ales Je ye Sty 03, (4) 
Wplaey cpl dl ST jem VAISS Lage ooly ll celal lb alylet 
cSleall jab Sula 5] Lage ely lac WL meV, eyed WIS «ql 
PWS leased lilo yladl ul « heel ye Lal basi Ins gS 
Say gles bes oo peels plac gO am Co al slay oa gle 
Sl eee Beale 3 lia gb 

IM cod agli oS 5h I obls clas ule pV gh tb (¥+) 
Ag a 9 SG Gh SLE UL caane Py Sloll il p deol plessu 


\o 


10 


20 


25 


30 


102 Book Three, Chapter Seven 


it would have equality. Its privation is not in the point—[in] unity, color, 
mind, and things that have no measurement?°—but of things that have 
measurement and quantity. 

(21) The equal, then, is opposed only to its privation—namely, 
inequality. Inequality, however, is a necessary concomitant of these two— 
I mean, the greater and the smaller—as a genus. [By “as a genus,”] I do 
not mean that it is a genus [in itself]; rather, I mean that it is a necessary 
concomitant of each of the two [genera]. For one of the two is great, and 
greatness is an existential meaning to which this privation is a necessary 
concomitant; the other is small, smallness, from this standpoint, being 


the same. 


Chapter [Seven] 


That qualities are accidents 


(1) We will now discuss qualities. As for the sensible and corporeal 
qualities, no one doubts their existence.! We have also discussed their 
existence in other places, refuting the wrangling of those who argue spe- 
ciously on this. Doubt concerning them, however, arises only [with the 
question of] whether or not they are accidents. For there is the individual 
who perceives that these are substances that intermix with bodies and 
that spread in them. Accordingly, color is a substance in itself; heat, like- 
wise; and, for him, each of the other [qualities] is of this order. He is not 
convinced [by the fact] that these exist at one time and cease to exist at 
another while the designated thing [with which the qualities associate 
remains] subsisting, existing. 

(2) For, [such people] say: “[The*former] do not cease to exist but 
proceed to separate little by little as, for example, with the water that 
wets a garment. For after a while there would be no water, whereas the 
garment would remain as it is. Through this [circumstance], however, the 
water does not become an accident. Rather, water is a substance given to 
separating from another substance it meets. It may separate in a man- 
ner such that the parts separating from it are not sensed, because they 





ladle oly yey 


Atl ah Wao Y'[OLtl) Jaaly aly sao gly att 3 ane ply 
Ss yo \Y 

2) gag ye rt Satya yay anne lb Ugg Lidld (19) 
lage soy Sesh sel Jp cee al sol at ub wi al 
chee Ply cpaall V8 Mh 59 ey ine Keay (oles go Lage Lely gl 
[Ye] WIS ALL lb 5 dally 


[all joa] 
29 (5) 
walsl oS gl 
Ae a WELL, ABI LSI LI OLS Ms (1) 
AE lee Lis ol able 8 Laagey 3 Lal LS dy cLaagey 
LE cod sl ualel os ba Ma layla, ELAS alls yl 
pave ley SME Yd Cet Awe WEE le ali glee ye oll ab 
taf ae aly AU ly ws gp cH a yy rely 55 hS,1,L1, 
«Syed SLELN 6 gly ib pasty yb veg Lh 
SANA fo SG IB Glas SL NS paw ell sds gd (1) 
Ys calle ageege ott Ky cL dls any VEL an a cyl a fi 
Ble 3 Lee BY ST Lae Sila gl page oll Lage ably oA pases 





pee coca co cell, Lal’ 


QQ 


10 


20 


30 


103 Book Three, Chapter Seven 


separated when they were smaller than what the senses [could] appre- 
hend as a separation that is distinct.” Others say that [the water] may 
become latent [in the other substance]. 

(3) It is important, then, that we should show that what they state is 
false. We say: If these [qualities] are substances, then they would have to 
be either substances that are bodies or substances that are not bodies? 
If these are noncorporeal substances, then they would be either such that 
bodies can be composed from them—and this is impossible, since no body 
can be composed from that which is not divided in bodily dimensions— 
or [such] that this is impossible, their existence being only through con- 
junction with bodies and spreading in them. This [second alternative 
holds,] firstly, because these substances would have position, and every 
substance which has position is divisible. This has been shown. Secondly, 
[it holds] because each of these substances would be given either to exist 
separately from the body it is in, or not. If it does not exist separately, its 
existence in bodies being on the basis that the latter are subjects for it— 
[this] since these [substances] are not in [the body] as parts of it, do not 
separate from it, and the body described by them completes its substan- 
tiality in itsel{—then they are nothing but accidents, having only the 
name of substantiality. If [on the other hand] these [substances] separate 
from their bodies, then either [(a)] this would be through a separation 
where they would transfer from one body to another without a separate 
subsistence being true for them, or [(b)] they would have the separation 


of a separated subsistence. 


[(a)] 


(4) If [(a), these hypothesized substances] are found not to exist in a 
body after having been in it, this would take place only through the transfer 
[of the substance]* to another [body]. From this it necessarily follows that, 
in the case of each body whose whiteness ceases to exist, its whiteness 
would have transferred to a contiguous body, or else it would have remained 
separated until it came to be in a distant body, being unattached to a body 
during the period of traversing the distance [from the one body to the 
other]—and this is not the case. As for latency, we have concluded discus- 
sion thereof, showing its impossibility. For it would follow necessarily from 
this [theory of latency] that every body that heats another transfers some 
of its own heat to it, whereby that which heats [another] becomes cold. 








elads| Sa oly yey 


WB Mee od Tyg Erol ory 3,6 YY cae lal eAVL YS pow Y 
GS BBL ppm Joi 

ple oe gl oe Yr d2d Slt da bl gs glad (1) 
at ob splock cad ple [110] oS JI cplec| 2 Ale oS gl bl 
Kay plac en dS GI SS aoe GSS gL tLe pe yale ae 
Ly Sear aie cil I SNL jalb Ril bal 3 'Thecs Y] be 3 Jlew 
sid GSAT 5 9B gd Shyally pla N 8 Wh ooyery GSU KEYG 
Lf see Val WE, 05 yy 8, cpin Ab ay 53 pyr By cacy wld 
A OK GH pod Byler sey Ghat y pl die y vel, MK ol 
leyoy Yl Je Awes] Forgery 0S «Byles 12 Kiel ob aK 
yah [Soe ly Spegll ably ble a Vy clad Od Sf al 
Vlad Se CIO gly Laat YY Uy Leljel YY cab canis 
Herpes MB andl ee pee Tl ee We Sis Wyle GS I Lb 
dye eld Bylo Yo 

JIE ob ol BS Ub AG ee Gres LEI (0 
(alg pace Saas Jit asl, bee So Kaleb yp cad ST 
CFL a be eee lhe pe oy coe em Fearn cl dl la yeme eg 
OF glels pope lbacal Lyya Ep  SKILy LSA, 


vet ae Oe ee sit 
[ Ps gre gall ae 23 cand Syl oy al ie ad Ln pa ae 





\o 


a 


10 


20 


30 


104 Book Three, Chapter Seven 


(5) Moreover, this kind of transfer does not negate the accidentalness 
[of the supposed substances]. For many people have allowed this trans- 
fer in accidents themselves—I mean, transfer within the parts of the 
subject and transfer from one subject to another subject. It would not be 
an accident only if its subsistence in no subject [can] in truth take place. 
As regards that which subsists in the subject, if considered [in terms of 
the question] of whether it would be true of it that it transfers to another 
subject without being separated from the two: this consideration would 
only be proper after [conceiving its] subsistence in a subject. But, then, this 
would not be correct at all. [This is] because the individual entity of that 
which exists in some subject must either be connected to that individual 
subject or not. If its individual entity is connected with that individual sub- 
ject, then it is known that it is impossible for its individual [existence] to 
remain [anywhere] except in that individual subject. If [on the other hand] 
that which rendered it existing in that subject is some cause (that cause 
not rendering it subsistent inasmuch as it is that individual), then it would 
be possible to remove from it that cause and the rest of the causes [that 
would render it existent in that subject], so that it would not require that 
subject for its subsistence. [Now,] the removal of that cause is not the 
cause of its need for another subject. [This is] because the cause of a 
thing’s not needing another subject is the absence of a cause for it to 
have [such] a need, when it in itself does not [have this] need. Hence, the 
removal of that cause is not identical with the existence of the other 
cause, unless the removal of that cause is impossible except through the 
existence of this cause—nothing more. 

(6) [In the latter case,] if this cause occurs, that cause is removed. 
Hence, the thing’s need for the first subject would have left it, and [it] 
would [now] need the second subject, for two reasons. As for the first, 
this is the ceasing to exist of the first cause. As for the second, [this] is the 
existence of the second cause. But the sum of these causes would be 
matters extraneous to its nature, not requiring them in realizing itself— 
[in] existing as that color, for example. Rather, it needs them only [in order ] 
to be specifically related to a subject. If its being a color and its being this 
specific color dispenses with [its need] for a subject, then [its being 4 
color] would not require rendering it in need of a subject. For, to that which 
needs no subject in its existence, nothing will occur that would render it 
in need of a subject, except through a change in its identifiable self. + Tf, 
[on the other hand, its being this specific color] does not dispense with its 








elets| ea oly Veg 


eet Gane Ga ai oa 


3 sla U erases re ‘Exes oll 


lege 23m gl ee yo Goer Mees ol ues Jo al a 15] pl 
Peele Xd ae Y Woe gt oes Oo olyal Vee Y) poe, pnd yee his 
«part Gye ll Ny A asetll ald abe Le Faye bey COI GSI Ll 
den Vl pad paSstllpp ll Me Lat Sib gle oh Gb fg y | 
grea lb pas! WSS aly Gamtll poll ol 9 Yaads i 
Fe od at IS pe tie ye Leste ell NS ped oll ye 
Gees lb Sade elon Y co LM play Ctl alls ace Shy gl 
Vol dell MST pew Shana a SS pl ll yy 
aide Cla iE lB Cll eae ga leper det eles 
None OS gl YS 23729 rath 9 pel Conall US SIy3d log 
ee) SN iii 39) Ved M3 Sly5 

Alb) a3 jbo ob OSS cme US 5 Gee | Ina aye I (1) 
oll EV] Shyye Jat Ul : SoA SV pp lt Uiztoly IWigo tl I 
tee wl oS oLuM siete SI SU cet ages SU LL, SN 
Toe le Le SMU bayerye cd gad Med] glo jae asl ye 
FATS! csc Sal OS, LES pangs seratit ol Ig 


OF aH SA SI Feo gll BI Lele alee Gl J Argon eld (Peegll y. 





10 


20 


105 Book Three, Chapter Seven 


need [for a subject] but relates it toa subject, then that subject would be 
specifically assigned to it, because it requires something assigned to its 
specific self. For, what is specifically assigned does not demand any hap- 
hazard thing of those potentially infinite things that, in their domain, do 
not conflict with each other. 

(7) If it is [asked], “How does it require the one specific thing?” it is 
said [in answer]: “That which attaches to it first requires its existence to 
be properly [realized]* and, by this, becomes specifically assigned to it. 
Thus, this color inasmuch as it is this color either is in no need of a sub- 
ject or else is restricted to one subject.” 

(8) As for the change of specific existence, mention of it carries neces- 
sarily with it an error requiring correction—|[one] from which we must 
extricate ourselves. For, by “the change in specific existence,” [it] is meant 
[by some] that “this” should cease to exist and that “that” should come 
into being without the inclusion of anything of the first in the other. If 
this is the case, then the first would have ceased to exist and the second 
would have become realized, but the first would not be the thing which 
changed into the second. Rather, what we mean by the change is that 
the thing described by the first becomes described by the second. This 
takes place in that there remains in the second something of the first. It 
would be composed of matter and something in it. For example, in the 
question we are discussing, if this is the quality of being a color, then 
there would be something “in being a color” that ceases to exist and 
something that remains. This which ceases to exist would be that in 
terms of which the thing becomes a color—indeed, it 1s “being a color” 
which is the material form or accident, and this is what our discussion 


[aims to show]. 


[b] 


(9) We go back and say: If [(b)] it is possible for [the supposed sub- 
stance] to separate from these substances and become self-subsistent in 
:tself as whiteness or some other thing, then [two alternatives would follow]: 

(10) [The first is that] there would then be some reference to it, and 
it would be the white that has it in its nature to be apprehended—unless 
one is unable to apprehend it due to its excessive paucity—and it would 
be among the aggregate [of things] known to be white. If this is the case 
it would follow necessarily that a vacuum would exist so that [whiteness] 
would be referred to in [the vacuum,] not in bodies. It follows that 





eleds| Sa ole \2d 


dee VSS Gly ane DEL Wepegll Sarge bl ae Vp peo 
gel 5b eam, Lasley pln aM cal Le gio ll OS gy SB 9p go Ale 
Keb SV Bs can ud Wag alg Y Ue gel see 

howe A BS Gall gatla, : JlAd S ype wolgl pa GS #3 ob (Vv) 
cepeal oe gb gall a po cae Gp all ap ti dat Glog, 
Lael Eyer Je pele Uy 

CGI SB «ee GPS I Com tage 8S Lah a gall OI UL, (4) 
ail c gt bt dN y Sea gl yb oy Ub egy be Rew 4 oe cal 
SENG PUNT GS, «pam 8 Sy pas 28 INI GSS ISK! 
pel bay « GOh Bye ple INL Gpegll gl Vy Cos Ul fp tl 
tine La gS SB. ede sta tale ye Sy [TA] BSS SU St daly 
he NU 3S sn ty lng PRM BOK le Bot ei 
ed LOS ell gl alll dy pall gay Ral 90 Jp by «tll a, ple ill 

Lely Ke psig psi dl ada Gyla jlad dem aS al Ly Used ris (4) 
glca eredliy ol ay! 

JW glals 5 ill PL Ky slAlall Lee ool Ul (+) 
OTB . ple Gall ays ALL! he yy Ato lsl dll Sol ye joe 
ty Cpe D pely all ple aK > bey OE 6 Kol phd UIT 
Leproe aus HAY GSK sloie ald 3d GSS « Lal, b poy ad KG! 





\o 


an 


20 


30 


106 Book Three, Chapter Seven 


[whiteness] would have some position and some measure. It would thus 
have in itself measure, of which only very little is sensed. For we do not 
imagine whiteness as having neither position nor measure, to say nothing 
about [not] seeing it. And if it has measure, position, and some additional 
[thing]—namely, the appearance of whiteness—it would be a white body, 
not simply whiteness. For by “whiteness” we mean this appearance that 
is additional to measure and size. 

(11) [As the second alternative,] if it does not remain among the aggre- 
gate [of things] known to be white, changing from this form to become 
something else—[something] spiritual—then whiteness, for example, 
would have a subject to which whiteness as generally known would occur, 
and at another time [the subject] would undergo becoming [informed] 
with another form which is spiritual, in which case that which we knew 
first as whiteness would have been corrupted, its form ceasing to exist. As 
for the intellectually separable, we have indicated previously that such a 
thing cannot transfer once again to become something having position 
and intermixing with bodies.® 

(12) If someone were to make whiteness something that possesses 
measure in itself, then [whiteness] would have two existences: an existence 
in that it is white and an existence in that it is a measure. If its numerical 
measure is other than the numerical measure in the body in which it is, 
then, if it [exists] in bodies and flows in them, [the consequence] would 
be that one dimension has entered another; and, if it were the very body 
set aside [by itself] then the matter reverts to having the thing which is 
white be a body that has its whiteness. Whiteness would then exist in 
that body but would not separate {from it]; and whiteness would not be 
the sum and the quality of that body, but something in that body—[this, ] 
since the definition of whiteness and its quiddity is not the quiddity of 
the long, the wide, and the deep. Indeed, according to this view, the 
nature of the long, the wide, and the deep would belong to heat also. 
Hence, whiteness would be conjoined to the thing, qualifying it. This is the 
meaning of our saying that the description is in the thing described— 





FAV DOAl| Sa oll Vey 


peay slate d SOL lj gl ge Dad shake Wy a ay Y lous vite 
phe ebdb ga UB «aL Il oper foul Le SSR SLIELD otal, 
pocly slaabl fe susizl 
SEN od Jee Mee ALN Gye SF ALL de VS Gb (99) 
APP ey We LIS bole, ST LY Ley dy pull ae ea 
syne Sel ie yas Gl Al Se ymg «by yal ll & AML oS ol 
Fea Bylall Uly ype ljy and ad Lol byt WAL GSS, gel 
pee b eclay + til oe fh ta gloom Val - Gh Ls bth oe 
[VTA]. plac St Us love 
Olea GK he Ba BLA LU Jobe Jer ol Ul, (14) 
PGi pebl slate yb sadly, ogloie GO GB «lade al opegy eyely dl age, 
SE Sy «8 Be Jh9 8 GSS YS Ley ple 8 GO EE coud ag 
My pce ALN ya gall e stll Gl YL abe 28 NI 9S jl ad a 
LIS Y, Syl YY Ad Birey Roll y KS ol, 
vad ley eld vo a) fed lb Bot fp AAS, edd US pyar 
Le Lal bol Seall Gayl Jalal Cale OSG Jy ipa Jal ll al 
PHYS ne Wary a) Leb etl Lgl Byles GaLtI g KS cell be 


N 


10 


20 


107 Book Three, Chapter Eight 


being, in addition to this, something that does not separate from it, and 
not [being] a part of that thing which is the long [and] wide. Whiteness 
and heat would thus be accidents, except that they would be necessary 
concomitants. 

(13) [What] remains is to discuss that it is also in [a quality’s] nature 
to separate. It has thus become clear that qualities that are sensed are 
accidents, and this is a principle of the natural sciences. As for disposi- 
tions, their case is [even] clearer. Regarding those that attach to the soul 
and [to beings] that have souls, in the natural sciences it became evident 
that these are accidents subsisting in bodies—this, when we discussed 
the states of the soul. 


Chapter [Eight] 


On knowledge, that it is an accident 


(1) As regards knowledge, it poses a seeming difficulty.! This is because 
someone may say: “Knowledge is what is acquired of the forms of exis- 
tents, abstracted from their materials, these being the forms of substances 
and accidents. If the forms of accidents are accidents, how, then, would the 
forms of substances be accidents? For substance is in itself substance. Its 
quiddity as substance consists in that it does not exist at all in a subject. 
And its quiddity remains preserved [as it is] regardless of whether it is 
related to the mind’s apprehension thereof or to external existence.” 

(2) We say: The quiddity of substance is substance in the sense that 
it is the existent in external things,” not in a subject. This description 
exists for the quiddity of intelligible substances, for it is a quiddity whose 
role is to exist in external things, not in a subject. That is, this quiddity 
is intellectually apprehended of a thing whose existence in external 
things is [conditional on its] not being in a subject. As for its existence in 
the mind with this description, this is not its definition inasmuch as it is 








ela ds a oly yey 


Sasall g> sh «tN US yo epee 5,16 YAR ee USK, Ld y0 4h 
VAI Lays idly Sols gS « saul 

Mol gl gu AB Lal Syl gl oak y gi bp 25 (01) 
bly fog) aye obs bly olla Le lay cahel etl os 
spo! Spat vale! Wil bball 3 ys ab i olgby dh glad 
[Veo]. peel Solo LSS ye us, 


[Ul jue] 
$3(9) 


28 aly oll 3 


AS yo pl} sb ol J Y by cag t 03 GB lal Ly (9) 
292 IE GB ALEly palm ye ity « Leal GF Dome S13 9 oll pe ys 
Calo aye sla ad gb SLolel 9G GS pal dyad. Lol el al cil 
ING Jal Nal en ely dyin Coal Caley oy 9 SEY ae 
bl ayes le 
foe VSL Bop lal as ae ad ab gl dyed (1) 
PI eo GSS NLS LAL UGB cA ghall yal LZ all dogo ye Leal ony 
SOL Buoy ol ye die eal agi ligeoy BY obs 
So op om DAD pcb deal oby Sill Barges Ul, poy BVIK 


Qi 


10 


20 


30 


108 Book Three, Chapter Eight 


a substance. That is, it is not the definition of substance that it is not in a 
subject in the mind; rather, its definition is that, regardless of whether it 
is or is not in the mind, its existence in the concrete is not in a subject. 

(3) If it is said, “But the intellect is also one of the [independent] 
existents in external reality,’ the answer is that what is intended by 
external reality is that [thing] which, when substance is realized therein, 
there then ensues from [substance] its acts and determinations. The case 
is similar with motion. Its quiddity consists in its being some [kind] of 
perfection of what is in potency. In the mind, however, there is no motion 
of such description whereby there would be some [kind] of perfection in 
the mind of what is in potency in this respect, so as to have its quiddity 
become a mover of the mind. For, the meaning of its quiddity being of 
such a form is that it is a quiddity that constitutes, in the concrete, a per- 
fection of what is in potency. If apprehended by the mind, this quiddity 
would also be of this description. For, in the mind, it is a quiddity [of that] 
which, in the concrete, is some perfection of what is in potency. Its being 
in the concrete and its being in the mind do not differ, for, in both [modes] 
of being, it is subject to the same rule. For, in both [modes,] it is a quid- 
dity that, in the concrete, exists as a perfection of what ts potential. 

(4) [Now,] had we said, “Motion is a quiddity that is the perfection of 
what is potential (in [the category of] place, for example), for everything 
in which it is found,” and then it was found in the soul [but] not in this 
way, then its true nature [in the two places] would be different.* [That 
there is no such difference] is illustrated when someone says, “The true 
nature of the magnetic stone is that it is a stone that attracts iron.” If it 
is found contiguous to the corporeality of the palm of a human and does 
not attract him and [then] is found contiguous to the corporeality of some 
iron and attracts it, it must not be said that it differs in terms of [its] true 
nature [when] in the palm and [when close to] iron. Rather, with respect 
to each of the two [locations], it has the same characteristic—namely, that 
it is a stone whose function is to attract iron. For, when in the palm, it 
also has this form and, when adjacent to iron, it is also of this description. 
The case is the same with the quiddities of things in the mind. Motion 1D 
the mind is also of this description. It is not the case that, if these [quid- 
dities] in the mind are in a subject, it becomes false that they are not the 
quiddity in the mind of what is not in a subject in the concrete. 





elect ys oll yeh 


BOS Hp ahem | goer OY Sell pal odio il ae 
ree Hrd SLE Barges 5b Kiel sl Jel 
Med cham 15} sil ule she 23 GLEN > Lal Jew: 1 gb (1) 
cl Le JUS Ugh Yale SUSI Ly UtKel, alsllacs cya pag 
of BLL [VEN] JUS Jal 3 SG fo deal oly So Jal b coy 
ira oe de Goals 3S gine GN «Jaa Soe Gale pe Se Se 
Lal GSS Mall oe yl cle lay Sayall WLS SLE oS Lal Yl yo 
GS Boe ud BY JUS Le 3 9S Rab feat 3 Mg cial aly 
tal ee 2 Alb voy So le LE BAB . Jil 2 WS abel 
gdh US GLA Oo es 
riot SI GMD adl UIST GS Kal SLI ol sw WS yo (4) 
AN IS ay «BS LS ISY ill Boney ab aes 
Biomed Uli sry 1519 cab! hoy ore al Anti pebliall am 5! 
AL le GT oe lb cadond Le aye dead Uylise nonyy Adon aly Glu 
* Hp boo ly hee lige daly Fo 9 bod! ay SI pared Gn, 
ly hy al oye GS La US 8 SOULS abl Oley gh ALE yp joe al 
Shy Seal 9 LAM lal Jl NS dial oll, gS Lal abl weg 
Sel BSS ol Sle poy 9 Jill PEO yuly ddl ody Lal Jaa 3 
[VEY] gee y deud Stell o bial ou 


\o 


Q 


30 


109 Book Three, Chapter Eight 


(5) Ifit is said, “You have said that substance is that whose quiddity is 
basically not in a subject, but [now you] have rendered the quiddities of the 
objects of knowledge in a subject,” we say, “We had said that it is basically 
not in a subject in concrete existence.” If [then] it is said, “You have ren- 
dered the quiddity of substance to be at one time an accident and at one 
time a substance, when [in fact] you have disallowed this,” we say, “We 
have also disallowed that the quiddity of something is [such that] it would 
exist in external reality? at one time [as] an accident and at one time [as] 
a substance, whereby it would in external reality be [at one time] needing 
some subject and [at another time] in [external reality] not needing a 
subject at all. But we did not disallow that what is intellectually appre- 
hended of these quiddities would become an accident—[allowing,] that 
is, for [these quiddities] to exist in the soul [but] not as a part [of it].” 

(6) Someone [however] may say, “[In that case,] the quiddity of the 
active intellect and the separate substances would also be of such a state 
whereby what is intellectually apprehended of them is an accident. But 
what is intellectually apprehended of them does not differ from [their 
quiddity] because they are in themselves intellectually apprehensible.” 
[To this] we say, This is not the case. For, the meaning of our statement that 
they are in themselves intellectually apprehensible is that they intellectu- 
ally apprehend themselves, even if others do not apprehend them; and 
also that they are in themselves denuded from matter and its accretions, 
not requiring the mind to undertake an abstraction [of them]. If, however, 
we said that that which is intellectually apprehended of them is in every 
respect identical or similar to them, or that what is intellectually appre- 
hended of them requires only that their essence exist in [the human] soul, 
we would [have uttered] the impossible. For the essence [of such celestial 
entities] is separate, and it itself does not become a form for the soul of 
a human. If it were to become a form, then the form of all things would 
have been realized for that soul, and it would know all things in act. This, 
then, would become the case for only one soul, the other souls remaining 
without that thing which they intellectually apprehend, since some one 
soul would have taken sole possession of [the celestial essence].° 

(7) What is said [to the effect] that one numerical thing is a form to 
many materials—not in that it has influence over them, but in that it 18 
itself impressed in this matter, and in another [matter], and in [yet] 
another—is impossible and is known [to be so] with minimal reflection. 








ret ye ol gy 4 


By hel pyoy BIKE VC al bye yah gl 8 8 0 98 (0) 
SM Sper BORK WS Id ppd ye Solybllial ee 
pre By eer ily Los GSGI6 Gl able al he 5 21558 tel 
ing Leys bye GLEN 8 aes opt Leal SG gl Lal Lace U gid cba 
pis ee SCE Y by ep poy StS GLE GS So Lae 
PEM pill Sime IS fi ley pas olalll lt Jyim SK Sie 
Mle GS Lal BL pal Ly Jladl faa Rald ya ol dy (4) 
spe tga WEL WG dle Y ge Iotall SI Loge ge Iytall 9 Soe 
Wn ly WB Jind Wo ya ne BION NGL SWS ane GB ca A 
ul, . Sis Mya gl glow ayecs Y Yt de, dalll ge dayou Lal Yl lye 
Pobre ed A) SL le gl cates Se GK lee peal ag: Us 
sei Vy iB lan \GIB OI Lal aad « ail b Wd song SIM Mg pial ogy 
Sipe Yo chan ob pall ol I Slog, gl] uid ype Yo 
CAM sell JS) aely pid IS pai C18, «ell oi Secale, 
[VEN]. Le pat ty Ael 23 3L caled Coal tl YY 
Fadl Y aS ahh 5y ye GK aaadlt lanl CS gl tle gill (V9 
pln Show a oly gel By taUI CI 9 babe ae 92 SS Gh J Ae 


\o 


or 


10 


15 


20 


30 


110 Book Three, Chapter Eight 


We have indicated this state of affairs in our discourse on the soul’ and 
will sally forth afterwards to plunge into the clarification of this.® 

(8) Hence, [in the case of ] these things,® it is only the ideas of their 
quiddities, not [these things] themselves,'° that are realized in the human 
minds. These [ideas] are governed by the same rules governing the rest of 
what is intellectually apprehended of substances, except in one thing— 
namely, in that these [latter] require interpretations so as to abstract from 
them an idea that is intellectually apprehended, whereas [the former] 
require nothing other than the existence of the idea as it is, the soul 
becoming imprinted by it. 

(9) This [thing] that we have said is only a refutation of the argument 
of the objector but does not entail a proof of what we uphold. We say: 
We will be showing hereafter that [those] among the intelligibles that 
belong to natural forms and mathematics cannot exist separately in them- 
selves but must exist in a mind or a soul.!! [With respect to] those among 
[the intelligibles] belonging to separable things, the mere existence of 
these separable things as different from us is not [what constitutes] our 
knowledge of them; rather, we must be influenced by them so that the 
effect of their influence would constitute our knowledge of them. Similarly, 
if there were separable forms and separable mathematical entities,'* then 
our knowledge of them would be [the influence] that occurs to us from 
them; they themselves would not come to exist for us, transferred to us. 
We have shown the falsity of this in [several] places. Rather, what exists 
for us from them are the influences that inevitably imitate them. These 
[influences] constitute our knowledge. This [knowledge] takes place, hap- 
pening to us either in our bodies or in our souls. We have shown the 
impossibility of the realization of this in our bodies; it thus remains that 
[these influences] are realized in our souls. And, because these are influ- 
ences in the soul and are not the entities of these things, nor examples 
of these things subsisting in either corporeal or psychological materials 
(whereby that which has no subject would then be multiple without there 
being in any way a reason connected with [such multiplicity]), these 
[influences]"? are, hence, accidents in the soul. 


| 
| 
| 








leds yo oll \\s 


bor Eee pill F LO xe ob BIL Lal sy Lb ol 
AE Bee 
Bld Y Blab Sle yt Joa 3 food Ly Lai all 338 (04) 
ote als 3 Poy st AY wid yp Vall gL KS YX 3K 
pl andl bt ict lay Jin eae lee ye Se le 
+ gil 4 ale yo LS 
cA [A] Vth yy EB dane ad yo ULL SINS (4) 
babel Kaley yrall ye GEL GI a Uayel oy pee ON sia ha gl 
of OS bey «ati gl Jie Bau Kgl won catty BLL pst. ol 5am eb 
Sheen Lake ge ped W dale OB Lal lb ogey ed Byles La 
haley Byler Ly pe CIS GJ MS fy Ladle oo po SL LX Ye fe 
Nel ea WS so ell SG Vy cpr fray be ly Lele 9X Ub as 
Yast UY a U lee ope sll «pele 2 lhe rll, [40] bey 
be by eeeges Ob ol Lal 8 LS Jaen gl Ll 3S Udy. Lake pay Tle 
Ye cui HTN, . gt 9 pat Mdl ed « talagl b aS dyer lec 
OK sled shity oly BY As6 LM ais JET Y, LAM all wis 
[N80] ull Bel ap ar Seda oe hae Kap poy VL 





vis Tae ON can 


\o 


ia) 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


3S 


ill Book Three, Chapter Nine 


Chapter [Nine] 


On qualities that are in quantities; proof of [their existence] 


(1) This chapter could properly belong to Physics.’ There remains 
[however] one genus of qualities [not discussed in the Physics] that requires 
proof of its existence and the drawing of attention to its being a quality. 
These are the qualities that are in quantities. 

(2) As for those [qualities] in number, such as evenness, oddness, and 
others [of the kind], the existence of some have been known and the exis- 
tence of the rest have been proved in the art of arithmetic. As for their being 
accidents, this is because they are dependent? on number and are proper- 
ties thereof: number belongs to quantity, and quantity is an accident. 

(3) As for [qualities] occurring as accidents to measures, their exis- 
tence is not evident. For, [in the case of] the circle, the curved line, the 
sphere, the cylinder, and the cone, the existence of none of them is evident, 
and the geometer cannot demonstrate their existence.? [ This is] because 
it is only after positing the existence of the circle that the rest of the things 
become evident for him. This is because the existence of the triangle 
obtains? if the [true] circle really exists°—the case being similar with the 
square and the rest of the figures. 

(4) Regarding the sphere, its existence in terms of the geometer’s 
method obtains only when he circulates one circle within another in the 
manner you have learned; [the existence of] the cylinder, when you move 
a circle in such a way that its center necessarily follows a straight line 
whose [one] end is its center in its first position, adhering [to this center- 
ing] without deviation; [the existence of] the cone, when you turn a right 
triangle around one of its two perpendicular sides, maintaining the circle’s 
center with the end of that side [at the right angle] and circulating the 
other [opposite] side along the circle’s circumference. But, then, the circle 
is one of the things whose existence is denied by those who hold that bodies 
are composed of indivisible parts. Hence, the existence of the circle must 
be demonstrated. As for its accidental [nature], it becomes evident for 
us by reason of its dependence on measures, these being accidents. 

(5) We thus say: As for the doctrine of the person who constructs 
measures from indivisible parts, it would also be possible to prove the exis- 
tence of the circle against him from his [own] principles. With the existence 
of the circle, one would then repudiate the existence of the indivisible 


part [to which he subscribes].® 














reall ye OLY \\\ 


[ pet ned] 
J23(L) 
BULA D AISLES 9 


Ji CLE yy vay er Gi oy coladall gh fail Ur (1) 
ASN MLS poday ASHES le acl Jy ory oll] 

\piae, 2329 ple red WS by Ryo pally Leg Ih rel od WLI (1) 
coll ML YI calyel Ul Ll, GLittdele 4b SU ogey cat, 
WF ly SA 5 sunlly cal poles 

goed LB, a Slat gb cg, Losey Gad poli ow GULL, 0) 
SPrrdl old So Vy «oe dl gs es et pel dey ely BL eM, 55 
Ma My caslall agry aby a eet Ui) LAW ys SW [ubdy] .beogey le 
[V0] SAY sl Ly (eH Sy lull cone gl eayery coe, el 

eagle isle ylal I} wogll dab Je Las gory caer Lb 3S ui, () 
Bo Lita bas US deh So sflo eS o> U5] Mplan ly Seude Leyes 


Doomee de JU all Vilage gli Sp hill NS Sle Ud sll ald ae 

ad bet ote ie luo att Say ovey Ke sgl dala 
lel a sl yalally Wiel dd Yoyo Uy alt ogy cue 

IK aid Iya Y elyel oy yalill Sy te le Ll Jed (0) 


ove Y call eye aslall Dyer galt ca yal jp Sfltl ogey Lad abe oh 





aichinas) per ea 


\o 


na) 


10 


30 


112 Book Three, Chapter Nine 


(6) This is because, if one assumes a circle in accordance with what 
is perceived by the senses, it being, as [the atomists] state, not a circle in 
reality but [a figure] whose circumference is serrated; and, likewise, if 
one assumes a part in it as the center ([for,] if that part is not the center 
in reality, it could be for [the atomists] a center according to sensation); 
and, (furthermore, if] that which is assumed to be the center according 
to sensation is made [one] end of a straight line composed of indivisible 
parts (for this has true existence with the assumption of what is indivis- 
ible); and if the other end of the line is made to coincide with an [indi- 
visible] part at the circumference; and if, thereafter, [the line’s] position 
is changed so that the [indivisible] part adjacent to the one at the circum- 
ference which we considered and first made to coincide with the line’s end 
is [now] made to correspond with [this] straight line’s end, either contigu- 
ously or by parallelism, [directing the other end] toward the center—if 
[all these operations are performed] and the other end coincides with 
the center, then the objective [would be attained]. 

(7) If, [however, the length of the line toward the center] is either in 
excess or is deficient, it would be possible to {rectify]’ this by the [indivis- 
ible] parts such that there would be neither a part which is excessive [nor 
a part which is deficient]; for, if excessive, [the excess] would be removed, 
and, if deficient, it would be rendered complete [by addition]. [However,| 
if by removing [the excessive part] it were to become deficient, and if by 
augmenting [the deficient part] it were to become excessive, [the part] 
would necessarily be divisible when it has been assumed to be indivisible. 
If [the operation] is performed with each and every part® [of the circum- 
ference], the circle becomes complete. 

(8) Moreover, if on its surface there is serration also consisting of 
[indivisible] parts, and if [the indivisible parts] are situated in a notch, 
then [such] parts® [taken] from [any of the parts] on the surface!” would 
be inserted into the notch to seal the defect. If [these] [cannot] enter the 
notch, then the notch would be smaller than they in size. These, then, 
would be divisible, since that which would fill the notch would be smaller 
than they in size.'’ That which is of such a nature is in itself divisible, 
even if one cannot separate it." If, [on the other hand, the indivisible 
parts] are not in the notch, they would be removed from the face of the 


surface, there being no need for them. 








or lal \\y 


yh Ode Je BS pl pull Ne ile Cut BLL AY by (1) 
Sly SM Al Je 5m ed 2 LUIS Leas BI GO, EEL Jasle 
apt Jens dl 8 Sy pare OK 0 LL IS obi vs Ko 
re BO pine lt Y eel Go He dae gh al IS 
Jil LP 2s silly sie SW ile Gb gb Ved L ep e asl 
Vy bl ay eb lbey ob yol gSN LAN ge oat eshte gill ght acl, canary 
SN ge OB «Sp Ree Mh alghye gh Rae Males gaia LDN ol, ay ed 
[\EV]. epi ols 
cay tie th GS Ze beh 5 a gl Sad ed Slab oly (V) 
WB) Whee Y eanken gd BILL oly AGL at Sly ek pat Gly cul aby glad 
B51 CE 85> joe US Jar IBD peniee pb U2} 
Pipe EB lel ye Lal pyat lplee Solel (0) 
ete AS lath ye JEU Ny med gyal ety lb cis we 
cee Lar JBI cil She gill SL aan Se al Bee Bl cyald el 
CPP ey SK ol ly Ahad KG ol ily pee dF 9g CUS Ly 
Nell ele pF yy gall ay ye esl 


\0 


10 


20 


50 


BD 


113 Book Three, Chapter Ning 


(9) Should someone say, “If correspondence is once made between 
the [indivisible] part at the center and [the one] at the circumference, jt 
would be impossible to make [such] correspondence—either in terms of 
contiguity or parallelism—between the part at the center and the one 
adjacent [to the former part] at the circumference,” we would say to him: 

(10) “How would you perceive it if all these parts were annulled 
except [the two], the ones at the center and at the circumference? Would 
there be a straightness between them to which the line could be made to 
correspond?” If [the opponents} do not allow this, they depart from what 
is self-evident and entrap themselves in another problem—namely, that 
one can assume special places in which this straightness obtains in the 
vacuum to which they subscribe such that there would be straightness 
between two [indivisible] parts in a vacuum, [but] between two others 
there would not be. This is error on the part of one who undertakes it and 
allows it to be upheld. But no matter—[such a person] sells his reason very 
cheaply. For the natural intelligence also bears witness that between every 
two parts there necessarily occurs a proximity filled from filled space by 
the [smallest] filled space or by the shortest dimension of filled space. 

(11) Ifthey say, “This is the case; but, as long as these indivisible parts 
exist, this proximity cannot obtain between the two and their two ends 
cannot parallel the two ends of the straight line,” this is also [of the same 
kind of reasoning]. For it would be as though, if these [indivisible] parts 
exist, the rule of proximity becomes different if they were not to exist. All 
this poses no problem to the natural intelligence in perceiving its falsity; 
nor does the estimative faculty—which is, as you have known, the arbiter!* 
in [ judging] sensory things and things that relate to the m—have a repre- 
sentation of it.» Howbeit, indivisible parts are, in reality, things from 
which neither a circle nor anything other than a circle is composed; this is 
[argued] only according to the canon of those upholding it.!® 

(12) If the circle truly [exists], then the geometrical figures truly 
[exist]. The indivisible part is [thereby] annulled. This is known from [the 
fact] that every line is divisible into two equal parts, that the diameter 
is not commensurate with the side of the triangle,’’ and the like. For, the 
line whose indivisible parts are odd is not divisible into equal parts, [but] 
every line [hypothesized as being] composed of indivisible parts would 
[have to] share in that [divisibility] common to every line.’ This is con- 
trary to what is demonstrated after positing the circle. The same applies 
to things other than this. 





i 
‘ 
i 
| 


i 
\ 
i 
' 
{ 
| 





Ki ob ie JA oy GS Ll op push la ol s $8 JB gb (4) 
24 Js Be LAN se el eb Sh Silly « SSN pe lil gs Wy Rela V gla 

SSN Ay SN sill clay Web de cuael Jedhl (V4) 
itd Ge Lee 0b US Iyryrm ad 5b SLU Nae ale gle gl Ke tll Ley 
Ip ee pares mel yo Uy S| Kel yay Fl ES geal LyaBgly Ay 
ing ela EI 8 oe Gy GSR Se cd Sill ILI 9 ALLA a 0 
Ge EB re WE ca Ss8ll jyemey AIS of ed Nay GV SGY Gye] aye 
WSL hoes V ildlene Gat ase Koy gl ogds Vall dpatl gb nee Gh als 
MD [VEAT any pail gl SHI pad SL 

SW agp ee de colal Sy cg Kald gh WBob (9) 
SSCS NS oy Leal OP cps Bb Yb silagl spew Vy calblb tobe lags 
Wa poate y agree CIS LAS op ISIE SS 55 Garey gl eed alk go 
We nee a9 BS slal go gill—aagl Vy adtle agai ke KAY 
VE Ng Ate Nyt Y ete Gl de sayy, — cae Sey ales 
A [oblal] gob be be Ul, cosh pF Vy aslo 

PAD ibang iL Ned Reval SV cone ca gh Cone lily (11) 
eb 5 <5 wl bey Win SLs YL ly agli peel aay bd 5% 
FAL bts oie op Bye Lat Sc sgylece gens pels ete > al 
Waa jb gol Leth WS capt edoy ay abe ay DOE Uy Sas 





OM. Slat * 


\o 


ir 


10 


20 


30 


114 Book Three, Chapter Nine 


(13) As for proving the existence of the circle according to the prin. 
ciple of true doctrine, [this 1s something] we must discuss. Regarding 
straightness and the necessity of an opposition between the ends ofa line 
such that, if the thing in motion adheres to [such a line], it would then not 
deviate from its course, whereas, if it separates from it, it would deviate 
and swerve; this is something that cannot be rejected. 

(14) We say: In the natural sciences, the existence of the circle has 


‘become evident in one respect. This is because it has become evident for 


us that [there is] a simple body. It has [further] become evident that 
every simple body has a natural figure, and it has become evident that its 
natural figure is one that does not vary at all in its parts. None of the 
noncircular figures is [of this nature]. Thus, the existence of the sphere is 
truly [established, and the area traversed] by the straight [line] cutting 
it [through the center]}!® constitutes the circle. Hence, the existence of 
the circle is truly established. 

(15) We can also further show the truth of this. We say: It is evident 
that, if a line or a surface has a certain position, it is not impossible to 
suppose another surface or line to have its position such that it would 
meet [the former] at one of its two ends and at an angle. It is [also] evi- 
dent that we can transfer this body or this line in whichever way we wish 
so that it would become contiguous to that other, or situated in its position 
as though it lay parallel along all of its extension, situated in its place or 
paralleling it. (And it is possible for one and the same body to be situ- 
ated in one position and then put into another position that intersects it. 
What is said of two bodies and of one body is the same.) If, then, there 1s 
only straightness, but no circularity, this2° would be utterly impossible. 
[This is] because, if the movement toward application [on the other line 
or body] is straight, either going lengthwise and returning to whatever 
point of return, or going in the direction of depth and returning in 
whichever way, or going in the direction of width in both directions oF 
in whatever way it is supposed, then—if the point one hypothesizes t© 
be at the center of the surface or line maintains a straight line in its 
motion—[the body in motion] will never encounter [the other body]”’ 


but will [only] intersect it in whatever manner. 











ett po Oley \\e 


Uy ad KS oh cond gh Cdl fecl Ube alll OL! LL (1) 
[3,8] gly le Sl A acliag BL be pb iy AL oes ora 
[VEN] ands KEV pl whad Mole lye oi 
Sud gps AY eld call ogey dry ye Leal 2 ew 8 S503 (14) 
pee dS Gy «gece SE AB Loa pce SG ends “e[leee] eer 
sib AS Gy ON a IM yo 2 Vy cate! BC RY gill 0 
LBSlAI 299 Goo MBS SlLl geal, (pled, 5S eS 
Be law gh as gO aL lly tye ald Goma il LG Ley (10) 
Soe 0g SK) ST Ls gl ST leet aya gh foc ye ald cle ay 
Labi lis |) od Lae Jad GI EK ail Gal jay yl le Abb vel 5 adh 
Siyal aby G loys ag) pNielal We jeer gh SS 
tion dorly wad Sy.” [le] gaming 2 ego ys gl cal LBD oat cage 
al aubly Gand 2 Sl, aebl ol aos HS Cen cere ren 
SSL HTL AY LN he Se layla SG hy Sad GB vel, 
Piss fh Kole ef glace) ob Iga!) Saal RLY le SLE 
OTN] ile eed GS gl ah ye Lege duals gh ei GS deol Glau 
Vale Lae Was SF 9 LN ji lath dlenly de opi sl dat Laing 
GS AS anol by cpeckl oblb Cl A 





BiB Sle ila” Lae ae Blyd 45,8 8 


\o 


on 


10 


20 


30 


115 Book Three, Chapter Ning 


(16) You can postulate each of these divisions in actuality and con- 
sider it. In the final analysis [you will find] that its motion must conform 
to a description I will [now] mention. It is the case either that one of the 
two ends of the line, surface, or body [remains] adhering to its position, 
with the other [end] transferring—this by rotation—or [that] both ends 
transfer, having, however, the characterization of one being slower, the 
other faster. In either case, the two ends or the one that moves alone would 
be enacting the arc of a circle. If the existence of the arc of a circle js 
correctly established, then it would be rightly multiplied until the comple- 
tion [of the circle is achieved], this [being done] on the correct principles, 
If, however, someone were to uphold the doctrine of “the loosening [of 
the parts],”?? then the first method?* would contradict him. 

(17) Moreover, let us also suppose a heavy body and make one of its 
ends heavier than the other. [Let us] make it stand on a flat surface, touch- 
ing it with its lighter end so as to stand on it by means of some device. 
[Now,] you know that its standing [in equilibrium], when its inclination 
to the [various] directions is adjusted, is one of the things that will con- 
tinue, and that, if it is made to incline in one direction and the support is 
removed so that it falls, either a circle or a curve will necessarily result. 

(18) As for the manner of this, [it is as follows]: Let us suppose a 
point at the end touching the surface, which also meets a point at the 
surface. In this case, it is either [(a)] that the point [at the lower end of 
the erect body] remains fixed in its place so that every point at the head 
of that body?4 would enact a circle; or [(b)| that, with the movement of 
this [upper] end downward, the other end moves upward, whereby each 
of the two ends would enact a circle whose center is the point rendered the 
limit between the ascending part and the descending part; or [(c)] that 
the point would move, pulled along the entire length of the surface, the 
other end performing an ellipse or a curved line. 

(19) Because inclination toward the center is only in terms of equi- 
distance [from it],25 it is impossible for the point to be pulled along the 
surface. [This is] because that movement [along the surface] would have 
to be either compulsory or natural. It is neither natural nor compulsory. 
[This is] because compulsion is only conceivable in terms of the parts 
that are heavier, and these do not push it in that direction [along the sul 
face]. Rather, if these [heavier parts] impel, continuity being preserved, 









eel yp OLY \\o 


je corrals al pLBVade ye oly S00] oy lle cil, (19) 


Ly babble SKN LS sltie Jou > 3855) MI STO 


crt LAA gl Layull fe alldy cle SM, caneys Wa ped splat 
ssory Apc gl sb 95S tpl SI, tel Lael oS slice Ue Si, 
«pled gt aay 5 oP EFI HP o9ery THe bly dl Ur Jaw JE Ke 
acd\5 yl da, ASA vol JB 3) LI, dowcuall Spell le lary 
LB Aled Sy Blab aol uty ie Lie ays Laly (Vv) 

Gp ily hey ae LS ps So ec able Lele clas cle Je 
Jae Fo pela Sig Aye A oe BLacly «pay MOM Sab Jae blab 


sppes gl Mle Vala Sascd 


Fi Mal ey cchell p ipl ta eb 0 5 GSU (08) 


Me FSS any BMH oS Bl UL oe Yaad plat ys dled 
Bhi La Se we - 3S Ll, igh bd od edad rl, ob Qoyd 
Bll poly Fob 8953.53) Soil aes — july 
ire asl Asacs Gl bly cLalgl ep, aelasl o5h gy souecll aia LoS 
Loe Las J) [00] SV sl Jae colatl Jsb fe 
Be Mats yous gl Jloead GALA he ge LSI AA N8) 
‘all ody lal cody cabal gh yell 5 SS LLL all SY «dent 
tt ON ys ad ally ai oe GI aN 5o Vn Y peal alts oy 


\o 


Gy 


10 


20 


30 


116 Book Three, Chapter Ten 


they would impel [the point contiguous with the surface in a direction] 
contrary to their motion, transferring it so that they themselves would 
be able to descend: it is as though the higher among them, since they 
are heavier, would seek a faster motion, while those in the intermediary 
[position would seek] a slower motion. There would thus be a continuity 
that would prevent an inclination [of the erect body] to become bent;?6 
the high part would then be forced to lift the lower part [from its position] 
in order that [the high part] would descend. The body would then be 
divided into two parts, one inclining upward by compulsion and a [second] 
part inclining downward by nature. Between them, there is a boundary 
which is the center for both movements and from which some straight line 
would come out. It would thus [through its movement] enact the circle. 

(20) It is, hence, evident that, if, as a necessary consequence of the 
descent of the body, a removal [of position] takes place, then this is [a 
change of position] upward. If no removal takes place, then the existence 
of the circle is more clearly verified.?” 

(21) If the existence of the circle is established, the existence of the 
curved [figure] is established. [This is] because, if the existence of the 
circle is established, the existence of triangles is established, and also the 
right-angled triangle. The possibility of the rotation of one of the sides of 
the right-angled triangle is established, whereby the existence of the cone 
is verified. If the cone is cut by an inclining plane, an ellipse becomes truly 
established, and hence the curved [figure] becomes rightly established. 


Chapter [Ten] 


On the relative 


(1) As for discoursing on the relative and showing how one ought to 
ascertain the quiddity and definition of the relative, and of relation,! what 
we offered in the Logic is sufficient for those who have understood it; 
Regarding [the supposition] that if relation has existence then it® would 
be an accident, this is undoubtedly the case, since this is something not 
apprehended intellectually by itself but always apprehended of one thing 
[in terms of] another thing. For there is never a relation which is not an 


accidental occurrence. 








eleds| oy oly \\7 


B35 Gl Kad ely WSG> OE le fads JL Late Ge Gado oly hl 
Sail Bleny thal than SII, opp Sm lle Jal gn 5h Law ANU Ge 
Hm GSS crows Fo Pls! Lt I BL glut fa aes gl ye he ps 
cla Jello os tpg Led shall oll Jos ee Gite i) Lee pad 
jbl aad Ue pcs Las a es 28y Sal Sp wo > Lay 

15 Spi ol by 99 ob dg} path glaouil ge oil obal gud (1+) 
eel lll ayn 

Bl, OMEN SOF splat 2 BLAM goedl oS sgl od BB (19) 
2d lb bey See raed agli Jo ASI gabe sol yyo shee caty « Lal fglpl 
Pieh om eat eee Cee Gael ee 


[poll jas] 
cho? (5) 


all 


Lal Rabe gets gl con ASA Slay ball 3 Jail Ly (9) 

BLOW 2,3 Nal ail Lily ange gh OS dled a slid Gal  Leasey LOY, 

Fao Lal fi Lil ails Joa Lp 963] cad ULAY pl Ula « Lays gS oye 
Ae yle gry Vddlol Yale fet Jl 


\o 


<n) 


10 


20 


30 


35 


117 Book Three, Chapter Ten 


(2) Its first occurrence is to substance—as, for instance, father and 
son—or to quantity. Some [relatives] differ in their two terms, and some 
agree. Those that differ are like the half and the double; those that agree 
are like the equal and the equal, the proximate and the proximate, the 
corresponding and the corresponding, the touching and the touching. 

(3) With some [of those] that differ, the difference is definite and 
ascertainable—as, for example, the half and the double. With some, it is 
not ascertainable but is based on what is ascertainable—as, for example, 
the multitudinous, the whole, and the part. With some, it is not ascer- 
tainable in any manner—as in the case of the excessive and the deficient, 
the part and the aggregate. The same obtains when relative occurs in 
[another] relative—for example, the more excessive and the more defi- 
cient, for the more excessive is measured against something that is also 
excessive in comparison with a deficient. 

(4) Among the relative[s], some belong to quality. Of these, some 
agree [in their two terms] (as, for example, the similar), and some disagree 
(for example, the fast and the slow in motion, the heavy and the light in 
weights, and the sharp and the grave in sounds). Likewise, in all these 
[as in the case of the more excessive and more deficient] one relation may 
occur in another. [Relatives also belong] to place (as, for instance, the 
higher and lower), to time (as, for example, the prior and posterior), and 
[to other matters] of these descriptions. 

(5) It is almost [always] the case [that] relatives are confined to the 
divisions of equality; to those pertaining to excess and deficiency; to action 
and affection, whose source is power; and to those [related] through 
imitation. As to those pertaining to excess, they belong either to quantity 
(as you know), or to power, as in the case of the vanquisher, the conqueror, 
the repeller, and the like. Those pertaining to action and affection are 
like father and son, the cleaver and the cleaved, and similar things. Those 
pertaining to imitation are like knowledge and the [thing] known, sensa- 
tion and the [thing] sensed. For between these two there is imitation, for 
knowledge imitates the state of the thing known, sensation the state of 
the thing sensed. But the measure and limit of this is unascertainable. 

(6) Relatives, however, may be encompassed in one way. The relatives 
may be two things that do not require some other thing from among the 
things that have residence in the relative by virtue of which a relation 








ele yp LY \\Vv 


gee plas Sh) clly Mf aged Ways Ssh (1) 
1 elo casi, ares) A [atoll] ee Ls Aney « pe pall 
wrhadly Lally py lledly jllally cobadly ciladly oluly cy lull 

pe Aany tally ead gerry oyrree OE LF HE yy (1°) 
ei od by bly Sly GLEN SE gi oe ge al] gine 
MIT shar J Shar By lb) US aLaLly arly Gablily utlpl oe ae 
[VOV]- Bh eke Lal tly GJ bith tly go Ul ag VI gb ay 

BOB aan AGLI Ge Hd GS 2 wo be Shall yy (4) 
MS, colpolll Ja ably gh Vl o ably fal, Li be tly 
pTlS ll ay «Jel, Je VE GY ay Le] LB BLE] YO a 
oledll ord bey aes 

cghatlly BalGh sly Balall LSI 3 spares SbbLall 9S sy (0) 
Sy Lebarbyh LG SEY Uy cigdl ye Lareny Staal, Jal Sly 
SLabYy aay My LS Fy Pilly pally IW! for byall LB Ly cals LS” 
by esl, WEG SRL Sly cells atl Ly pail, ual, 5M, AS 
He Shou uadly cpphell Le She plall gb abe Lee 5B fe ely 
ody 0 yds joa, Y Ia Gh he capped 

Ole Len Y git gblall 9G oid cage yp pert wb oblall I (4) 
Lol Lg de ay fo lal b Lol YN Lay thet 





As feiy see 


\0 


Qn 


15 


20 


25 


30 


118 Book Three, Chapter Ten 


between the two would occur. An example of this is that which is to the 
right of [something], or to the left of [it]. For in that which is to the right 
of [something] there is neither a quality nor any other resident state of 
affairs through which it becomes related [as] being to the right of. [There 
is nothing that makes it so related] other than [its] very being to the right. 
[On the other hand,] it may be required that there should be in each of 
the two related things something by virtue of which it becomes related 
to the other,® as in the case of the one who loves and the one who is loved. 
Thus, there exists in the lover an apprehending state,° which is the prin- 
ciple of the relation, while in the beloved there is an apprehended state 
which renders him loved by the lover. Such a thing may exist in one of 
the two things but not [in] the other, as in the case of the knower and the 
[object] known. For there has occurred in the essence of the knower a 
quality—namely, knowledge—in terms of which he became related to the 
other. But no other thing has occurred in the essence of the object known: 
it became related only because something in the other had occurred— 
namely, knowledge.’ 

(7) What remains for us here concerning the relative is to know 
whether relation is an idea that is one in number and subject matter, 
existing between two things but having two aspects,® as some—indeed, 
most—have thought, or whether there is for each of the two related 
things, in being related, a special property. We say: 

(8) Each of the two related things has in itself an idea with respect to 
the other, which is not the idea the other has in itself with respect to [the 
first]. This is evident in things whose related [terms] differ,’ as in the 
case of the father. Its relation to fatherhood, which is a description of its 
existence, is in the father alone. But it belongs only to the father with 
respect to something else in the father. Its being with respect to the 
other does not make it exist in the other. For fatherhood is not in the son. 
Otherwise, it would be a description [of the latter] from which a name 
for him is derivable. Rather, fatherhood is in the father. The case is simi- 
lar with the state of the son with respect to the father. There is nothing 
here at all which is in both of them. Here, there is nothing but father- 
hood or sonship. As for a state posited for [both] fatherhood and sonship, 
this is something unknown to us and has no name. 

(9) If [such a state of affairs] consists in [the fact] that each of the 
two has a state [all its own] with respect to the other, this is similar to the 
case of the swan and snow, each of which is white. For it is not necessary 
that this [state in each] is one thing. Nor does [the state in each] of being 





old yw Oley \\A 


Bhar a she ame al el gh AAS Gell OB ped Eel old 


toy ob Fol Uiget boy gl at Wy 


ao GElell 9 1 Gytally [VO] BSbal fe el Il Lali a eves 
ABD Byte char SN a SyaeRp Gytall By LOY lar 2ST) 
23 plldl GB -psbaly ltl fe GAN yo aod! Goel 2 tll be oS yy 
Sl Gp jared pslally 5 Gl Blas ly gle cphall a RASS. Jam 
spill 2b SUIS b fae bd bles le lf she 

aaa oly Zan LEY Jo ayl Gl LAL yl je lige WA Gilly (V) 
iv) Spa ysl J cll jan ab WS ghey Gt op ory cp perlly 
: Syed Sable] baels golall » vol, 

Pod SUM rlil t B pwd ob bla y vol SL (9) 
AS BLY LEM yg ge Udy Ad LBL Quad 9 STW call all 
LL IW 92 Lil Sy corey OVI — 005g Hey ty ~ ayStl CALE gb 
iM SN 6S oe SV ES ay AM Slt Ul 
US MB agM enlarged ley Ci YL GY God 
Ab Lao 90 CN sly ed bak eb A UL etal gl Je Lal 
[V00]. nal Vy Wipe lb sglly By 5N Ae pin ge le Lily vzs gliy! V] Lge 

ISS lags FN I LIL Sly Lge ly JOS eS GHG (4) 
SS secdy cael Cb IS gh com pad Sb saul lly ell » wey 


\o 


ery 


10 


13 


20 


30 


119 Book Three, Chapter Ten 


with respect to the other render [the relation] orle, for that which belongs 
to each with respect to the other belongs to that individual and not the 
other; [it is possessed,}] however, with respect to the other. 

(10) If you have understood this from what we have given you by way 
of example, then know that the [identical] state of affairs [obtains] in the 
rest of the relatives that do not disagree [in their two terms]. It is, how- 
ever, in this place that most [of what is] problematic occurs. Thus [for 
example] since, in the case of the two brothers, one has a state relative to 
the other and the other has a state relative to the first, and since the two 
states are of the same species, [these two states] have been reckoned to be 
one individual. But this is not the case. For to the first belongs the brother- 
hood of the second—that is, he has the description of being the brother of 
the second. [Now], this description is his, but [only his] with respect to the 
second. This is not the [same] description of the second numerically, but 
only in species, just as the case would be if the second was white and the 
first was white. Indeed, the second is also a brother of this first because 
he has in himself a state predicable with reference to the first. 

(11) The case is similar with touchability in two touching things. For 
each of the two [things] touches its companion in that it has [the state] 
of touching it which exists only with respect to the other if the other is 
similar to it [in being in touch with it]. You must never at all think that 
an accident, one in number, exists in two receptacles so that you would 
need to apologize about this by making “accident” an equivocal term, as 
those weak in discernment have done. 

(12) But what is of much greater importance than this is for us to 
know whether relation in itself exists in concrete things! or whether it 
is something only conceived in the mind, being like many of the states 
that adhere to things when intellectually apprehended, after they are 
realized in the mind. For, when things are intellectually apprehended, 
there occur to them in the mind matters that did not belong to them 
externally. They thus become universal and particular, essential and 
accidental; they become genus and differentia; and they become predi- 
cate and subject, and things of this order.” 








etd op old! SA 


gop WN 48 FN Bh ell ly IL GY cael ales SI II Lill 
PU Sola aS oY 

Y Al clad ple Co SEI aye col oli Lk Mae cage ae (1+) 
Ale ye oN gO ab  mogll Ihe 9 IRAN ST eb Uy - doe 
65 op SO SI LM ral De Lal £50 38 OAT I etal 
Ki Grey ab gi SO eT IS Gb CIS aly el Ladd Lae vel, 
caval, ptt ey ld pecly «SN Sd ell SS, ab Gee gl ald «gt 
IA the gel al Lad ff al Ny Gaul BOI GS Sep th J 
JN lola dye ob 8 [ae] 

dl Aa Lal Ale pe vol SO cuenlel J Auld AS, (9) 
Loe gl il gle 6 ae SV gS ol 23 Ul ola Wass Y IL 
Lath aya aller (3 ald yo id GI cle, Fe allow 2 OK saddls oy 
[YON]. nl riences 

Pirgorye ud SEL fo Uber cle ye lela A SS (0H) 
BL LEM GS NDA ye STOR «Selo anes UL pl gl bel 
Fag sol aall 2 Y Od cls I] LAV gb S Jill 3b Jat gl aw elie 
Jarre SSS y juaby per Ky doy Lily Ajay AE ped UE y Y 
«geal tha je Bh, 62 9g 





led AR ale? 


\o 


10 


15 


20 


30 


120 Book Three, Chapter Ten 


(13) Some people have thus maintained that the reality of relations 
also occurs only in the soul when it apprehends things intellectually, 
Another group said, “On the contrary, relation is something found in 
concrete existence,” and argued, saying, “We know that this is, in exis- 
tence, the father of that, and that that, in existence, is the son of this, 
regardless of whether this [fact] is intellectually apprehended or not. We 
know that plants seek nourishment and that seeking is conjoined by some 
relation. Plants do not, in any manner, have intellects or apprehension. 
We know [moreover] that the sky is in itself above the earth and that the 
earth is below it, regardless of whether or not [this] is apprehended. 
Relation is nothing but the like of these things to which we have alluded. 
It belongs to things, even if it is not apprehended.” 

(14) The second party said: “If relations were to exist in things, then 
from this it would necessarily follow that relations become infinite. For 
there would then exist between father and son a relation. This relation 
would exist either [in common] for both, for only one of them, or for each 
[separately].'° [Now,] inasmuch as fatherhood belongs to the father, occur- 
ring accidentally to him (the father being subject to its occurrence), it 
would be related, the case being similar with sonship. Thus, there would 
be here a connection between fatherhood and the father and between son- 
ship and the son outside the connection between father and son. It would 
then follow necessarily that for [each] relation there is another relation, 
and that this would proceed infinitely, and that among relations there 
would also be those that would constitute a connection between an existent 
and a nonexistent, inasmuch as [for example] we are posterior to the 
centuries that preceded and have knowledge of [the future] resurrection.” 

(15) What resolves this difficulty" in both ways [of the argument] is to 
turn to the absolute definition of the relative.!° We say: The relative is that 
whose quiddity is predicated only with respect to another. Thus, anything 
among concrete things that happens to be such that its quiddity is predi- 
cated with respect to another belongs to the relative. But among concrete 
things there are many things that have this description. Hence, the rela- 
tive in concrete things exists. If the relative has another quiddity, then one 
must separate from [it] what [the relative] has by way of the intellectually 





e\ees| S ol gy \Ne 


cls 1b) nell 9 Lal oud Ui ObLaY ee gl Ned 2 (7) 

ds pet 13, Wecaly Qhell aye y LEY 1B egy LAM 
ols pia «Singh al fie ks sprgh 2 ald gly ld Ol age 9 aagl 
Vy epee dary Jae OLA pay LRU] ae lal gy «edad ley ol 


Asi ly LAW LoS] say WII CL | MeL Vda SEI cad, 
peg AN ioe ye LAN I) | NaI ty (16) 
sao alli 38% tLe! Vly M op GS GAB SOULE fs Y gl ats 
cb Royle yt SN ag Sam pd. ages aerly 5) gl Leman | lag do gee 
ily MI a iy SW RE G3 Lyd ded! MS, Lan PW yee All 
Gel BL el BLEW 4 5G gl cond. Gly A gy SU Rill Ge dele Me 
oy Be a b obLeyl 5 al [Von] ase hy All pF San gly 
ADL yshley LES SN gyal Srl gyeade gos LSS ppamey ory 
Ras Slab 2 eer ol Lee opts al ye Apttl ay Jot ally (12) 
SLEW 9 gd SG cone i pLBL SUE Le Cabs call po hall gf 1,8 


SLED Solel yee ttelbdo 2 Lal Jb Lal Cee K 


Belial Sled gO ob ope SLM B GLal deal aby 3 Ses 


ADL Jytre ge Kl copy one dl lid Joell call pal L seu gl aed 


A OS Sy’ 





\o 


oar 


10 


20 


30 


12] Book Three, Chapter Ten 


apprehended idea with respect to another. The “other” [in turn] is intel. 
Jectually apprehended only with respect to another by reason of this 
idea.!® And this idea is not intellectually apprehended with respect to 
another for any cause other than itself but is, as you have learned, in 
itself related. Hence, we do not have an essence and something else which 
is relation. Rather, there is only that which is related in itself, without 
another relation. In this way, relations become finite. 

(16) As for this idea (which is in itself related) being in this subject: 
inasmuch as it is in this subject, its quiddity is intellectually apprehended 
with respect to this subject. It has [however] another existence—as, for 
example, the existence of fatherhood. This existence is also related. But 
the [former] is not the [latter]. Let, then, this [latter] be an accidental 
occurrence arising from the [former] as a concomitant of the relative, 
each of the two being related in itself to that to which it is related, with- 
out another relation. Thus, being predicated is related in itself and being 
fatherhood becomes predicated in itself. For this very [state of] being 
related in itself does not require another relation through which it 
becomes related. Rather, it is in itself a quiddity that is intellectually 
apprehended with respect to the subject. That is, it is such that, if its 
quiddity is intellectually apprehended, it would be in need of something 
else to be brought to the mind, with respect to which it is apprehended. 

(17) Indeed, if this is [now] taken as a relation in concrete things, it 
would exist with another thing, [conjoined to it] in itself, not by some other 
conjunction that follows it, it itself being the very “with” or conjunction 
specified by the species of that relation. If intellectually apprehended, 
its apprehension requires the presentation [to the mind] of something 
else with it. [This is] just as [the case] with the quiddity of fatherhood 
inasmuch as it is fatherhood, for it itself!’ is related in itself, not by some 
other connecting relation, [although] it is for the mind to invent some- 
thing between [it and that to which it is related], as though this is a 
conjunction external to both of them. [This, however, is something] 
which conception itself is not compelled to do, but [it] is some other con- 
sideration of [those] considerations enacted by the mind which attach to 
[the quiddity after conception]. For the mind may connect things to things 
according to the diverse [possible] ways of considering [them], not out 
of necessity. In itself [fatherhood] is [simply] a relation, not [something 
related] by a relation, because it is in itself a quiddity, intellectually appre- 
hended with respect to another. 











eletll oy OL VV) 


pt eet Oe Lil ste ad Cell lang «gall Le et oe Sh 
Jy BBLEYN gp py Old She jucld che be le aI lice gp fp cana 
ODLEY Nal Ie ye God Gl LoL Vl, lee dhe 

WL em oP Ep eal Neb dy SLAM gall be GSU, (19) 
phy Se il Samay cP a2 hl Ie Gh lal Wyte Coal pio gll he 
op Lae WS Kb alld pad) $y Lae Lal oye gl ald cag ope 
Bld Sla pl Jeli Gir keels, Sig Stal 
ab SUI Molar ole agl o Sly esl [VOV] SENGeos nies 
Ph Bae Wp pres G1 Lal cle pul alld Glas 9 SU be at 
ferlnes  al CMie LS] too ga Gl pall I ALI Myiee Rabel 
sag pal es Jin TS pall 3 pare ol Ul! 

LY a1 STS wow wb Obell 9 Bla. ine 51 15) (AY) 
Cool fe IS BLY ll pgs Read all gl all paid aad Jp anc gs! 
\Fl0d cag a am Syl Kale HIS ST yt lal e Jin gl 
Lage da ld dar dS les Iplesoe gl Jaaly dal gp sleLob Y ly Ble, 
« Saal Uflnky SN Rea OL LEE ye ot Led be cypeill pad ad) dent, 
oP Need 3 Ub Sayy pall YOLEN yy pla HLBk +t ga 28 Jill gb 
wyll Jeli Jas glad al YY lol Y alo! 


\o 


10 


15 


20 


50 


122 Book Three, Chapter Ten 


(18) There are, here, many relations that adhere in themselves to 
some essences, not by virtue of some other occurring relation, but along 
the course followed in the adherence of this [type of ] relation to the rela- 
tion of fatherhood. This is like the adherence of relation to the state of 
knowledge; for it would not be adhering to it through another relation 
inherent in things themselves, but [it would] adhere to it in itself, even 
though the mind may at this juncture invent some other relation. 

(19) Now that you know this, you know that the relative in [external] 
existence exists in the sense that it has this definition. This definition 
necessitates only that the relative should be an accident which, when 
intellectually apprehended, would have the above mentioned description; 
it does not necessitate that it should be a self-subsisting thing, one [in 
number], connecting two things. 

(20) As for predicating [the quiddity of the relative] with respect to 
another, this occurs only in the mind. Hence, it pertains to intellectual 
relation, whereas existential relation is what we have shown—being, 
namely, that which is such that, if it is intellectually apprehended, its 
quiddity is apprehended with respect to [another]. As for its being in the 
mind, [this] consists in its being intellectually apprehended with respect 
to another. Thus, [relation] in existence has one governing rule and in 
the mind another rule—[this] inasmuch as it is [something] in the mind, 
not insofar as relation is concerned. It is possible to have invented rela- 
tions in the mind by reason of the special property the mind has with 
respect to them. 

(21) Thus, the relative in concrete things exists. Moreover, it has 
become evident that its existence does not necessitate that for [each] 
relation there should be another [relation] ad infinitum. And from this it 
does not necessarily follow that whatever is intellectually apprehended 
as a relation should have a [corresponding] relation in existence. 

(22) As for [the question of] the temporally prior and posterior— 
one being nonexistent and so forth—[the answer is that] priority and 
posteriority are both relations between existence when it is intellectu- 
ally apprehended and the intelligible that does not derive from proper 


existence.'® Know this. 








eledll ye oly Yl vw 


chia ye gol LAV Y (glad clyall fam jos 3S obbLa| kyay (1A) 
Jo [VON] ely typ LOW LEY ode Sb yp Nabe Gow bb J 
Yo rll at og Lol eV 9 SY Yb Ley BLY Sd 
ie ioLo| bap sol Ley Jaa oS oly «lps 

Sh gk tae Spall B GLAll gl caye ab a cde oF aly (14) 
36 Jie 15) Loe Voge gl 9 hall gS gi ey Y abl thay cod teal 
feet oy Mealy Lely ISI tid Ll gS Gl Gory Vy <a, SON Real 

‘Mall BUOY, yo NS gS Jed P dary Ub tal Jal Ul, (1+) 
Lily Solid Kall Jytee Gh far IS) too AS pty colty dre Jl BLEYL, 


Jill Baby Ko apes Bab cope rab fic Kok Jel BAS). 


is foe OULD Jill 2 pony LOY dm ye V Jal B oe YS 
Ngee fel Sh eth Ce fell Yee, 

Bee 9S jl Cae Vergy 3 ily Oke 2 oye gi] Glalb (19) 
53S line Jn, Le VK ol Lda ye pi py Aly gh Ble] J! WLe| 
Bole! oye 3 8 

pa gb US AT by pyaee Lael gli d SU zl Ll, (1) 
Sgersll jo Byte pad gill Atal ogy «Jae NB] oyerall op Glala Ul, 
[Vis] aakels § old 


\o 


10 


123 Book Three, Chapter Ten 


(23) For a thing in itself is only prior in terms of something existing 
with it. This type of priority and posteriority exists for both terms [of the 
relation] in the mind. For, when the form of what is prior and the form 
of what is posterior are presented to the mind, the soul apprehends this 
comparison as existing between existents within it, since this comparison 
obtains between two existents in the mind. Before this, however, a thing 


‘in itself cannot be prior; for how could it be prior to nothing existing? 


Hence, whatever among related things is of this order, their relation to 
each other is in the mind only, having no subsisting idea in existence 
with respect to this priority and posteriority. Indeed, this priority and 
posteriority is, in reality, one of the intellectual ideas, one of the rela- 
tionships imposed by the mind, and one of the aspects that occurs to 
things when the mind compares them and refers to them. 





elecll je oLyy! aay 


CF Pe Way See ope eit TN pos ped Aen Oo etl ole (1) 
pig pe alll Be planl Lab faith 9 le bal ayy SUL pl 
dali ode ISS) cad yo gorge oy Madly Reali oe puell oles SUN Sy yey 
poy GSS «ean dads 9 + tI GK Nd JS Ul, . atl 9 ose yew 
Seal 8 els Leb Jett ode le bball yp QS LG Sayre + oY Ue 
pall ep SU, path as Eom oy lb sae WY appeal GB yay Sony 
CULM, fea yoy MN oletdl jy Ail Gla» per aL 
Ngdl gltly fall Yes ould aL LON frat St 


















































Q 


10 


20 





BOOK FOUR 
Consisting of three chapters 





Chapter [One] 


On the prior and the posterior, and on origination’ 


(1) Since we have discussed the things that [relate to] existence and 
unity in a manner akin to species, it behooves us [now] to discuss the 
things that [relate] to these two in a manner akin to properties and acci- 
dents that are necessary concomitants.? We will begin first with the 
things belonging to existence, and of these [we will begin] with priority 
and posteriority. 

(2) We say: Although priority and posteriority are predicated in 
many ways, these, in an ambiguous manner,’ almost unite in one thing— 
namely, [in the fact] that to the prior inasmuch as it is prior belongs 
something not possessed by the posterior, and that nothing belongs to 
the posterior unless it [also] exists for the prior. The common [meaning] 
prevalent with the masses is the prior in place and time, where being 
prior and “before” pertains to things that have order. Thus, [the prior] 
in place is that which is closest to a determinate starting point. It would 
thus have [the characteristic] of coming after the starting point where its 
own successor does not, [the latter] succeeding the starting point after 


— 124—- 








day| SASL 


Jed KS lpg 


[JY jell] 
p22 (1) 


Syabl oy SUM, pall 2 


Pla bye tae Sly oes] oe cil Gl ayll fe KE ULV] (9) 
Wl lag Lal Pabytly wetsbl bye lage ei gl LAM oS gl obs 
Ply poll ey oral oS stb 
cS gf SG Gb iS osey he Vote gS lye UNly pall ol td 29 (1) 
ed ed cpa eee op cpl ISL ty Ho PSE Jo fe 
P ysptl 2S ysgtdly spatial ogo 9 gy Y etal iV oKy celull 
GSU de LG Cas YW Lal 8 Jal, pall 6B belly GTI 9 pat 
PM ed ee lah ob Gh gl GS cagaee Hl ye ol ill oe 


—\Ve- 


10 


20 


125 Book Four, Chapter One 


[the first] has already succeeded it. The same applies also to time in rcla- 
tion to a present “now,” or some “now” supposed as the starting point, 
even though it would be a different starting point in the past and in the 
future, as you know. 

(3) The term “before” and [the term] “after” were then transferred 
to apply to whatever is closest to a determinate beginning. This priority in 
terms of rank could be in things by nature, in the way that body is prior to 
animal relative to substance and the positing of substance as a principle; 
but [this] would differ if the individual is made the principle. The same 
applies to the nearest ([that is,] to the first) mover—for example, the boy 
who is before the man.‘ It could also be in things not by nature, but either 
[(a)] in some art—as in musical tone, where, if you take high pitch as the 
starting point, the priority would be other than the one where low pitch is 
so taken—or [(b)] by chance or coincidence, in whichever way it occurs.° 

(4) [The term “prior”] was then transferred to other things: the 
excelling and the virtuous—also the foremost, even if not in virtue—were 
made prior. The very meaning was then made akin to the determinate 
starting point. Hence, whatever one thing has of [this meaning] which 
the other does not, the other possessing nothing which is not possessed 
by the first, [causes the former to be] made prior. For the preceding 
belongs to the category of possessing what the second does not have, 
where whatever belongs to the second belongs to the first and more so. It is 
in this way [of viewing things] that [the masses] made prior the one who 
is served and is the leader. For choice befalls the leader, not the person 
led. It only befalls the follower inasmuch as it has befallen the leader, so 
that [the former] moves at the leader’s choosing. 

(5) They then transferred this [term] to that which is considered in 
this way with respect to existence. They thus made the thing that has 
existence first prior to [a] second [thing], even if the second may not 
have existence and would only have it after it had belonged to [the first].° 
An example of this is the [number] one. For it is not a condition for the 
existence of the one that plurality should exist, whereas it is a condition 
for the existence of plurality that the one should exist. In this, it is not a 
[question] of whether or not the one bestows existence on plurality, but 
only that it is needed so that, through the composition thereof, an exis- 
tence would be bestowed on plurality.” 


FAV BOA)| Sa oll me 


SU Qe Lal Us gla by 92 aly ody LN al Gh oa silly cou 
pls WS JEAN, oll 9 te Le oS ob lar ea TT} ot 

aby aga lee yp Ol go le SK Mas ye edly Jal el Jo (1) 
lb [VIE] SL AL JB pd gh LS celal ool 8 I pall La 
Sp CAS, «GSI at Lt Jer all Le abl eas echt Ul 
io luay Uy celal Vorl Po By - eS SK I LMI A 
ope Nah GK Gal pb poll GGL ge EI gl) LED «pearl aS” 
6 ES Saly oe4 ely § Ja 

PG aly Lal GLA Lolly Sal Jord gy Ll Ul ee (4) 
Lely SN ed eae ad GS US «aga LL all pad Jarnd Lead jl 
od LB let gb Laie Jace IB cJgill ullad LY} ab 9 
Lnblly pgacall Lyle Le Jel Ie Gay -dolasy Gilad yo ae ot bey « ZO 
et By ae tab all ce Ey end rel ely th gered ob i Ss 
itl bek dons 

coil Lord coe Sl Mela s eV a gS be lulls Let (2) 
ny] JW G58, WA SKY SUlly GO Koel gly Wy! ope 814 oS Ga 
BSS 9S gh vols age a bey yp pd dl velgl fo SUI le [pak 
Bolgh GHD B pady lageye OI GK G15 op byt yy cdagey 
shea SN 3yery HSU stn Fo al glo al Jp canis Wy! SD oe gl ack 





pee 299 mune, logy 


\o 


wi 


10 


20 


30 


126 Book Four, Chapter One 


(6) Then, after this, [the term] was transferred to the realization of 
existence in another way. For, if there are two things and the existence of 
one is not from the other (its existence being, rather, from itself® or 
from a third thing), but the existence of the second is from this first, so 
that it [derives] from the first the necessary existence which it has neither 
from nor in itself, having in itself only possibility—allowing [that is] that 
the first is such that, as long as it exists, it follows as a necessary conse- 
quence of its existence that it is the cause of the necessary existence of 
the second—then the first is prior in existence to the second. 

(7) For this [reason], the mind is not repelled at all by our saying, 
“When Zayd moved his hand, the key moved,” or, “Zayd moved his hand, 
then the key moved”; but it is repelled by our saying, “When the key 
moved, Zayd moved his hand,” even though [the mind rightly] says, 
“When the key moved, we knew that Zayd moved his hand.” The mind, 
with respect to the temporal coexistence of the two movements, assigns a 
priority to one and a posteriority to the other, since it is not the existence 
of the second movement that causes the existence of the first, but it is 
the first movement that is the cause of the existence of the second. 

(8) It is not improbable? that, as long as a thing exists, it follows nec- 
essarily that it is a cause of [another] thing. In reality, a thing cannot be 
such that it is rightly a cause of [another] thing unless [that other] thing 
coexists with it. If a condition of its being a cause is its very self,!° then, 
as long as its [very] self exists, it is a ground and cause for the second’s 
existence. But, if the condition of its being the cause is not its very self, 
then itself by itself is something from which it is possible for a thing to 
be generated and for it not to be [generated]—neither alternative having 
precedence over the other. 

(9) Similarly with that which is generated: it is likewise [something] 
that has the possibility of being and the possibility of not being. It is not 
inasmuch as its being is possible that it exists, nor is it by virtue of the fact 
that the other has the possibility of generating it that [the other] bestows 








elettl pp olgyl vv 


sled GS Ua lb gel age ye oer dpe cl alld ow Jd (1) 
Ape] att cto ged Ge daagey by Level oes ely 
Selb pe AUD A acd Sat age ogey Sal jp ald cM Le oye Ol ary 
ihe Kgl oasey pi ay le IN IKI 5 jot de ORM AB yd 
» GOI ag os dh lai aS IM gb «BUI las ogy Gerd 

Jb gh lA Poy a5 Ae Ur Jeb CH Jos! Sg Veli (Vv) 
Sly coo ag Sym CAS Urge gl Sony cS bone 005 
ol Sh soery ee Jib ory aj Am al ble CIS UO 
Lea gery ae ged JA SE AO SL LS oy La Lease Goya gla 
AN SLI bagey cee GON Hy ASEH SL 

Legit We GS GI ayy ary ery lage ol sKgl andy, () 
dar Say VW eile 9K) peta GK lie V Hobdy 
Ley Me VK lageege Sb plo Li cad adi le KS LS ye GT GB. etl 
wes 9S Gh SE ally 1d call Gad le BS Lyd Geol oly {gl ove 
PM gy Bel abla vol pty aK Vol Sty tl 

Le 8 IKLY 5 Ky 0K 5 KE MS yo 9K IG (4) 
Lage gl be SKK | KE Le yy oes 20K SY 


\o 


Q 


10 


15 


20 


30 


127 Book Four, Chapter One 


existence. This is because a thing’s being generated by that which has 
the possibility of generating it is not due [to the fact] that [the former] 
has the possibility of generating it. For, its merely being capable [of gen- 
erating it] is not sufficient for a thing’s coming into being from it. If its 
mere capability to generate it [obtains], then the thing, even though not 
sufficient, would exist with it at one time and not exist at another, the 
relation [of the cause] to that which exists and that which does not exist 
being, in the two states, one relation. The state made distinct by the 
[thing’s] being ([as opposed] to its not being) does not include the dis- 
tinction! of something by reason of which the effect would exist, in con- 


junction with the possibility of its being generated by the cause, in a 


manner that renders [such a state] different from the state of the non- 
existence of the effect due to the cause, in conjunction with the possibility 
of its being generated by the cause. Hence, in being from the cause, the 
effect’s relation to its existence or nonexistence would be one and the 
same. But that whose relation is one and the same to a thing’s existence 
and nonexistence being due to it has no greater claim to be the cause than 
not to be the cause. Indeed, sound reason necessitates that there should 
exist a state that differentiates between [the thing’s] existence from it 
and its nonexistence [from it]. 

(10) If this state also necessitates this distinction, [and] if this state 
occurs to the cause and exists, then, together, the “entity”!? and what 
has joined it become the cause. Prior to this, the “entity” was the subject 
of causality and the thing that appropriately could become the cause. 
[Prior to this,] that existence would not have [constituted] the existence 
of the cause, but, rather, an existence which, when another existence is 
added to it, would [constitute] the cause [through] the combination of 
the two. The effect would then proceed from it necessarily, regardless of 
whether [the added existence] is a will, an appetite, an anger, some 
nature that has come into existence, some other thing, or some external 
thing awaited for the existence of the cause. If, then, it becomes such 
that it is appropriate for the effect to proceed from it and no causal con- 
dition is left unsatisfied, the effect must necessarily exist. 

(11) Hence, with the existence of the cause, the existence of every 
effect is necessary; and the existence of its cause necessitates the existence 
of the effect. The two exist together in time, eternity, or whatever but are 
not together with respect to the attainment of existence. This is because 
the existence of [the former] did not come about from the existence of the 
[latter]. Thus, to the former belongs an attainment of existence not derived 





eles yp ole ay 


pad [VV] HKG] Kell LAK ol Kall yee tly SN al, 


ols ane EAS ds oF ob AS eloMale Lo pa! ease 


SGI Ms miy OSG Vagey cape lager ye tll Aer g KH add. LW Kol 
SKN ject ANA 8 jody ely Es GHB GKY Gil 
ty lee ak Aa je SS GK ao Iglall segs ol SEY gly 
NAS ge 5 S15 9S A yp SGI pe dll 5p Jel ayy V le 
meng Ae est ogy ad bey cirely ae or gry Vy ace pill agey 
on ceeall Jaap Se OSV gy Bol dle GS puld Gaely a6 oogery Y 
saagry YGF 5 ooyery lp jn de dha GK GI 

chem La] JL cigs peel he eg Lad JULI ol GB (4+) 
CHT IM Gl US FB, SAM ge Ugh ga) Ley lI Ale SG corey all 
cAlall ayy 29-31 US SK ply the pres 3! CAs SI tl Sy Lal pp 
AS oy Lise Sy Al Lysegeree ST ST agers al] La ISL layer, J 
Jobs pe gl bole Lede gh Lae gh agg glial] «tlh US 3h el per Shall 
of dal AS ys Tht, aoe he la) ale alall ogo) (ene lays \yl 
[YA] gall oyoy9 Cory Gt bt gles 6 

AS oly ALE 9d goyy calle Sry ory Sse Foxes od (\\) 
ALD Uae Ld $y ced pb gh pall glegl Co lee Lasy cdslell agery 


Jam a ISS Ne ayy ye fee al ulld ayy GV Alby 2g Ine Gl 


\o 


ey 


10 


20 


30 


i128 Book Four, Chapter One 


{from the latter’s attainment of existence, while to [the latter] belongs 
gan attainment of existence deriving from the [former’s] attainment of 
cexistence. As such, the former is prior with respect to the attainment 
cof existence. 

(12) someone, however, may say: “If each of the two things [is such 
tthat], if one exists, the other exists, and if one is removed from exis- 
ttence, the other is removed, then one is not the cause, nor the other the 
effect, since neither has a better claim than the other to be the cause of 
eexistence.” 

(13) We will reply to this; however, [we will do so] without looking 
imto the implication of the meaning of this proposition." For it is not the 
ccase that. when either of the two exists, the other exists, without distinc- 
ttion and difference. This is because “if” must mean either [(a)] that the 
eexistence of each, if realized, necessitates in existence itself! that the 
ether should exist; [(b)] that, if the existence of either is realized, it fol- 
liows necessarily from [this] in existence that the existence of the other 
imust have occurred; [(c)] that, if the existence of either has occurred in 
tthe mind. then the existence of the other must occur in the mind; or [(d)] 
tthat, if the existence of either has occurred, then it follows as a rational 
mecessity that the other must have occurred, either in existence or in the 
mind. For the expression “if” in such contexts is equivocal, sophistical. 

(14) We say: The first [alternative] is false and not admitted. For it 
iis [only] one of them—namely, the cause—which [is such] that, if it 
coccurs, the occurrence of the other, after being possible, follows neces- 
ssarily from it. Regarding the effect, its occurrence does not necessitate 
tthe occurrence of the cause; rather, the effect would occur only after the 
ccause has occurred. 

(15) As for the second alternative, [first of all] this would not be true, as 
regards the cause. For, if the cause exists, it does not follow necessarily that 
tthe effect would have come into existence by itself, or without the cause. 





i 
! 
| 





elucdl iy oll NYA 


Dd S99 Sem yt 9 dary Sper Wy lr ager y dem oye ond rary 
prgl Spam Selah pail ells 

tly «PMI sey ory BBL age vely HGS BLL Dea gl fb (9Y) 
5S SI apt ase pd 5] Mole ey We Lael al 2 i 
PV gy esl pile 

ly Adi ae eggs ony Lb Js gl gga wld Ge A Gady (1) 
ge Vly KEL, faith SV sey a Lye acl, oery bol at al 
ayer AE Gon eam Lb] age vel Pogey gla ang! Ll oe Y «lip 
ssl Bae com fam Mal Lage aol B agey Gh gl eV any gl ant 
aS Com Siall 2 fram I3l lage Boyes Sil SM oy her KSI 
Gil Be com fa Bl Lage aly ager al yl Jaal 2 53) Jorn 
wn fia gd clad aad gd. Juall od Jem gh ageall 2 SV per 3 Kol 
[VW] -tlabee iS yatee aah 

on fam Ua) gill go Lease 5B cplaw pF CST gl idee (14) 
Jam AS com pam ld Sslall Lily lal pry GEG] aw Vl per ace 
Jslall fram Se chem ob 9 SS ddl fp cal 

ibd rey IL ed SB CAL le OB Gana, 2 GO pel ul, (v0) 
ay ates call ae gl aa 5 ham lal gh gh aes cay 
23 lh CIE Abel Sree IB] ALL Jem Ge opal Lb Com old fram ob OF 


\o 


10 


15 


20 


30 


129 Book Four, Chapter One 


This is because, if it had occurred, it would not have been necessitated 
in existence by the occurrence of the cause if the cause had existed and 
that other [namcely, the effect] had occurred without the need of [its] 
existence—unless by “occurred” is not meant what has [just] been 
[said],'® conjunction being sufficient. This [secondly] would not be true, 
as regards the effect, in two respects. [The first] is because the cause, 
though it itself has been realized, has not been [realized] as a necessary 
consequence of the occurrence of the effect. The second is that the exis- 
tence of the thing which has already occurred cannot be necessitated by 
the occurrence of something supposed to be occurring, unless one does 
not mean by “occur” what it [normally] signifies. 

(16) Regarding the last two alternatives, the first of them is correct. 
For it is possible to say, “If the cause exists in the mind, it is a rational 
necessity that the effect, of which the former is its essential cause, should 
exist in the mind”; also, “If the effect exists in the mind, the existence of 
the cause must likewise exist in the mind.” 

(17) As for the second [of these last alternatives], which is the fourth 
part, [this much] of what you say of it is true—namely, that, if the effect 
exists, the mind testifies that an existence has been realized for the cause 
that has necessarily been completed so that the effect has come to exist. 
The cause could well be in the mind after the effect—not only in time.'” 
But the last part of these two that belong to the fourth alternative need 
not be necessarily true, for the reason you know. 

(18) The same applies with respect to removing [cause and effect]. For, 
if we remove the cause, we really remove the effect; but, when we remove 
the effect, we would not have removed the cause but would [simply] have 
known that the cause in itself has been first removed, so that the remov- 
ing of the effect has become possible. For, when we suppose that the effect 
is removed, we suppose that which is necessary to suppose to be poten- 
tially with it—namely, that its removal is possible. And, if removing it was 
possible, it was possible only through the removal of the cause first. 
Hence, to remove and affirm the cause is the cause for [respectively] the 
removal and the affirmation of the effect. The removal of the effect is a 
proof for the removal of the [cause], and its affirmation is proof for the 
affirmation of [the cause]. 

(19) To return to where we left, we say, in solving the seeming difh- 
culty: It is not conjunction which rendered one of the two [existents] nec- 
essarily the cause, since, with respect to conjunction, they are on a par, SO 
that neither has the better claim to be the cause than the other. Rather, 


rleshl yo oly \vA 


. 


Ky 8 Sy cope by Khao» sa Yl YL cope ll de Che 
pd UM Mle CiI6 ly Mall SY aby types op dial Gils oy Gana Yy 
Sh fetes ham 8 gle ptll gl SUN kee aly Sabah Jyam ye Cel alld 
sAnggie «jam lily gan Y gl Y)Shole ey (ob Spare ody Co 

Sey BL legl jee ab pore bye JVB GLE glandll LL, (09) 
( Jaall (9 OlatL ake Aud I (sill Sal Jeon, jh fisll sae omy faall baal 
«Jia tll oyery La) rare Sl ony ll (3 Sell any 13] Lal, 

Jshall sory BLA) BU ae Gane all aendll gay lager GOI LI, (1) 
[VIN] rare > AF fiyple Whee V agery Uy free od dal gk Jill ag 
pl Bassas Sl ais Vy «Laid glyfl C3 Y Ssball oe Jas dCi Leng «lll 
be BW AlN phe gael ye ye 2M 

Nay Hebd Jalal! Lad, Aldl Lad, 13] 4b cad le 3 IIS (14) 
SN Se GIS beat od 9 SS al Gl bye Aa a5 ol Solel lay 
Py bl dace yw Vi Loe ve leg. J dal Lop Ub. Jsbebl ab, 
SUL, Addl bs J) al ob SRN ib andy IKE gS lly andy IS gall 
SU) Jo GL], ND (by Jo Jolall cbr caiily Jabal ey Cw 

Pall oda tl Jo 3 Jed ol bee Nees (14) 
LAY AY jo td ol Lael a oS fo kb ase coer 
Ck EV copy Com ph slog Leased GV WLI Ld Ip crlpee Rall 


\o 


10 


20 


25 


30 


130 Book Four, Chapter Tivo 


they differ because we have supposed that the existence of the one is not 
rendered necessary through the other, but with the other; whereas, in the 
case of the second, just as we supposed its existence to be with the other, 
likewise, we supposed it to be through the other. It is in this way that this 
problem should be resolved. 

(20) What may remain problematic [in this connection] is the ques- 
tion of potentiality and actuality—which of them is prior and which 
more posterior. For, knowing the answer to this is one of the important 
matters relating to the knowledge of priority and posteriority; also, [this 
question is problematic] because potentiality and actuality are them- 
selves among the accidents and concomitants of existence, being things 
that must be known when knowing the states of absolute existence. 


Chapter [Two] 


On potency, act, power, and impotence, and on proving 
[the existence] of matter for every generated thing 


(1) The expression “potency,” and whatever is synonymous with it, was 
first put to [indicate] the “intention”! existing in the animal that enables 
him to let arduous acts in the category of movements proceed from him— 
[arduous acts] whose existence, in terms of their quantity and quality 
[proceeding] from people, is not frequent. The opposite of this is termed 
“weakness.” It is as though [“potency”] is an increase and an intensification 
of what is meant by “power”—namely, that the animal would be such that 
the act would proceed from him when he wills it and would not proceed 


‘from him when he does not will it, the opposite of which is “impotence.” 


(2) It was then transferred from [such a meaning] and adopted to 
mean that for which and because of which a thing is not easily affected. 
[It was so adopted] because one undertaking arduous acts and movements 
would also be affected by them, where [their] effect on him and the pain 
he suffers from [that effect] would prevent him from completing his act. 
Thus, if he were affected in a tangible way, it would be said that he had 
become weak and had no potency. If [however] he were not {so] affected, 
it would be said that he had potency. Thus, “not to be affected” came tO 
indicate the meaning we initially termed “potency.” 











lett op Clg ua 


Ke SVL y2 SS 25 Samy po 0093 Bh Sail obuo,e tly «eT 

aL sWales Gale! es 
ia yer gb A eb atl gly pal Lglally «Jal gd yl Lys ft Ley (1+) 
SANE op Ak Jal Sgal Gh ley «Fly pall yaw pel G Oleg 
[\V+] Gall oer hl Spal ahs Lom ph gloom SLAM, cial yy 2 ral 6 


[ gO jaa] 
22 (v) 
Se iW OU, pry sally Jail 5 9 


ely bl gb ayegll paul + gdh Jy Cardag ud Bol Ley gill dled 5} (9) 

SF dg Bh AS cand OL ob ye LE JL Ace aed Gl ly Ke Gal y- 

SIN pall ye Baty Babyy YY Samal Lance Cgeeeny AS YS ll 

Wass si, Wy HLS Ib] fal Ae parc Seow Sledl GK Gl sty cdpalll 
jell ae Le 

dy H ggany e gtll A ey A fats Y Goth nell clan are ole (1) 

abel SIS «lg Lal Jaa Gh BBL OK acy SLAM oly gh ven OS AY v0 

24) 5 Layee Vlad atl 3) GS aba pil go oda, ad oye gall AN, 

GE > «Jats Yo gl gS 58 4 gl 1S Seer! oly Bb d dy Gee 


3g Val skpeee (cOll al 


A 


20 


30 


131 Book Four, Chapter Tivo 


(3) Then they made it the name of this meaning, so that it became 
such that, if [the subject] was [only] slightly affected [by his act], [his 
disposition] was termed “potency,” even when [the individual] did not 
do a thing. Thereafter, they rendered the thing which was not affected at 
all more worthy of this name and thus termed its state, in being as such, 
“potency.” Then they rendered as “potency” power itself, it being the 
state possessed by the animal in terms of which he? [is able to act] or not 


to act,’ according to [his willing or not willing it],* and the removal of 


impediments, since he is the principle of action. 

(4) The philosophers then transferred the term “potency” and applied 
the expression “potency” to every state existing in a thing, [that state] 
being a principle of change [coming] from it [and being manifest] in 
another (inasmuch as that [thing receptive of change] is an other), even 
when no volition is involved—so much so that they termed heat “potency” 
because it is the principle [coming] from some other, [acting] on another 
inasmuch as [the latter] is an other.> [They did this] to the extent that 
if the physician moves himself or treats himself—the principle of change 
[coming] from him, [acting] on him—this is not in him inasmuch as 
he is receptive of treatment and motion but inasmuch as he is another. 
Indeed, [they regarded the physician] as though he is two things—a 
thing having the potency to act and a thing having the potency to suffer 
action—the two things seemingly separated in two parts [of him]. Thus, 
for example, the mover would be in his soul, and that which is moved, in 
his body; wherefore, he would be the mover in [terms of] his form and the 
thing in motion in [terms of] his matter. Thus, inasmuch as he is recep- 
tive of treatment, he is an “other” to himself inasmuch as he is engaged 
in medical treatment.® 

(5) Thereafter, when they found that that thing which has potency in 
the popular sense [of the term] (whether power or intensity of potency) 
does not have as a condition of this potency that it would in actuality be 
acting in terms of it—having, rather, the possibility to act and the possi- 
bility not to act (as far as “potency” is concerned)—they transferred the 
name “potency” to [mean] “possibility.” Then they named the thing whose 
existence is within the bound of possibility “an existent in potency.” And 
they named the possibility of a thing’s receptivity [to be acted upon], and 
to be affected, “potency to be acted upon.” They then termed the comple- 
tion of this potency an act, even though it is not action but the reception 
of action, such as being moved, acquiring configuration, and the like. For, 
since there is the principle termed “potency,” [then, where] the first, 





Lett ye Lgl vy 


pot bee Mets Y care AS obo Fe pall Le eal ogee ot (1 
el [VV] Ve lal Call ales Voit «ct glare oi Lb Jal ly «igh 
SSN pty — Ne Ball Nyse 5g LUIS ye Sam ye alle Lye 
Sbaby AN prey Ratbone «hain V gly «fas cI OK ley cla 
joa Lane ge 3) 33 — lal 
POS Je F ge sal bd (ab agai ob dental gl (4) 
daly) She Sool gly GATS te ye eT ba WS a Le eet 
BewWl gl ge agelalk sl a el a ath be Wigs) Lipa cs 
SB my AB ld ald cab ace ll Lae G8 And lle yl aad A> 
tots Jen Slab A eb rola sl poe yb Sh ioe 
BABII GSS ae B Bt me al SK gl ty « Jaen Gh5 3 4 
(ceearire Mery rarenr Urrrerie ope ie 
Bla Se op Sad 5 sl 


HET — gg tdl eal 55 4 GM etl Lyocey Uulls va (2) 


iam ya bj eb ly OK gl agdl oli byt yo) - 3b at 
tt Ngan EY agli Le « Jaws Yo al gRly «Jae gh gS 
iB aletly + AI yd GE Lyeery cB lage ye GRA ve 3 ayery gull 
Ks he fh Val Wed Fb Sly Wed byl obs pli Nya ot asta 
2 ll Jey oS, Bb gay Gall lad de gf [\vv] Wa is 42 


\o 


oa 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


132 Book Four, Chapter Tivo 


original meaning of what is named by this term {referred to] what is an 
act as it [actually] is in reality, they now term as “act” that [thing] whose 
relation to what they now term as “potency” is akin to the relation of 
act to what was previously termed “potency”—and by act they meant the 
realization of existence—even though this thing is a suffering of action, 
or something which is neither action nor the suffering of action. This, 
then, is potency that is receptive of action. Perhaps they have said 
“potency” because of the excellence and intensity of this [receptivity]. 

(6) The geometers, when they found that some line is such [that it 
would serve] as the side of a square while some [other is such] that it is 
impossible for it to be the side of that square, rendered that square the 
potentiality of that [former] line as though it was something possible in it. 
[This line of reasoning was followed] particularly when some of them 
imagined that the square comes into being through the motion of the 
side over that which is similar to itself. 

(7) Now that you know [what] “potency” [is], you know what is 
potent. You now know [also] that the nonpotent is either the weak, the 
impotent, that which is easily affected, the necessary, or [in geometry, the 
case] where the linear measure would not [form] the side of a hypothe- 
sized measure pertaining to a surface. 

(8) What may cause a problem in this connection is the [question of | 
potency in the sense of power. For it is thought that it exists only for those 
who have the prerogative’ of acting and the prerogative of not acting. If 
[potency is attributed] to one who is given only to act,® then they do not 
perceive that he has power. This, however, is not true. For [this is only 
true] if this thing that only acts, acts without wishing or willing, in which 
case he would have neither power nor potency in this sense. If, however, 
he acts through will and choice, except that he is perpetually willing and 
does not undergo change, then, [regardless of whether] his will consti- 
tutes an existence which is coincidental or [one] whose change is impos- 
sible in an essential manner,? he acts with power. 

(9) This is because the definition of power with which these people 
prefer to define it is present here. This is because [this definition] would 
be true for the [agent] to act when he wills and not to act if he does not 
will. Both these [statements] are conditional—that is, “If he wills, he 
acts,” and, “If he does not will, he does not act.” The two are included in 


the definition of power only inasmuch as the two are conditionals. It is 





elecsl ye ole \vY 


agent Le MaalS gill La Lpaee fad MLL yo Le de ge Lil ell lay cen! 
cape Sl Jam ail pinay «al eal 58 L528 goed I all LB cag 
ASLEY| Bylo odge  YLaal Vy ed ge! ts J Vail Pl hs oS oly 
LVjnthy sda tod 38 198 Loy 

\pams car be oR) LS Gp bead fam Iyary Ug pereall (1) 
6b SE yl ASLAN 58 wal Lae allel dhe gS old I ud 
Andi fo ge phil 3 Sow yay Iba yom Sl ppiaw JES 3] Lepasty 

intl UL gsi pb hedges gpllcde ob agdl cde ab Ly (V) 
Lake dah Lill SY gl bly csagpall Ly Sta dl gall Lily jertal Udy 
29; lew sla 

GSE WB capa ans A ag pl ALL ode ye JRE By (A) 
ja QELS yp WG GL Jats Y GI SLE yey chee gh ALE je U Vinge ye 
Laid Jai, gill & p23) Lhe gO GL Sb Galea, ud Vay «dyad 4 Sl yy 0 Led 
ish Ja OS ly {eal log, 88 Yy 8 a God ONS copay LE al oe oy Jal 
Lai forte gl BUSI logy dally cate Vy [VE] abl cil VY] Let, 
yak, Juiz Gd AIS alloca 

US, Lge oyeye & Lgaon gl ye O99 All Byadl 2> BV ald, (4) 
She bbey ye WS cy 15) Jats Vly LE SL Jap Sl ae cay Ue gi 
ea le he syodll at ob dels Ls Lily jes) Lea Waly chad Ld La] a 


\o 


10 


20 


25 


30 


40 


133 Book Four, Chapter Tivo 


not a condition for the truth of a conditional that there should be in any 
way a repetition of [antecedent or consequent]'° or a categorical truth, 
For it does not necessarily follow that, if our statement, “If he does not 
will, he does not act,” is true, the statement, “But at some time he did 
not will,” is true. Nor does it follow from the falsity [of the statement], 
“He did not will at all,” that our statement, “If he did not will, he did not 
act,” is necessarily false. For this entails that, if he did not will, he would 
not have acted, just as, if he wills, he will act. [Now,] if it is true that, if he 
wills, he acts, it would be true that, if he acts, he has willed; that is, if 
he acts, he acts inasmuch as he has power. From this it would correctly 
follow that, if he did not will, he did not act, and, if he did not act, he did 
not will. But there is nothing in this to imply necessarily that at some 
time he did not will. This is clear to whomever knows logic. 

(10) [To turn to] those powers that are principles for motions and 
actions, some are associated with reason and imagination, while some 
are not associated with these. Those associated with reason and imagi- 
nation are of the same genus as reason and imagination. For it is almost 
the case that man and not-man are known by one power and that it 
belongs to one power to imagine! pleasure and pain and, in general, to 
imagine a thing and its opposite. Likewise, these powers themselves are, 
in their individual instances, each a power over a thing and its opposite. In 
reality, however, it would not be a complete power—that is, a principle 
of change, complete and in actuality, of one thing in another (inasmuch 
as [the latter] is another)—unless the will conjoins it, impelled either by an 
estimative belief that follows an appetitive or irascible imaginative act 
or by a rational opinion following a cogitative idea or the conceiving of an 
intellectual form. Thus, if that will, still not being a will that [only] inclines, 
but a decisive will (namely, the one which constitutes the decision that 
necessitates the movement of the organs), conjoins [the power, then the 
latter] becomes necessarily the principle of necessitating action. For we 
have shown that, so long as a cause does not become a cause in terms of 
necessitation whereby a thing is necessitated by it, the effect would not 
come into existence through it. Before this state, the will would have 
been weak, decision not having taken place. By themselves,” these powers 
associated with reason are [such] that, from the presence of their patient 
and its standing with respect to them in the relation—where, if [these 
powers] were to perform an act in [the patient, such an act] would have 
been enacted by them—it does not necessarily follow that these would 
have been [the means of such] action when these are still a power [that 


is not conjoined by a decisive will]. 





rletll yp obey \rr 


Bree gh copes pany al he SSSI byt Gms yy say gly 
Uy Leap aS: Gamay lei «Sain Lead BSUS Ge Ii] tS cao 
GB «Jain La Bly WS Sls Cory CHL LS taly 
sl que lady «Jad #Lty 3] a) US Ja GSU el Y 


\3| 4! OF Jal pale lis 
ILA ead «ya pe tom Ge Jeb bo la ogl Lt AB Jo Naha moo «fad ot 
Kany «be Udy Ltn Y gl jb al Whe uedy Lda Jot «ais 9 Uta 
. Gall ae hy 
Ball or 69 \peam SV, OF pod eole Co A stl okay (05) 
Sell ole Joell, glad G18 Sy MGV Ss Qawy fl 
Hine 8d Ky GLI WL, SLIM AL, ib pled IK al Ly, 
Gail ode WIS [VE] corey ol ALLL ‘aad sly cally 5031 al ras 
Sb 5B 9S VARY YS core dey etl IBIS Lasley] Yuu 
tase LY Wy gy3l GLY Sadly pl Tal STO eT a 
J ifis 5 ol fie Bh ge gh nab sl Slt Ll at sy sles 56 
Sah Jp cam ALL daly] SG oy OLY al by G81 GSS alee ayy yy 
jaa a lew Yoyle «elas hye} Ce oll clea Yl sa ci ty Aaj 
Dense) tll ee Com ce esl Ale pail Lal Sly 8 3 opel 
A jlall syd odd plo} ab dead G91 Yl GSS UB Jods 15, 0) all eo 
HS TL ol All Mp Ae gg Yates yam ye oe Y ~ best sly — a 
BB om ele OSI y Oks ond As 


\o 





10 


20 


30 


39 


134 Book Four, Chapter Tipo 


(11) In general, from their meeting the passive power, it does not fo]. 
low necessarily that [these] powers would enact that [effect]. This js 
because, if [the act proceeds] necessarily from them alone, then from 
this it would necessarily follow that the two contrary acts and those inter- 
mediary between them would proceed from them, and this is impossible. 
Rather, if they became [conjoined with the decisive will], as we have 
stated, they would then act by necessity. 

(12) As regards the powers that are not present in things possessing 
reason and imagination, when these meet the passive power, then action 
necessarily [takes place], since there is neither will nor choice that is 
being awaited. Should [something] awaited be there, this would be an 
awaited nature. If [such] an [awaited] nature is needed, then that nature 
would be either the principle [of the action]'* or part of the principle. 
The principle would, then, be the sum of what was before and what has 
occurred and would, then, be similar to the awaited will. The will, however, 
differs from this in that it knows. Moreover, the passive power that, upon 
encountering the agent, makes necessary the enactment in these things 
is the complete passive power. For the passive power can be complete or 
incomplete, because it can be either proximate or remote. For in the 
sperm there is the potency [for it] to become a man, and in the boy there 
is also the potency [for him] to become a man. But the potency in the 
sperm requires that it also be encountered by a motive power that pre- 
cedes [the power] that moves to manhood, because it requires the actu- 
alization of something other than man. Then, after this, the preparation is 
set for it to bring into actuality a man. In reality, the true passive potency 
is this. As for the sperm, in reality it still does not have a passive power. 
For it is impossible for the sperm, while still a sperm, to be acted on so as 
to become a man. But, since it has the potency to become something 
through that which is not sperm and then, after this, transfer to another 
thing, then it is also in potency that thing. Indeed, prime matter is, in 
potency, all things. Some of the things realized in it impede it from other 
things, and the impeded things require the removal [of the impediment]. 
Some things in it [on the other hand] do not impede others but require 
some other concomitant so that the disposition becomes complete. This 


potency is a remote potency. 








eles ye OLY \re 


56 J AY blag cells fais gl alee sal YL G gh Valbhy (99) 
sJoacll yrhedll Yr jonas gt ALS Ge Com, gD «Jail g) Lae le Coe 
bag paly Jad Go WS LS jhe Lal fe Slee Uday cages Glew gly 

shall 33) BY Ib YG FSM, glett oid pe Ob MN Gaal LL (9) 
ge KS Ae Bl gb es joey toby] Ales Ln} 5] Jadl Des Cry 
op Hope Maly EVE] «yA Laat Le 92 pal 08 pb Yi zten GO EE. es 
aes al yh Ups Lem Oy ree by JB OTL pyre Lally a 
gh Jew C89 15) Coy, SU Lal ILA ayaly fold Loe yp the Gyle aoL Yl 
5S 8 DAN bal gb AO ADA ayll o LAV ole (3 JAM Booey 
pr Sl5B lB OB -Faem GS by A 9S 08 YY Rail 9K 25, Ut 
Laas gh SIe0H A Magdl Ske rer glig Lal all By Oley 
PCS Saal Mess jl AW abe SAA Jo Sag Lal 
La aN sl BALL, key Jadl Bcd ol Lewd an «Jo 
AN GS gl foc ab adel 38 ay ab cand MALLS ll Ly ae 
Jae Ale Jo Cb pres 1B LB GO UA hey foes oe oy 
Sa oo ANI solll fe ce tll alld Lada 2 gS ol Lt lulls ow 
vary Salles Ae Boal clans «ae Ge Woon ed Jere Gort 4 
ray «shal oy fo ool da UI cle «Sy Sl Gan oe Gn Vb 
brn bso A Syl 


10 


20 


30 


135 Book Four, Chapter Tivo 


(13) As for the proximate potency, this is the one that does not 
require its being joined by an active power prior to the active power from 
which it receives action. For the tree is not a key in potency. [ This is] 
because it requires that it is first met by an active power prior to the 
power enacting “keyness”—namely, the power of uprooting, of sawing, 
and of chiseling. Then, after this, it becomes prepared to encounter the 
power enacting keyness. 

(14) Some powers come to be through nature; some, through habit; 
some, through art; some, through coincidence. The difference between 
those that come to be through art and those that come to be by habit 
[lies in the fact] that that which is realized through art is the one in which 


one intends to use materials, tools, and movements. [As a result of this,}" 


the soul gains a positive disposition as though it were the form of that art. 
As for that which is [realized] through habit, it consists of acts which are 
not confined to [the use of the above] but proceed as a result of appetite, 
anger, or opinion; or else the intention is directed to some other objective. 
It may then be followed by an objective which is habit, though not intended, 
where the habit is not identical with the persistent [existence] of these 
acts in the soul. It may be that the habit would not have specific tools or 
materials. For it is not the same thing for a human to become accus- 
tomed to walking and to become accustomed to trading, in the manner 
of which we have spoken, for there is a great difference between the two. 
Still, if you look closely, you [will find] that the realization of habit and of 
art revert to [being] one in manner. [Regarding] the powers that are by 
nature, some are in nonanimal bodies, and some in animal bodies. 

(15) Some of the Ancients, Ghariqia!® among them, have said that 
potency exists with the act and does not precede it. Some of those who 
have come long after him have held this view.'® The one who says this 
seems to be saying that the person seated has not the power to stand up— 
that is, that it is constitutionally impossible for him to arise, unless he 
stands up. How, then, does he arise? [He also seems to say] that wood, in 
its constitution, does not have [the potentiality] to be chiseled into a door. 
How, then, is it chiseled? 








eld yo Lgl \Yo 


ileWlagal alebss \gol Gl A ctAY AI pay alagal ul, (1) 
Syl bas [WA] gh Bi ct# AY Ce yl Ca saat GB. lps ais 
Md ra po Lolly sally Adal bgdl pay Ro Caall Alelal spall Lo debs 
oUall delat osal sb ye jaar gY LG 

iota are \qiinsbtl any my PLL Joann lpm ely (6) 
Gall glboldl, Jrere Gilly Aelidh, froom Gill gy Byilly GUY frame, lpeey 
paell iKS oyey Oy aly Slanenl 43 wre Gall ye eleall rore 
Coaned LEN ye fare, be gpd doldly gill Uy Se leall OU ay yo LYS IRL Udy 
dail \yd aos gh gly gh endab gligget Ge joni Lil Jp Ladd alld (yb 50 pai 
pat doll 9G Vy ra aly dole PRE Ya 3S AW ede pb I) 
Sh ely VB cdisne slog SV dab Gel Leng {ped LP Le Ml ult oy! 
MS aay at gli Lary $B SALI sp dle igly tlighiist. 
os 3 re bdo ly ie Jpiclially solal Spam ole last eis t5! Lib 
Aly L Loeb OK Le gery RSL LI yal PLY 2 OS be le ela 

Aaa Vy Jul eo OSS aya tage Lesley LI am J ay (9) 
Jy AE Jyill yy BW. 5 yee [VV] ore gartal oy -3 al agi iby 
Spo ASS pid lepsinc he B SEV Gl lll do wok ot sel 
Se BS (Oh au Con gl dhe Ba tdl ol 


\o 


Gy 


10 


20 


25 


30 


136 Book Four, Chapter Tivo 


(16) This person who speaks [thus] is undoubtedly incapable of look. 
ing and seeing several times in the one day and would in reality be blind, 
Indeed, everything that does not exist and does not have the potentiality 
to exist cannot exist. And the thing that is possible to be is [also] possible 
not to be—otherwise, it would be necessary [for it] to be. That which js 
possible to be must either be possible to be and not to be some other 
thing—and this is the subject for the form of [the other] thing to inhere 
therein—or to be as such when considered in itself (as, for example, 
whiteness), if it is possible for it in itself to be and not to be. This [latter] 
must either be something that, if it exists, would be self-subsistent— 
such that the possibility of its existence consists in [the fact] that it is 
possible for it to be simply self-subsistent—or [something] that, if it exists, 
it exists in another. 

(17) If the possible is [possible] in the sense that it can be something 
in [some] other, then the possibility of its existence is also in that other. 
It follows necessarily, then, that that other exists with the possibility of 
the existence [of the former], it being [the former’s] subject. If it is self- 
subsistent, not [subsisting] in another or from another in any respect, 
having no relation with any material by way of subsisting in it or needing 
it in anything, the possibility of its existence would, then, be prior to it, 
unattached to one matter rather than another and to one substance 
rather than another. Since that thing has no relation to anything, then 
the possibility of its existence would be a substance, because it is a thing 
that exists by itself. In brief, if the possibility of its existence does not 
come about, it would not be possible of existence, [but] impossible. But 
since it is realized, existing, and self-subsisting, as was supposed, then it 
exists as a substance. Since it is a substance, then it has a quiddity that 
includes nothing of relation; for substance is not related in its essence 
but is that to which the relative occurs. Hence, to this self-subsistent 
[thing] there would be an existence exceeding the possibility of its exis- 
tence to which it is related. But we are speaking about the very possibility 
of its existence and, based on [our discussion,] our judgment is that [this 
possible] is not in a subject. Now, however, it has also become in a subject. 


This is contradictory.” 








lets yp Oley wn 


selsl pal Bras dl key Gnd! Se GP gb Whee Y Bla Keay (19) 
fore A sor Sh Je IBY, lage ge eed Lc gel Mba GK «Ly 
‘gKodl Lely SVG SS we Kgl SS 2 Gall lly oes 
ay ae Valy ool Lt gal Ke aK gl UL JAY aK ol Sy 
caus oh USK GI bly ayy alt ghald y Gil +All pposll 
Rl UY Oe and BOK Vol Ke Kol KH gh HL 
USB Kgl Ke Al ge eayey SRL IK Se cane U8 gS ey BLL 
ob dey boyy 0 1} 5K 3 lam 
GSA OB copeb 2 Lot 9K gh Kel pas Kall oS ow (0) 
999 009229 OK ee lage pall UB GK gl Coed ill ol B Lal wry 
Wy cage sl ye aman ab ie Wy ob BY dns LB SO UB OS oly 46 poy 
SEAL gS Mell Le el Blow, gh Med pts Le RIDE aly oy dale ed Bde 
roth Ma 5] page ay paver Vy dale Oyo talk Ghee pF ale Vale aogery 
LALLY Ald 2 905 ag dN Lae ery 3S (Kors gd ey 
Sry pele gt Sly Le coe sl SE pb GH Mob oye OM! Kl 
pb Ral Ad page 9 Sly la eye ob LWA] — Yep WS — lds il 
pil Ng) GSS Laake, Je 1 Leas pad po hl gS] Lal ys Uy 
£23 929 JRL ud 2 LOS «Line ty ga gill oa gery SEL ST opery Sl 
ASS fyb ye o Lal jlo ib Vy page 3b pad ail LG ate 


\o 


ea 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


137 Book Four, Chapter Tivo 


(18) Hence, it is impossible for that which remains self-subsistent, 
being in no manner whatsoever in a subject or from a subject, to have 
existence after nonexistence. Rather, it must have some sort of relation 
with the subject in order to be. If, however, the thing that exists is self. 
subsistent but exists from some other thing, or with the existence of 
some other thing (in the first case, as with the body composed of form 
and matter; in the second, as with the rational soul existing with the for- 
mation of bodies), then the possibility of its existence would be related 
to that thing—not in [the sense] that that thing’s being in potency con- 
sists in the body’s being white [for example] in potency, nor in [the 
sense] that it has the potentiality of existing and of having within it the 
possibility of [the existence] of whiteness [for example] in the subject in 
which whiteness is imprinted, but [only in the sense] that it exists with it 
or with one of the states it has. 

(19) [With] the body that comes into existence—as, for example, a 
fire that comes into existence—the possibility of its existence consists 
in its coming into existence from matter and form. Thus, the possibility of 
its existence has a receptacle in some respect: namely, its matter. [That] 
thing of it that comes to existence first—namely, the form—comes to 
exist in matter, and the body comes to exist by reason of the combination 
of the two: from matter, in one respect, and from form, in another respect. 
As for the soul, it also does not come into existence except with the exis- 
tence of a bodily subject, at which point the possibility of its existence™ 
would be in that [body], subsisting in it because of that matter being 
specifically related to it. For the soul can only come into existence after 
nonexistence, this being the possibility of its existence when certain 
bodies come to exist having a manner of composition suitable to render 
them an instrument for [the soul]. Through this [bodily] composition, its 
deserving creation from the primary [principle] is rendered distinct from 
its not deserving it from them. If, then, [the bodies] have the possibility of 
this composition, this is a possibility for the existence of the soul. 

(20) In the case of every body from which an act proceeds neither 
accidentally nor by its being compelled by another body, [such a body] 
acts from whatever power there is in it. Regarding [its action] that [pro- 
ceeds] by will and choice, this is evident.’ As for that which is not through 
will and choice, this is because that act proceeds either [(a)] from [the 
body’s] essence, [(b)] from something different from it that is corporeal, 
or [(c)] [from] something different from it that is incorporeal. If it pro- 
ceeds [(a)] from its essence, and [if] its essence shares corporeality with 








elec or oll yy 


pron oy Vege GV ands Lib a Ua Sal gee Voab (14) 
a wedle OCA, el eeen Ke Le ae S959 09m I oy Amey 
el Orb tot op dong aS cake, Lt rey gil + gill SUB Ly 
Bol BS GON, cay pry Sor ye ed JAI Ul cope gt oy 
vigil lS gh le Y + ttl allay UE gS soyery GK GB gla gS v 
GE SSS lla gp sory high ad SI Ys pL orl madd 9S yo sll 
1A) Slo 225 shane sor ol Se «ell ad ales ill ppioall boll 

Balll jp Dame gl ye orgy GKel Li] Bole WS dase ill pb (14) 
See Sill 6 lll SS Saale gay Lede y Joe oa yery GRY GK dy gally 
9 Ag Boll ye Lapel dl Socey Ball booed) pall yoy Ake 
OS Kee gay Fey 29-9 Yh Lal 2 yb Uatll Uly ony 8) yal 
Las gmy Ke Ul atll go cay doll WS GolLetsY a, Lets MS 3 029-9 GH 
CO op sek he plc ogy we Grae SEL gay [VA] SS de 
ps aBlincl Y 5 lS yy Vigne Glinal Wp jay « Wall gS gl chal 
«reel 28 GEL ye ZA Le GE] Gd OS ab 

PU mee oy ell Vy apt ped JB sare LBL MB mee § (1°) 
ur CO Ly. le ls GSB LEE, sol YL ol LI Sa Lge jais ld 
Myles 6 o8 5e janes gl ails OF pone jl Le] Jal BUS Gib SM, dol Yh 
plc a Las Alby Ib GF jae gh. Glau pba glee ct ye gl Glue 


\o 


10 


20 


30 


138 Book Four, Chapter Tivo 


the other bodies but differs from them in that that act proceeds from 
it,” then there is in its essence a meaning additional to corporeality— 
namely, the principle for the proceeding of the act from it. This is the 
thing termed “potency.” If it proceeds [(b)] from another body, then this 
act would [proceed] from this body either accidentally or through com- 
pulsion. But it was supposed to have proceeded neither by compulsion 
from another body nor accidentally.”! If [the act proceeds (c)] from a 
separate thing, then this body’s being exclusively related to this media- 
tion [of the act] from that incorporeal separate thing would be either 
due to its being body, or [due] to a potency in it, or [due] to a potency ir 
that separate thing. If it is by reason of its being body, then every body 
must share with it [this property of mediating the act], when [in fact] 
every body does not. If [this mediating property] is due to a potency in 
[the body], then that potency is a principle for the proceeding of that act 
from {the separate incorporeal thing]; this would also be the case if it?? 
had emanated from and by the help of the separate [principle], or because 
of its being the first principle in it. 

(21) If, however, this is due to a potency in the separate thing, then 
it is either [the case] that that very potency necessitates that [act], or 
that [it is necessitated by] an exclusive specification of a will. If [that] 
very potency necessitates that [act], then it must either be the case that 
necessitating that [act] is due to this very body for one of the [reasons] 
mentioned [above ]—which brings the discussion back to where we were 
before—or that this is by way of the will, in which case that will would 
have differentiated that body from other bodies, either because of a 
property peculiar to it, or as an haphazard venture and in whichever 
coincidental way. If [that will has differentiated the body] haphazardly 
and in whichever coincidental way, then it would not continue [to follow] 
this eternal order, or [a pattern] that is prevalent.23 For coincidental 
matters are those which are neither permanent nor prevalent. But natu- 
ral things are permanent and prevalent and, hence, are not coincidental. 

(22) It thus remains that this is due to a property peculiar to it and to 
no other body, and that this property [is such] that from it the proceeding 
of the act is willed. It then follows that this is willed either because that 
property necessitates that act, or that it [renders it to occur] prevalently, 
or that it neither necessitates it nor [renders it to occur] prevalently. If it 
necessitates it, then it is the principle of that [act]. If [it renders the act oS 
occur] prevalently,?* then that which is prevalent, as you have learned 1n 











rlettl yo ole \vA 


Go Ny eee sild 8 OSB lpr add IB gree ob YWlady Raed 9 oS 
op 3b oF aly £3 ee Gall ge UMay cass Jadll Ve gyno lau Phaad| 
op we Yep By eye pals ped Ie Se Jail Lhe GSS ST ae 
a eles 9S ol Wl SA jlo 8 oe OS Gly ee ST ee 
Ns Digi gh a Bigl gl pec go le ga Gylill ul yo Lea gl Lage pol 
Sy AD Sole ud SS) Ad Silt per I caer ga Le GS GB Sy lal 
Glib ye acts 08 QTL Lely cass add Id yee Lae byl MS AS gd GS 
[VAs] 43 SgV LA i$ gh cata hacy 

MS oF il ME oli 9S Gh UBS Wl Jad gM oll, (49) 
cl oleal 3K GI Je cals Cay 3g aid GO OB tab) Les 
ws OK 3 ly cl Sa os ae) 3 Sou ay so dee: od| Le of 
Me ee Rely ad es pe dL Yl lb BSS gh LL LY We cas J 
De Ne pot ol Gil GS Whom SEG . 8] BS Ble gl cpl flo 5. 
Si aySNY, a od) pastel AM gb SOL] gall lit 
ABEL Condd ANT, Ala Randall 5 pA 

eblulk oS, pled gle y eerily gs Kil 43 (11) 
ls Cos oth alls GV ul aly gi Ll see Vb add CIB ayn le lol 
2 55 Ob SU bau yK Wy cos Ys) SM ae 5S lc jal 
PH hale Beale W— SV B citl, SV 2o6 oh als Le ag 





3 ‘2 


\o 


ws 


20 


30 


40 


139 Book Four, Chapter Two 


the Physics, is the very thing that necessitates. It has, however, an imped- 
iment. This is because its having the property of having the matter 
[occur] prevalently is due to an inclination in its nature in the direction 
of what [proceeds] from it so that, if [that which would proceed from it] 
does not exist, this is due to an impediment. [Turning back to the second 
alternative, | that which is rendered prevalent is also necessitated in itself 
when there is no impediment—the necessitated being that to which the 
affair comes safely, free from an impediment. If, then, this special property 
neither necessitates it nor renders it [an occurrent] prevalent, then [the 
act’s proceeding] from it and its not [proceeding] from it would be one and 
the same. Being specifically attached to it would be a haphazard venture. 
But it has been stated that it is not a haphazard venture. 

(23) Similarly, if it is said that its being possessor of this special prop- 
erty has the higher claim [for the production of the act], this means that its 
proceeding from it is the more appropriate. Hence, it either necessitates 
it or facilitates its necessitation. That which facilitates is a cause, cither 
essentially or accidentally. If there is no cause that is essential other than 
it, then it is not accidental. [ This is] because that which is accidental is in 
accordance with the two above mentioned ways. It remains, then, that this 
special property is in itself necessitating. The necessitating special prop- 
erty is thus termed “potency,” and this is the potency from which bodily 
acts procced, even if [they do so] with aid from a more remote principle. 

(24) Let us [now] confirm [our] showing that every originated thing 
has a material principle, and thus we say in brief: Everything that is orig- 
inated after not being must necessarily have matter. [This is] because every 
gcnerated thing requires for its generation—before its generation—that 
it be possible of existence in itself. For, if it were impossible of existence 
in itself, it would not exist at all. The possibility of its existence does not 
consist in [the fact] that the agent has the power [to enact] it. Rather, the 
agent has no power to [enact] it if it is not possible in itself. Do you not 
see that we say, “There is no power over the impossible, power being over 
only that whose existence is possible”? If the possibility of a thing’s exis- 
tence were identical with the power [to enact] it, this would be as though, 
in this statement, we are saying, “Power is only that over which there is 
power,” and as though we are saying, “The impossible is not enactable 
by power because it is not enactable by power.” By examining the thing 
itself, we would not know, then, that this thing is {enactable] by power or 
not [enactable] by power; but [we would know this only] by examining 
the state of the power of the one endowed with power, whether or not it 
has power over it. If it becomes problematic for us to know whether it 1S 





etl» obey \r4 


Hack IK ST Mg Kgh molest sl pled Sony ills 
Leg tad 3 Lal 65M GSS GW KG Kid gb caer OS Le Gl 
tel lt 6 Sly Flee pV La sill wo to Ky He Kid gl 
‘Shea melas tolpent oy as 65 SN garg SYaosd 
[VAN] Ship Gu al Jy 

apie Jahn’ «Syl Kolb oli Cole S51 243 gb al (4) 
Sel ely lll le Ll My angen poe gla congo il «yl 
sel Je wall SY el yp alba d bth gslile So 6b 
9 athe Mi eLb doy es Letbl all gl 2a 6 SM pynall 
«dat ee sp Rie GO Gly Sie Lot janet pe syd olay 

de dole Fo LLY Jed bol bu soe Sol gly Sidy (16) 
K-46 $53 = Eid) Mgt IT PM ab tle Yas Kb 
0299 IHL pals EN Sh andi Doel act SEL AB ad Bagel 
VW Wea 3» Ke Ia ade jae Y Joldl cate yolb folal gl gs 
BORIS & ge pind Gy ale go VI gl sdb tl gy 
Layo ol Jb UT a Lae SB cade ayailh od go etl gS gel 3 
BS ae ued V8 ale 3 JEG! 35 US cspadlale L ke 5S 


CF sell ad Vlas ae spate 9b slate yates o sill le gl os I Ly 


gabe yyree ail kde LGB Vlad ale bo jalil sud Je 3 byes 5 


\o 


ery 


10 


20 


30 


140 Book Four, Chapter Tivo 


enactable by power or not enactable by power, we would not be able to 
know this at all. For, if we knew this by way [of knowing] that that thing 
is impossible or possible—and the meaning of impossible is that it is not 
enactable by power, and the meaning of possible is that it is enactable by 
power—then we would have defined the unknown by the unknown. It is, 
hence, evident—clear—that the meaning of a thing’s being possible in 
itself is other than the meaning of its being enactable by power, even if, 
in subject, the two are the same. Its being enactable by power is a neces- 
sary concomitant of its being possible in itself. Its being possible in itself 
is in terms of its being considered in itself, whereas its being enactable 
by power is in terms of its being considered in terms of its relation to 
that which brings about its existence. 

(25) Now that this has been established, we say: With every origi- 
nated thing, before its origination, it is in itself [such] that it is possible for 
it to exist or impossible for it to exist. That whose existence is impossible 
does not exist. That whose existence is possible is preceded by the possi- 
bility of its existence and [the fact] that it is possible of existence. It fol- 
lows, then, that the possibility of its existence is either a nonexistent idea 
or an existent idea. It is impossible for it to be a nonexistent idea; other- 
wise, the possibility of its existence would not have preceded it. It is, hence, 
an existent idea. But every existent idea either subsists in a subject or 
does not subsist in a subject. And everything that does not subsist in a 
subject has a special existence through which it is not necessary for it to be 
related. The possibility of existence, however, is only [what it is] in terms 
of [its] relation to that for which it is a possibility of existence. Hence, 
the possibility of existence is not a substance that is not in a subject. It is, 
thus, an idea in a subject and an occurrent to a subject. 

(26) We call the possibility of existence the potentiality of existence. 
And we term the bearer of the potentiality of existence, which has the 
potentiality of a thing’s existence, “subject,” “hyle,” “matter,” and other 
[names] according to various ways of considering [things]. Hence, every 
temporally originated thing is preceded by matter. We therefore say: 

(27) These sections we have offered [may] make one imagine that 
potentiality (in an absolute sense) precedes the act and is prior to it, not 
only in time. This is [a view] to which a generality of the Ancients inclined. 


|e 
ca 
H 





rlestl oly Ve: 


Ber ye la bye gf UY IT bs ay Gl Se ol cae [VAY] gyate pe 
tl Sal gaey abe spate ob al ge SE ae G8 KE sl dle til 
PIKE HGS gee I ely cad del See Wye Scale yu 
ade \yyate Sy laos fehl WS gly ale Igoe AS gee yb gp ae 
ale Lyyaite Sy a1 Uo ge and 9 SEAS, aad 9 ISS 
+ OD 9 al aslol sist » 

PISS Uaigom [SSB Sole KGL Joi Ub laa 8 dy (10) 
ere Sal, oy Y son gh SAly eae Yess) eu Siok 
et OG ge orgy SEH Joe Wb coe gl SGaly cod gey GR Ae 8 
6939209 Kel dines lb Vly yar ome OK Si lone «Iagerye gine gl Lagu 
gree BY sb gl epee BiB UB oy ae BG ore ee iL ae 
GE) Blane SKigl coe Vek opny ab prey BY al SG 
PY We ayes Rel bd ogey GEE] pal GLEN Lys Ul oe J 
Ped eles Pee oP se O51 8 Eee 

GO ag B Sole gany Soe SED op gl GK] eet ody (171) 
hiker Aj LLel anne LHS by doleg Jyty Le garye ri gtll ayeny 368 ad 
Syed doll Cee ad dole 6 gil 

— BLY Je ~ ig gl eas [VAT] Labs, gh cI pall ode gh (YY) 
cL je Male ad] Jl od + 8 lay forey glogll bd Yale darcy faall [5 


\o 


QS 


10 


20 


30 


141 Book Four, Chapter Tivo 


Some have made for hyle an existence prior to form and [maintained] that 
the Agent bestowed form on it thereafter, either [as something] initiated 
by Himself, or for some [other] reason beckoning Him to it—as was 
thought [in the latter case] by one who meddled in what is none of his 
affair and who lacked the competence to delve into [matters] similar to 
this. Such a person has thus said: “A sudden uncontrollable whim” befell 
something akin to the soul, [prompting it] to engage in [the task] of 
managing hyle and of endowing it with form. But it did not perform [such] 
managing well and was not equal to the task of [properly] endowing 
[hyle] with form.?6 The Creator then stepped in and [properly] set its 
[affairs] aright.” Some other has said: “These things moved throughout 
eternity by their natures in an irregular manner. The Creator gave help to 
their natures and gave them order.”?” Some among them have said: “The 
eternal is darkness, an abyss of an infinity that remains motionless, which 
was then set into motion”; or else [some have adopted the doctrine| of “the 
mixture” upheld by Anaxagoras. [They held such views] because they 
said that potentiality precedes the act, as with seeds and sperm and all 
things that are artifacts. We must, hence, examine this and discourse on it, 

(28) We say: The state of affairs regarding particular things that are 
generated and corrupted is as they have stated. For potency in [these 
particular things] precedes the act in terms of a temporal precedence. 
As regards universal things or eternal noncorruptible things, even though 
[they be] particulars, whatever is in potency never precedes them at all. 
Moreover, after [taking into account] these conditions, potency is poste- 
rior in all respects. This is because, inasmuch as potency does not subsist 
in itself, it must subsist in a substance that needs to be in act. For, if it 
had not become actual, it would not be prepared to receive anything. For 
that which is absolutely nonexistent cannot receive anything. 

(29) Moreover, something may well be in act without being required 
to have been anything in potency—as with the eternal entities, for these 
are always in act. In this respect, then, the reality of that which is in act 
is prior to the reality of that which is, in essence, potency. In another 
respect, also, potency needs to be actualized by something existing in act 
at the time of the thing’s being in potency, not in that the latter comes 
into existence with the act; for that [act] also requires something else to 
move it [and so on, with the process] leading to an actual existent that did 
not originate in time. In most cases, that which moves potency into act 








le ye oly V4) 


Pocal Lal lS ae 8 gual Mell Jett oly cay gall 13 lageny Joell em agian 
dlanje dV, ace Y La (ye ltl aw ace LS cat} sles pl Lely Aandi 
snmp nal Del yo Jot gE oy eI LS gl: JIB aL 
SB oe peeey Legs ly BE INGE ype et SVs seat 
BB QUIgleb Abie 2 OW elles IM Gee LA ol 
Jeph AY tig ghaglyl sl dalla) y» Call gl SB i pgey - lyelesy eb 
GSE asa OL 1 GM ely erga J sh cil LH gh ol SL 
Ab Sg Le Joti gh ghd «are, ere by ally spl 3 LS eal 3 
ob AJ le yp sauldl ast as bi Leis ul: gea (1a) 
CIB gly aed Y Waar FAH AN UL, Sglegh bls ball 5 sya 
Soong Soe alll ode oe 2 ay dC aL ST Yad Yb ae 
Jel Ogi tlow prem pa Gl ye Wap’ Wl ps Cu sha,dI gM als, 
re Ulan ad gale ob £4 b Upld lace GH Jul le Kiel gh sb 
[Vat]. Lt a gl WS 
AAT CS sd GK I ectow Vy Sail sett gH a (14) 
Amy yey INL Sgill akm JO fail, Le deem Ahh ode yd . faa lel Yb 
tll OS ey Jul opeye tte Jud cs gi ct sal gl Lal oT 
Tee li cles Lal al gb . asl pe yom ctll ald aoe Ul pad ay 


\o 


Qn 


10 


15 


20 


30 


142 Book Four, Chapter Tivo 


is something homogeneous with that act, existing in actuality before the 
action—as in the case of the hot that heats and the cold that cools. 
Moreover, it is often the case that that which is in potency, inasmuch as it 
is the subject bearing potency, comes into existence through that which is 
in act, where the act is prior to potency in time, not [contemporaneous] 
with it. For sperm comes to be from the human, and seed from the tree, so 
that, from [the former], a human comes to be, and, from [the latter], a 
tree. Hence, the supposition that the act in these matters precedes potency 
has no priority to the supposition that potency precedes the act. 

(30) Moreover, in conception and definition, the act precedes the 
potential. This is because you cannot define potency except as belonging 
to act, whereas, in defining and conceiving the act, you do not need [to 
maintain] that it belongs to potency. Thus, you define and intellectually 
apprehend a square without there occurring to your mind the potentiality 
of its receptivity, but you cannot define the potentiality to become a square 
except by mentioning the square either verbally or mentally, making this 
part of your definition. 

(31) Also, act is prior to potency in perfection and purpose. For 
potentiality is a deficiency, while actuality is a perfection. The good in all 
things is in conjunction with being actual. Where there is evil, there is 
that which is potency in some respect. For, when a thing is an evil, then it 
is either [(a)] in itself and in every respect an evil (and this is impossible, 
because, if it exists, then inasmuch as it is an existent, it is not an evil; but 
it would be an evil inasmuch as it lacks the existence of a perfection—as, 
for example, ignorance in the ignorant) or [(b)] because it necessitates 
this in another, as in the case of injustice in the unjust. For injustice is an 
evil because it decreases the nature of the good in the one who has injus- 
tice [as a characteristic] and [it lessens] safety, wealth, or some other 
thing in the one incurring injustice so that, inasmuch as it is evil, it is 
mixed with nonexistence and something that is in potency. For, if that 
which is in potency were not with or of [evil], then the perfections which 
necessarily adhere to things would [all] be present and there would be 
no evil in any respect whatsoever. 








PAY WAl| a oll Vey 


Sill he UB AI IST fy dace Jal ope tt I day 
+p Sykdly Game SEE Jail Jal JS agege Jail OMA) piles «ot al 
PSAs tll ge Bsa fle ye Lem Sp cig ga Lay Le LS Lal, 
ddly Sle ge GF bl ob asl & Vagal 13 glgh Jad gS > La 
seo Jal 2 yi) edd ipa Ue yey GLUL UWS ge Gh > spentll op 
«Jed $3 baal yi Gl ye Syl agal bo LAY 

of J USE VAY al JS sworlly ppl 8 Jal gb Lal, (+) 
poh oF LD spl al opp y et SLAY Ub ill Uy . Jed \gl Ya al 
SS NW ays pe sell oF SAS, SEB aly ede gl ab yp alidy 
see topr dlndy Seg) Ue @ 

MS Jealy Shed 58) Gd Abul, JUSTL ayall J5 fall gb Lal, (19) 
soy [VAO] Hdl Ley tlh ony Sad SI ee go Lt Fo 
ANS Slows Lay cary B ypey |p ld GS Gl WB LS SUS! « Sl gb. L 
pred etom Lb SG Uy cote ged ogee PES Ge loey hal 
oP Ul plata la NN Pe US ope Ub Coe a gl c fale Jbl fe SUS” 
coh) Anal llth ae sith yey La ll a ill yp yon 4 
Vy se Kapha Jy 5B pty pone bce pt pa tem yo GK cel pe gl 
ors yp doy gS oso LAW OZ SONS it al baw 


\o 


ay 


10 


20 


30 


145 Book Four, Chapter Three 


(32) It is clear, then, that that which is in act is the good, inasmuch 
as it is [in act], and that that which is in potency is either evil or that from 
which evil comes about. Know that the potential [to do] evil is better than 
actual [evil] and that being [good] in act is better than the potential [for] 
good. The evil person is not evil because of the potentiality of evil but 
because of the positive disposition toward evil. 

(33) To return now to where we were, we say: You have known the 
state of the priority of potency in the absolute [sense].?° As for particular 
potentiality, it may precede the act for which it is a potentiality, and it 
may be preceded by an act similar to it, whereby [its potentiality] derives 
from [the act]. This [latter circumstance] may not be necessary, but there 
may be with it some other thing through which the potential becomes 
actual. Otherwise, there will be no act at all, since potentiality by itseif 
is insufficient to become an act but requires that which would change it 
from potentiality to actuality. 

(34) You have thus learned that, in reality, act is prior to potency 
and, moreover, that it is prior in terms of nobility and perfection. 


Chapter [Three] 


On the complete, the incomplete, and what is above 
completion; on the whole and on the total 


(1) The complete, [when] first defined,! was defined in terms of enu- 
merated things? if all that had to be achieved for a thing would have 
been achieved in terms of number, such that nothing of [what needed to 
be achieved] remained nonexisting. It was then transferred to things hav- 
ing continuous quantity. It was thus said [that a thing was] “complete in 
stature,” since, for the populace, [stature] was also enumerable because it 
was known to the populace inasmuch as it is measurable; and, if measur- 
able, it was inevitably enumerated. They then transferred that to qualities 
and powers, saying, “Such [an individual] is complete in strength, com- 
plete in whiteness, complete in beauty, and complete in goodness,” as 
though all that ought to belong to him by way of what is good had taken 
place, nothing outside remaining. 


eR: 


seo 





eleds| a oll as 


jh pS path Gilly US ocem Ge SI ye Jal sath gl go (11) 
sal oy Lt Jal Sy chill yo pl Je I gl ely ttl an 
ANS tise Lyd wp KY, Cdl le 

Lily $ Lalas 5a puis Sle cabs oS 1 Syed cad St ews (rr) 
OSS Sm Wed Le Jeb pod By Sake 58 ge Gall Jal pails Aah al 
oy al al obo a ST ect Nye OS SS Gee Y ody fan yl 
MES hI 5 BEY Lary yd 5 oe Ci Jd K 
- Jal Sh yl gee 

ap lb poll eal, iil 5 asl ALY fall gl ude od (16) 
[VAT]. plasty 


[ett ail 
j2(¢) 


etl Ds «SO by pL Gp bey «ill el 


Gh sab ee GB UBL coal oly LAY Baye Seb Syl ll (9) 

US Jb bs age ye pb OB ye eo upd cca fram 28 + tl role GK 
sob ace La ol iS dala ob 2 LB fall Ki olga LAM YI 
Ba SI ep oe Si) 08 ly Cat Lem pe gape ose yd UV tae 
hy abl othy aL ply Seal ob US: LU ce gally SLES 3) as Isis 03 
TE A Gaels bam 8 Dy WOK lee b ee oS 


\o 


ia) 


10 


25 


30 


144 Book Four, Chapter Three 


(2) Moreover, if there was something homogeneous with the thing, 
[the latter] not needing it in something necessary or useful and the like, 
they deemed [the former] superfluous [and the latter] complete without 
it. Furthermore, if that which a thing needs for itself [to be complete] has 
taken place, [but] with it there [also] took place some other thing of its 
genus that was not needed for the basis of the essence of [the former]— 
except that, even if not needed in that [former] thing, it is useful within 
its category—it was said of all this: “It is above completion and beyond 
the end.” 

(3) This, then, is the complete and completion. It is as though it is a 
name for the limit. It is at first [used] for number, then for other [things] 
in terms of order. 

(4) The populace would also not say, of that which possessed num. 
ber, that it is complete if it were less than three; and, similarly, it is as 
though they would not speak of it as “a whole” and “a total.” It is as though 
the three became complete [for them] because it has a beginning, a mid- 
dle, and an end ([as if] a thing’s being [such] that it has a beginning, a 
middle, and an end renders it complete)—[this] because [for them] the 
origin of {the concept of] “completeness” lies in number. 

(5) Moreover, it is not in the nature of any number inasmuch as it 
is number to be complete in an absolute sense. For, in the case of all 
numbers, there will be those of the genus of its units that are not found 
in it. Rather, it would be complete only in being ten and in being nine;? 
but, inasmuch as it is number, it cannot be complete inasmuch as it is 
number. However, inasmuch as it has a beginning, a middle, and an end, 
it is complete. [This is] because, inasmuch as it has [only] a beginning 
and an end, it would be incomplete by way of there being nothing between 
them whose function is to be between them—namely, the middle. Use 
this as a measure to [judge] the rest of the divisions—that is, that there 
should be a middle but no end, or a middle and an end, but having lost 
that which should be the beginning. Moreover, it is impossible that there 
should be in number two beginnings of which one is not in some manner 
an intermediary, except in the case of two numbers; nor could there be 
two ends, one of which is not an intermediary in some manner, except 1D 


the case of two numbers. 


i 


i 
i 
| 





rtd) yp oly Vee 


iaics glingpe Pali clon Y Wy ed tll we OSE (1) 
a} eon ll LMS GO GLb eaiga GE etl Iglag Lily Pagly] cells os | 
fel Bailes ad ee ye eT eb te ery hem baa Be atl 
ilad JB cal dab oe Alelb Ball cto pl oh ob st + tol 
Aalall elygy plat Gp ai] rs 

Ge ays ch cael Vyl sty cdalyll pend SEG -plOdL, alll yo "[ 19] (r) 
[\AV] ES pl 

LIS ADE je Bl gOS) Lal gb ai] saall go gee Yoel OS (€) 
CAlgy Manlyy Lae Y MEE oye WR Sy cary Sa ide we 
_ saab BOS ple fool gY Ub aad gy Mlemlyy Lae a ttl oS ah Uy 

Lb 9K gl sve ep em y alae y rede Ye Gl (0) 
GS UL Ye £43 ogerye ped LS Llaey yr Go ane SG GAbYl de 
oe op bt SSSI be a one eee oy Uy hat, Atal 9 Ut 
Vand SS Cam Ge aN cpt gh Mlanlyy dity Le tee iy Uy 226 8 
Py ages GS TLE ye et ages Ab ed Le ey Lt OS 
ity Maes gh eee poly Henly a Kl I Lal fle ale ni, » leu 3 
erred jad slaell 2 She Sally le aK Slay bob 23, 
goad Vay daly Lasel pa gles Vy goad Vary denly 





ub. ee’ as 
9 ogy 


oy 


10 


15 


20 


50 


145 Book Four, Chapter Three 


(6) As for intermediaries, these can become many, except that, in 
their aggregate, they are as one thing in being intermediary. Moreover, 
multiplicity has no known limit. Hence, the realization of commencement, 
finality, and intermediacy is the most complete thing that can occur in 
an order [of this kind]. This belongs only to number and is confined only 
to being triune.* 

(7) If [now] we have indicated this much, let us desist from [dis- 
cussing] it [any further]. For it is not our custom to discourse on the like 
of these things that rest on persuasive suppositions and do not belong to 
the syllogistic, scientific methods. Rather, we say: 

(8) The sages have also transferred “the complete” to [make it refer 
to] the reality of existence. In one way, they said, “The complete is the 
thing which is such that its existence is not perfected by that which dors 
not belong to it. Rather, whatever [is needed for its perfection] is [already] 
realized for it.” In another way, they said, “The complete is that which 
has [the above] description with [the additional] condition that its exis- 
tence by itself in the most perfect way belongs to it alone and is realized 
for it, no [part] of it belonging but to it. And nothing of the genre and 
existence, in excess of this thing, is related to it in a primary way, not 
[even] by another cause.” 

(9) That which is above completion, [they held,] is that which has 
the existence which it ought to have and an excess of existence for the 
rest of things. It is as though it has the existence due to it, as well as that 
additional existence which it does not have to have [to be complete] but 
which is in excess [for the sake of other] things, this [excess] coming 
from its essence. They then made this the rank of the First Principle, who 
is above completion and from whose existence in Himself (not through 
the cause of another) emanates existence over all things, in excess of His 
own existence. 

(10) Then they assigned the rank of completion to one of the sepa- 
rate intellects which, in its first existence, is in act—not mixed with what 
is in potency—and does not expect another existence [to come about 
from it]. For, every other thing that comes about from it is also from the 


existence emanating from the First. 








PAY SOA ea oly \¢0 


t gS Alely \fl 3 ho oS IWS gl ym od LL Ul, (4) 
[AA] lsly Aad Spam G31 ake Udy re SU SOY I oly 
5S Vy oo Wb gSY, ale Os 3 3 ad & Le Al ye Law tly 
ADI pares 

win fe Bl gl lake ye lb case opel Ina HU tH ly (¥) 
JIE Jp dal Lal Ob jp cody RELI Ob SS le gs aN eLAN 

pC gh Aas ye YU cope SN Ate I AU Lgl 8 Lal LSI gL (A) 
IP MS ys eS fo ad gad Ue oagery hy J GL SLE ye ot pd gill go 
dent od ory Gl Leb ar nal Lp itl ge pl gh: Tay Ge Ly cad Jeol 
er palms pels cle Vacs aly dl pole ory eal gb JST ge 
cab eos Vy) aad be ad Hh age 

AV fl ope dllae ai al aoe Gill age glal b olcll ay (4) 
as jai Sy cd fo peed Gill ai opera aly ca an ill oageny dl gS” 
weg iy pl ya sill Jy MAS y La Lyla lb jo lldy «#LASU 
[VAR]. YS LAY Jo aagey je Mb ayoll cat one omy Vail U3 

Sri oo gery yl gb oe GN LiL Lyall oo fd LON Sy Lleny (9°) 
Nd [ase wee) Slt Sob sl loey bee Vy idl Lala Y 


AN oy Gallll aye 5p Lal 





lsd [as rey] | 


\o 


Q 


10 


20 


30 


146 Book Four, Chapter Three 


(11) Below completion they placed two things: the sufficient and the 
deficient. The sufficient is that upon which is bestowed that through which 
its own essential perfection is realized. The absolutely deficient is that 
which is in [constant] need of another to furnish it with [one] perfection 
after another. An example of the sufficient is the rational soul of the 
whole—I mean, the heavens. For it, in itself, performs the acts belonging to 
it and brings about the perfections that must come about successively, not 
all at once,° and which do not remain permanently,® except those among 
the perfections that belong to substance and form. For [the sufficient] 
does not separate from what is in potency, even though it has a principle 
that moves its potentiality into act, as you will learn. As for the deficient, 
it is like those things in [the realm of] generation and corruption. 

(12) The expression “completeness,” the expression “the whole,” 
and the expression “the total” are almost close in their signification. It is 
not, however, a condition of “completeness” that it should encompass a 
plurality, either in potency or in act. As for “the whole” [on the other 
hand] it must belong to plurality, either in potency or in act. Rather, unity 
in many things is the existence that ought to be for [the complete].’ As 
regards “completeness” in things possessing measure and number, in 
subject matter it seems to be identical with “the whole.” Thus, a thing is 
“complete” inasmuch as there is nothing remaining outside it and is a 
“whole” because what it requires is realized in it. Hence, in relation to 
the existing multiplicity restricted to it, it is a “whole”; and, in relation 
to that which does not remain outside it, it is “complete.” 

(13) Then there was a difference of opinion concerning the two 
expressions “the whole” and “the total,” in the manner the two are to be 
considered. At times, [philosophers] would say that “the whole” is said 
of both continuous and discrete [quantities], “the total” being said only of 
the discrete. At other times, they would say that “the total” is said specifi- 
cally of that whose posture does not change, while “the whole” is said of 
that whose posture changes, and that “whole” and “total” are both said 
of whatever has both states. 








elect ye OLY Ver 


deel gall go ASL, adlly ASU ryt LOM gga Igleny (19) 
JS ox Pl Mgt wall gel BL) ATI OP Anaté SUS fraoe, aye 
eB Ble YB colyand gol SU adel ett: SU Jt JUS ow 
WS ct Yt te it WOK gl oe IOS og, Y TN 
Maney pre BIS yp OO LY lets Lal 25 Vy ciel dads 
Lily. ae Le ols Se Jal MAB eee he 03 SH Gly Bah Lb Syl Y og 
_ addy SUI gb SN LBM cle bo gd alll 

KDW a 9G gl 9 atl dy Si Ld, pL bay (14) 
Bil cod SUL, Jal) spb 59K Lesa gh abet Ge ped pla 
Lily od a Gill ages ga LBM yo ase bc hadly gl all 550 
ross! 3 Slam 2 GK Gland alaslly poli olyd LAV 3 plat 
alow le M «J gay ace Lyk ot a ll toe ye Glin «ab 
Grph eB titly (fo 438, pad Baye ll SN Lal og ad pole 
[VA+]. <tr Tas] ey 

Sh Gs HS cle Je ably Ji Gad b GI (1) 
Ste abl oh sd sally « Jee I Ste Y aly « fetelly Jaret) Je, 
Keemy? (> 2 lay MS ards U Sy GS anos jad dels 
Accor Nilay Cts 





ie 60S AS,” 


ve 


\o 


oy 


10 


20 


25 


147 Book Four, Chapter Three 


(14) You know that these expressions ought to be used according to 
accepted idiom. In one way, it is preferable to say “whole” to that which 
has disconnection so as to have a part, for “the whole” is spoken of in rela. 
tion to the part. “The total” should also be likewise. For “the total” derives 
from the sum, and the sum belongs to actual ones or actual units. Usage, 
however, has applied it to whatever thing whose parts and [single] unit are 
in potency. “The whole” was originally considered to be astride the part, 
“the total” astride the one. It is as though “the whole” was considered as 
having within it that which would enumerate it, even if no attention is 
paid to its oneness, whereas it is as though the total was considered as hav- 
ing units, even though no one paid attention to enumerating it. 

(15) All this talk seems superfluous, however; for conventional usage 
has rendered them thereafter running the same course, so that “the 
whole” and “the total” came to be said also about things that are not 
quantitative, since these are amenable to be quantified accidentally, as 
with “the whole of whiteness” and “the whole of blackness,” or when they 
are prone to become intensified or weakened, as with “the whole of heat” 
and “the whole of power.” Moreover, a thing composed of different 
things—such as animal—is spoken of as a “whole,” since it is composed 
of soul and body. 

(16) As for “the part,” it is sometimes said of that which is enumer- 
ated and at [other] times of that which is something of the thing, having 
another with it, even though it does not enumerate [the thing]. Some- 
times this is specifically designated with the name “some.” Of the part, 
there is that where a thing divides, not in quantity, but in existence—as 
with soul and body, for the animal; hyle and form, for the composite 
thing; and, in general, that from which the thing whose principles are 


different is composed. 











rleasl iy oly \ev 


Dhael ale pile de Jatad gl coy bi ade gi ales cil, (14) 
Jt SOB 5 GS Jo Slat a3 gO U KS sda ghany ye way 
leds ely eabl ob cli G SG om Lal dl cosh lola 
ajper bia GOL fe addled 3 Jc Sc fed Slog gl Jad ste VS 
cbse ably cei ih boll 8 Kgl ad pe SSI [98] adh oly, 
58) Brey Meath dl gly “e[ede] 4 aK glad fe Kl ots 
02 Seth oly tel AS 9K glad om ae! 

Ger Id aw Label esl gb {faith ye aS Jal ha G5 (2) 
SI IS AMIS FB lly Sie Lal ple BS lot, 
WS pil WISE Gay 85 IY QW gl AS al pally a LIC’ F wll 
[VAN]. ay Gat oy 98 31 4S Gly AO USS LB 5 all Slay 

dae od aly roth o Lb GK Winky de Uses bab bibl, (09) 
PY a tll all pedis b epbl ty «jan ear ae Gat Legg codes VS GL 
tats SS yb small Badly Slee Godly patll fo coral SS 
Gos Paes lias oS orl 





wilco 1. caoed aly coom, oo" Sly (5 gS" 


res 


\o 





10 





BOOK FIVE 


Consisting of nine chapters 





Chapter [One] 


On general things and the manner of their existence 


(1) It behooves us now to discuss the universal and the particular. For 
this is also properly related to what we have finished [discussing]. [These] 
are among the accidents specifically belonging to existence. We say: 

(2) The universal is spoken of in three ways: “Universal” is said of 
the meaning by way of its being actually predicated of many—as, for 
example, the human being. Universal is [also] predicated of a meaning if 
it is permissible for it to be predicated of many, even if it is not a condition 
that these should exist in actuality—as, for example, the heptagonal 
house. For it is a universal inasmuch as it is in its nature to be predicable 
of many. But it does not follow necessarily that these many must exist— 
nay, not even one of them. “The universal” is [also] said of the meaning 
whose very conception does not prevent its being predicated of many. It 1s 
only prevented if some cause prevents it and proof indicates [such pre- 
vention]. An example of this is [the case of] the sun and the earth. For, 
inasmuch as these are intellectually apprehended as sun and earth, there 


- 148 - 








Ome arurit 
Jprad dant \ydy 
[eM ei] 

J25(1) 


Lao gory AAS Meld yell 


Wal Ganka « Sib, Si 2 MAS JI tks [80] (9) 
Syed coger gh Lolbl aleM ye gay auld’ 


Sabb, San lage ye paall OES ogery le Ste, 3 KT gL (1) 


be cue Ge Jeo ol Ile GO Ua) paalb lay Glad fe nS Ue 
tarde ie Sh am Ge SAN Spel all ga Jha Ja Syd ser pl Leite 
Ye de pov ye Blew Y yy SH lg] 9S I Coe ped Sy cu Ue les 
ae eos Lil Sy Be Sealine oe le Y il gaald Slay pes vols! 
Lass Lad fas om Ng ey ntll fo «a Abe Jay Ce oe 


a\tA= 





oi 


10 


20 


30 


149 Book Five, Chapter One 


is nothing to prevent the mind from allowing their meaning to exist in 
many, unless a proof or an argument makes it known that this is impossible, 
This, then, would be impossible because of an external cause, not by reason 
of its very conception. 

(3) It is possible to combine all this [in saying] that this universal is 
that whose very conception does not prevent its being predicated of many, 
The universal used in logic and what is akin to it must be this. As for the 
particular that is singled out, this is [the thing] whose very conception 
prevents its meaning from being predicated of many, as with the essence 
of this Zayd to whom one points. For [the essence] cannot be imagine¢ 
except as belonging to him alone. 

(4) The universal, then, inasmuch as it is a universal, is one thing; 
and, inasmuch as it is something to which universality attaches, it is 
[another] thing. The universal inasmuch as it is a universal is that which 
is denoted by one of [the above] definitions. If that [indicated thing] 
happens to be “human” or “horse,” then there is another meaning other 
than the meaning of universality—namely [to take the latter example] 
“horseness.” For the definition of “horseness” is not the definition of uni- 
versality, nor is universality included in the definition of “horseness.” For 
“horseness” has a definition that is not in need of the definition of univer- 
sality, but is [something] to which universality accidentally occurs. For, in 
itself, it is nothing at all except “horseness”; for, in itself, it is neither one 
nor many and exists neither in concrete things nor in the soul, existing 
in none of these things either in potency or in act, such that [these] are 
included in “horseness.” Rather, in terms of itself, it is only “horseness.” 
Rather, oneness is an attribute that conjoins with “horseness,” whereby 
“horseness” with this attribute becomes one. Similarly, in addition to this 
attribute, “horseness” has many other attributes that enter it. Thus, 
“horseness”—on the condition that, in its definition, it corresponds to 
many things—becomes general; and, because it is taken with properties 
and accidents to which one points, it is specific.' “Horseness,” however, is 
in itself only “horseness.” 

(5) If we are asked about “horseness” [in connection with] the two 
terms of what is contradictory (for example, “Is ‘horseness’ A, or is it not 
A?”) the answer would only be negation for whatever thing there is—— 
not [however] that the negation comes after “inasmuch as,” but [rather] 








rectly oly) ve4 


Sh pte gl flo ah gl SB serpin gl sae l oe pail ee Y 
[VAN] say ga cuted Y Qe ye oy et ad Ky a Le 

Prenat aii es Y gall pm lan gl Bah Lie earn gl Ke aby (1) 
Ain 2 Mal Ley sleet Jartoall 5 9S gl omy «ue ee dle gl 
Ie ae) OS «pS Me cline Sah keyed Gilly 9 yal Gal uy, 
casey JY pag gh poten ab fad} Lt 

SI aia et om Gy tS te» ISIE (4) 
US GT UL’ fayadl ede relate Jn be pe WS pacee ye Wb 
ttyl Ao GLb Reel py AIST ae ob FT ee lg Lend | CLG) 
ja Ve Yell ob yl ae Gas USI, ASI oe 
CN AY pe et ed BOB ISIS eed IIS 1 
ill Uy SLE 8 ape Vy SY, wel) Vaud Bal aya 
O be Aeyall GWE bs BS gl de Lal Vy ab bd ye BY, 
Ch rill pS Rl Wop Abe elt bp Lda gs tee 
Ne Atle 395 gh cline Mall ali ee Lyd LIS ino, Anal ob 
SL WY, mules SoS 25 ol laroy ales teil Lo pite ~ dll 
[WV] bb ia Qed Gadd Lok OSS Wl lel ie 

Sate a gh Allo tae al Bde dl ge UL GB (2) 
JK Eom Ge de La I ge pod 5 et A CLI Wid Ge 


\o 














ior 


10 


20 


25 


30 


150 Book Five, Chapter One 


before “inasmuch as.” In other words, it must not be said, “‘Horseness? 
inasmuch as it is ‘horseness’ is not A,” but “Inasmuch as it is ‘horseness,’ 
it is neither A nor anything else.” 

(6) If the two [opposed] terms of the question [arise] from two affir- 
mative [alternative] statements that exclude anything else,” there is no 
necessity at all to give an answer to [these] two. In this [lies] the differ- 
ence [between] the rule governing [these two] and [that governing] the 
affirmative and negative [statements] and the two afhirmative statements 
that have the potentiality of two contradictories.> This is because the affir- 
mative of the [latter] two, which is the necessary concomitant of the nega- 
tive [of the other], means that, if the thing is not described by that other 
affirmative statement, then it is described by this one. It is not the case, 
however, that, if [the thing] is described by it, [the description] refers to 
its quiddity. For it does not follow that, if a human is one or white, the 
haecceity of humanity is identical with the haecceity of unity or whiteness, 
or that the haecceity of humanity is the haecceity of the one and the white. 

(7) If, in the question, we render the subject the haecceity of human- 
ity inasmuch as it is humanity as one thing, and if it is asked about the two 
contradictory terms and it is said, “Is it one or many?” it is not necessary 
to give an answer. [This is] because, inasmuch as it is the haecceity of 
humanity, it is something other than either, there existing in the defini- 
tion of that thing nothing but humanity. 

(8) As for [the question of ] whether it is one or many insofar as this 
is a description that attaches to it from the outside, it is inevitable that it 
should be described as such. But it would not be that [thing] which is 
described, inasmuch as it is only humanity [for example]. Hence, it would 
not be many inasmuch as it is humanity; rather, it would be as though 
[multiplicity] is a thing that attaches to it from the outside. 

(9) Hence, if our perception of it is inasmuch as it is only humanity, 
we must not mar it by considering some external thing that would render 
our consideration two: a consideration of it inasmuch as it is the thing 
that it is, and a consideration of the things that attach to it. [Now,] with 
respect to the one first consideration, it would not be anything except 
only humanity. For this reason, if someone were to say, “Is the humanity 
of Zayd, inasmuch as it is humanity, [something] other than the one 17 
‘Amr?” he must answer, “No.” From his conceding this, it does not follow 





elecsl Sa oll \O* 


inp A Se oe Keel iL Sth ol oe Gad gh tee ge JB al Ye 
EY gy ty Hh te yp cad th 

FS de oh et le Be Vahey ge WLU Bb gy (1) 
«geal gb gb ell oom ally WILL, Ke ll SSO Fe gy EI Lge 
per ttt Sap) Bich al gal pa nll ly 
ALA 4) ote gh Gh aly ose Ming bey Bh Vice lieth, 
sharonph dagen 0 ALM Saye C58 al gh Lely glad GO UL pad Ald «ye 
pila elas publ aa ak lege 

SLi gp ee pe GLY aye BLU ppl le BE (V) 
[YA] clang ejheel SoS pl ge oe lgl hob cael Sob ge feng carly 
Se Ds Vy Lge ely Fe LY Aye tee y Mel 
» Aas ASLAN YL 6 

WB Ge yp Ain heey dl eS jl aely db oy Jaa bly (4) 
Maid A LuiL ga tam ye Cage gh BS 52 QS Y Sy cy Coy al dls 
CE oy Henk ot lb TOK Ul bp LS pRLAl pte y (Kw 

te aig gl oe 16 Leib RSL] go ee HB QOH (4) 
Se ta Ae) Ol ely cg gt Leal] fe ste atl be ey 4 
F ALY ob : fb Ig) Igo Ja ASLAN YY SV! vet gh fas 
Ot thonds Vids l ld Syne BAe A PRL tee yoy 


\o 


10 


20 


50 


151 Book Five, Chapter One 


that he should say, “That [humanity] and this [humanity] are numerj. 
cally the same,” because this has been an absolute negation. By this nega- 
tion we meant that this humanity inasmuch as it is humanity is simply 
humanity. Its being other than the one in ‘Amr is something extraneous. 
For, if it were not something extraneous to humanity, then it would nec. 
essarily follow that humanity inasmuch as it is humanity is either A or 
not A—and this we have shown to be false. We have taken humanity only 
inasmuch as it is humanity. 

(10) It may, however, be said:* “We have made for humanity inas- 
much as it is humanity a consideration where [the fact] that it is in Zayd, 
or the one that is in Zayd, is removed from it. Otherwise, it would be 
the case that we have taken humanity as being in Zayd. For we have 
abstracted it and discussed [it] on condition that we pay it attention 
[only] when it is humanity.” [But then,] either [(a)] we refer the allusion 
“that it is” to the humanity in Zayd—which would be an impossible 
assertion, since a humanity in Zayd [and a humanity] considered to be 
only humanity do not combine; [or else, (b)] if it refers to humanity only, 
then the mention of Zayd would be superfluous talk, unless we mean [by 
this] that the humanity which happens to be in Zayd is an extraneous 
occurrence from which we have detached its being in Zayd. Is this, then, 
the case {with humanity]?° But, then, this would also include a consider- 
ation other than humanity. 

(11) If [after this] someone asks, saying, “Do you not answer, saying, 
‘It is not such and such [a thing]; and its not being such and such [a 
thing] is other than its being humanity inasmuch as it is humanity’?” we 
say, “We do not answer by saying that inasmuch as it is humanity, it is not 
such [and such a thing], but we answer that it is not, inasmuch as it Is 
humanity, such [and such a thing].”® The difference between these two 
[statements] is known from logic. 

(12) There is here, moreover, something else—namely, that the sub- 
ject in questions [of this kind] is almost [always] due to indefiniteness when 
no determinate quantification is attached to them and [hence] will yield 
no answer unless one renders that humanity [of which we are speaking] 








elecdl pole \o\ 


teity «Uller Ue GS Lan GY could trol ty wb 3B : gia gl Lhe ant 
GA EWS LBL GL pee ~GLY ali gi La by 
islet GSS ol LY Ge LE I Gol ghey Lb pe 
SSLLS USL Lely ls What by BIL cud gl othe dl SLL] pe tae 
[VAN]. etd cll pe te ye 
BAL pte yay Bb AGLI: J Ld be (+) 
Ob PAN a5 BW Ngo Lede ASL] atom y LUE LY Uae] 
Ul fe LASS Labo 3 6B cay Od Wl Ge SLM bos! 3 "Ty X37 VW, 
AVL UBD AIS po SI UAVS ASL ay ll eat 
NEL A995 PULL GS ol AV Ab Sad Vow Ue S305 
LLY gl oes gl \ al 15 $15 Lib GL flew gl » dats ALG] \l 
Vee JP a5 3 pe theta 5) 1g GEG] OE y Wee Ol 
ALY pb lel a3 Lal boy 
NES 5 ISG SENG IB pd ere adlt By Lela B(99) 
Bhat atom cy gb ZY Ui lyd HSL oo LIL SP 1S 1S 
= Sal 9 legey yi he By VISAS tam ye ceed Bhd fe Sr 
lee KR Blah ae foe a peal Sl yey eh et key (1) 
UY] hb Ja Sl Yall lam Wee GS, pare lt ol Lal JL 





F199 GS GSS" cy lee. Yer 


\o 


hey 


10 


15 


20 


30 


152 Book Five, Chapter One 


as though it is [something that is] being pointed to or that does not include 
plurality. In this case, then, our utterance “inasmuch as it is humanity” 
would not form part of the subject. [This is] because it would only be 
correct to speak of “humanity, the one which is [taken] inasmuch as it is 
humanity,” when [such an expression] reverts to being indefinite. [For,] if 
it is said [without indefiniteness] “that humanity, the one which is [taken] 
inasmuch as it is humanity,” reference to it would have occurred; it thus 
adds [something to its being] humanity [ pure and simple]. 

(13) Moreover, if we are tolerant in this, whereby [we allow] both 
terms of the question to be negative and where it does not necessarily 
follow that [the subject] is one or many, [or that it refers to] itself or [to] 
an other—except in the sense that it is inevitable for it to [refer] either 
to itself or [to] an other?—we would then say: 

(14) It is inevitable that [humanity] should become an other through 
the accidents that are with it, since it does not exist at all except with 
accidents (in which case it is not taken inasmuch as it is only humanity). 
Since [for example] it is not the humanity of ‘Amr, it is not his humanity 
in terms of accidents. These accidents would thus have an influence [(a)] 
on the individual Zayd [for example] in that he would consist of the 
aggregate of man or of humanity and necessary concomitant accidents 
that stand as though they are parts of him, and an influence [(b)] on man 
or humanity in that these are attributed to [Zayd]. 

(15) We will now return to the beginning and sum all this up, express- 
ing it in another way as a reminder of our discussion that has transpired. 
We say: 

(16) There is here something perceived by the senses—namely, animal 
or man, together with matter and accidents. This is natural man. There 
is [also] here something which is animal or human—viewed in itself in 
terms of it itself, without taking with it what has mingled with it and 
without its having the condition that it is either general or specific, one 
or many, whether in actuality or also through the consideration of potency, 
inasmuch as it is in potency. For animal inasmuch as it is animal, and 





eleds| Sy ole! VOY 


Pte Wg SOY and ba QL GLY 
PES HA ALY gf Sle gl char VM cppiogll bg GL 
AaLa e Sm yA ALY all + 13 ob aby cole 23, Yast} 
ASLAN! Je ool s LEY Iyll by UK 

Comply Wee Gusher BLU 5 GU 9 SG lS LB LL gl (V9) 
ee oKls AY al gar he Ve gl ye ge LoS gh Lely KI 

or LR ns ob lgee SALE Lb aad al ge Wad (14) 
ASL] od 5b LB LG etm yy BSL SY deny ee 
wh ay gated ob Sb al eM dg GK cual eV ILI ob Ub ye 
DLN Sty cae eyed BRGY alely SLM gl LLY pyre 
Ad) pee Wg ASLAN 

ha USI etl ila ae pty na eats uly ge aay (12) 
ed Wd yy 

aay «erlsey dale we Lal JN lad ge Legon Lt bya gl (99) 
Co EATS I Lyles GLY gl glydh oe «2 berg carla LAY! ys 
ely gi [19] ee gl ple Slbyb abbots by cab dee Sole ob 
cle 8 Le lab SL bgt gs tam yy Lad agill Look Yy fad 5) 


\o 











ion 


20 


25 


30 


158 Book Five, Chapter One 


man inasmuch as it is man—that is, with respect to its definition and 
meaning, without any attention being paid to other matters conjoining 
it—is nothing but animal or human. 

(17) As for animal—in the general [sense], particular animal, ani- 
mal with respect to its being considered in potency as either general or 
specific, animal considered as existing in the concrete or intellectually 
apprehended in the soul—it is animal and a thing. But it is not animal 
viewed alone. It is known that, if it is animal and a thing, then “animal” 
is in the latter two as though a part of both. The same is the case with, 
respect to man. 

(18) Considering animal in itself would be permissible even thoug i 
it exists with another, because [it] itself with another is [still] itself. Its 
essence, then, belongs to itself, and its being with another is either an 
accidental matter that occurs to it or some necessary concomitant to its 
nature—as [is the case with] animality and humanity. Considered in this 
way, it is prior in existence to the animal, which is either particular by 
[reason of ] its accidents or universal, existing [in the concrete] or [in the 
mind]® in the way that the simple is prior to the complex and the part to 
the whole. In this [mode of ] existence,® it is neither genus nor species, 
neither individual, nor one, nor many. But, in this [mode of] existence, it 
is only animal and only human. 

(19) However, it necessarily adheres to [animal or man] that it should 
be either one or many, since no existing” thing is devoid of this, except 
that these necessarily adhere to it extrinsically. [Now,] this animal with 
this condition, even though existing in every individual [instance], is not 
[rendered] by this condition a certain animal—[this] even though it 
becomes necessary for it to become a certain animal because, through 
this consideration, it is, in its reality and nature, a certain animal. 

(20) The fact that the animal existing in the individual is a certain 
animal does not prevent animal inasmuch as it is animal—T[that is], not 
through a consideration of its being an animal in some state—from 
existing in it. [This is] because, if this individual is a certain animal, then 
a certain animal exists. Hence, animal [inasmuch as it is animal] which 
is part of a certain animal exists. This is like whiteness. For, even though 








slatll yp Oley yor 


s 


pdb AL sgl Gethe F colemy we Koel Glglil yo i GLa, 
Veal sh Ces! 

aydh bl jel Re op Slab «poet old, celal ld! uly (sv) 
Sly 9 anil Bdsm gl shelly spr pal eb ghebly pelt gl ele 
Lag Se etiy Slam OO Lal pany srry ll Lyssa garde Hy 
glean he (9 WIS Lage oh OGL A 

1b apd ea lS MY cape po GT Gly Hila Sls SLL ely (4) 
Lae ALAM, ALO Card SY gla ware plone oi Casliy a 18 
£5299 Kal Ad ylye part 52 sil Gldl le 2eJl LB pate Le 
yar PY oss ey SOI ge phy SI de bal pals «se 4) 
Aad yluily Lid gly m ost lhe eb SY vay Yy ee Vy psy 

rgth Lager gh YS lp 'S gh lamly GK Gl lee Yass aS (14) 
lagmge SE ly Lepatl lay lab lay TE yp a iY ulls jie ose 
see Sh sgh GO ly «le Cyr oy tll Ug, 9% pel cadet Up [10] 
Lolo CA bg tal, tis sal 0 ti 

OWS GS gl be Thee Gatettl geal SLL aS es eds (1°) 
Latatll ae GO LAY cab lageye cle Slee glam dl liek Y cglpe gals 


\o 





10 


20 


25 


30 


154 Book Five, Chapter One 


not separable from matter, it exists in its whiteness in matter as some. 
thing else, considered in itself, having its own reality, even though it so 
happens that this reality is conjoined in existence with something else. 

(21) Someone, however, may say: “Animal inasmuch as it is anima] 
does not exist in individuals. [This is] because that which exists in indi- 
viduals is a certain animal, not animal inasmuch as it is animal. More- 
over, animal inasmuch as it is animal exists. It is, hence, separate from 
individuals. If animal inasmuch as it is animal were to exist in this individ- 
ual, then it either belongs specifically to it or not specifically. If it belongs 
specifically to it, then animal inasmuch as it is animal would not be tha 
which exists in it, or that which is identical with it, but [would] be a certair 
animal. If it were not to belong specifically to it, then a thing numerically 
one and the same would exist in plurality, and this is impossible.” 

(22) Although it is feeble [and] inane, we have reported this doubt 
because, due to it, a difficulty has, in our time, befallen a group that 
flounders in philosophizing. We thus say: 

(23) Error has influenced this doubt in a number of ways. One of them 
is the belief that, if what exists of animal is a certain animal, then the 
nature of animality considered in itself, without any further condition, 
does not exist in it. Demonstration of the error of this belief has been 
previously given.'! The second is the belief that animal inasmuch as it 
is animal must be either particular or not particular, by way of “equi- 
pollence.””? But this is not the case. Rather, animal when looked upon 
inasmuch as it is animal is neither particular nor nonparticular—namely, 
that which is general. On the contrary, both [alternatives] are denied it 
because, from the direction of its animality, it is only animal. And the 
meaning of animal inasmuch as it is animal is other than the meaning of 
the particular and the general, these two, moreover, being not included 
in its quiddity. If this is the case, then, in its animality, animal inasmuch 
as it is animal is neither particular nor general but is [only] animal, not 
any other in terms of things or states. But it follows it, as a necessary con- 
comitant, to be either particular or general. 








elects iy oly \O¢ 


pe gt ail le SoUll 3 agony Aoaley op doll Glee pF GO Gly bb 
al \yel agi wl gl ADI AM oye gh jly cally ae by aildy 

cet’ Pr oF Slem ok Gl gl Spe gl play (19) 
PUD Elm 2 Leg LY L Shem ge EAM 3 aye ll oI 
laser xe Slam 98 Le Sled OS sly PRA bee i) yb cope ye Ol a> 
Pips ek 3h bb ok 2 ld LE Sl Le Joa) « yasestll dy 
SE PE se ST Sly ESL pot gad oprll ge glee yp Ls old! 
slows Nay BS lageye sad aay ely eat 

tea cody 1B AI a liaygl Blac KS gS gly elt aay (19) 
Spt dell ob bets ye allel Noe Lily ay tl 

Sb fal aol ine ogey je bl ad [1-7] Bs BALE Meg) (11) 
Sib a Y Gly ica dL Dab gb cb pe QL colt ye oyegll 
PUES Gb lll « Sy pa 28 fll Le LIE Slay addayeye GY 
LNA fp IS aly Spall ee 2 pe gl Lett 9 SGI on Ola 
cpill oe Si el Ey Loe Sib Clee tee ey Glam sale al be 
Der al Bled gary ‘Laid Spm Calpe Rye ye aN cass LL LOS 
ole So MS GTI, ah 3 Lal gels Ly cplaly Leth eae pe 
Sey Al yond Volar ye dle 3 Le Y, Les glam ok 
Ale gl Lobe 9K gl anh a 


\o 


a 


10 


30 


35 


155 Book Five, Chapter One 


(24) Hence, [regarding] his statement, “It must be either particular 
or general,” if he means by his statement that, in its animality, it is not 
devoid of these two alternatives, [this is not the case]; for, in its animality, 
it is devoid of both. If [on the other hand] he means that in existence it is 
not devoid of the m—that is, it is not devoid of the necessary concomitance 
of one of them—then he is [saying] what is true. For it is a necessary 
concomitant of animal to be either particular or general. Whichever of the 
two occurs to it, it would not annul animality for it, which is considered 
as neither particular nor general but which becomes particular or general 
thereafter by reason of whatever states occur to it. 

(25) Here there is something which you must understand—namely, 
that it is true to say, “Animal inasmuch as it is animal is not [something] 
of which ‘particularity’ and ‘generality’ must be said,” but it is not true 
to say, “Animal inasmuch as it is animal necessitates that ‘particularity’ 
and ‘generality’ must not be said of it.” This is because, if animality were 
to necessitate that “the particular” and “the general” should not be said 
of it, then there would be neither an animal which is particular nor an 
animal which is general. 

(26) For this reason,'* there must be a distinction standing between 
our statement, “Animal inasmuch as it is animal is in abstraction, without 
the condition of some other thing,” and our saying, “Animal inasmuch as it 
is animal is in abstraction, with the condition that there is no other thing.” 
If it were possible for animal inasmuch as it is animal to be in abstraction, 
with the condition that no other thing exists in external reality,'* then it 
would be possible for the Platonic exemplars to exist in external reality. 
Rather, animal, with the condition that there is no other thing, exists 
only in the mind. As for the animal abstracted without the condition of 
anything clse, it has existence in the concrete. For, in itself and in its true 
nature, it is without the condition of another thing, even though it may 
be with a thousand conditions that associates with it externally. 

(27) Thus, [considered in terms of] pure animality, animal exists in 
the concrete. This does not render it necessary for it to be separable. 
Rather, it is the thing in itself, devoid of the attendant conditions, which 
exists in the concrete but which has been enclosed from the outside by con- 
ditions and states. Thus, within the bounds of the unity by virtue of which 








rletsl ye Oly yoo 


paola ve gl be gS JLo 9 S5i Le) Jou al alga (1) 
cad Bee EVA ge ay Calne 8 lage JE BSL OB lage 
JE GK dling e wih led gb dole 8 Lael ayy ye JAY Gl 
Je pe Vs cele ad be leek oe ML Sas flo dad Be Lagly ble 
ae op Wd cee ly laa ile l Lels ay 

Sle 9 Uolebl ol tll go al yay angi Gl co et keay (1°) 
Shem eK Sledl SURG! gee Gals pee gl ead abe Sth Y gl ow 
Ag Ryd Ci al dy copae gl yepas abe Je LY] shoes 
ple lem sh UE Sle Kicl pee gl ened \gle Sle V gl [ve] 

Slee eK Sled SL dod lop BG GK ol oe all ty (19) 
Yboyts aye lee 8 Le Sldl gl tai ol ayy pel et byt oy oe 
SEY gl Leyte lame Slee 9 Ld Kgl easy eles 
SLEW ayy SOM LUSK je gi GLE Bovey ole 
Leyte Y bayeee Sla bl Ly LB spill Gorgey ST eV byte old 
Oly ele tb boy cide by aed lb LEM D apny ab oT et 
BE y Hebe le of 

Shae > oy ely che 9 aye ye Lily dex Gleb (VV) 
SLE 3 byey MDM LAL AI ge JIE aad OF ga gill ga Bulb gS 
SE poly le Airey ow Sel, Lilt Ok 5 iS, 





gis oY abs} 


\o 











a 


10 


20 


25 


30 


156 Book Five, Chapter One 


it is one among that group [that has unities], it is animal in abstraction, 
without any condition—even though that unity is additional to its anj- 
mality, being, however, other than the other concomitants. If there were 
a separable animal here, as they believe, this would not be the animal we 
are seeking and discussing. For we seek “animal” that is predicable of 
many, in that each of the many is identical with it.’° As for the separate 
[thing] that is not predicable of these, since none of them is identical with 
it, [this is something] we have no need for in what we are seeking. 

(28) Animal, then, taken with its accidents, is the natural thing. What 
is taken in itself is the nature, of which it is said that its existence is prior 
to natural existence {in the manner of] the priority of the simple to the 
composite. This is [the thing] whose existence is specified as being divine 
existence because the cause of its existence, inasmuch as it is animal, 1s 
the providence of God, exalted be He. As regards its being with matter 
and accidents and this individual—even though through the providence 
of God, exalted be He—it is due to the particular nature. And, just as in 
existence animal has aspects above the one, likewise [it has them] in the 
mind. For there is in the mind the form of animal abstracted in the man- 
ner of abstraction which we have mentioned, and in this respect it is 
called intellectual form. There is also in the mind the form of animal with 
respect to what corresponds in the mind (in terms of one specific definition) 
to many concrete instances. As such, the one form would be related in 
the mind to a plurality. In this respect it is a universal, being an idea in the 
mind whose relation to whatever animal you take does not differ. In other 
words, whichever [of these instances you take] whose representation is 
brought to the imagination in any state—the mind thereafter abstract- 
ing its pure meaning from accidents—then this very form is realized for 
the mind. This form is what is realized as a result of abstracting animality 
from any particular image, taken either from an external existent or from 
something that plays the role of an external existent—even if it itself 
does not exist externally but [is something] the imagination invents. 








ele oy OLgy! yor 


Lage JF tt) oN AK Gly sls t byt wh ee gle dd 
SNdl ee Sap) oye WG ke gle bya gh yee getall 2 YS, 
op ly FOR ob aS le Wye thee Cle UY cake Sy ala gl 
PP Neh oad Me de Vee a sill UI Le ye gS 
sth pe Ld all by de oe 
daca gaily 992g cada 6 tll ye a hyn Ibyrl gl bb (1A) 
9 SB Le bee pade garda 39 5 pall Logey [+0] gl dlls 
1 JE AV ALE Shae 0 Ug yy eee MV AM age fl ah eryory gate il 
Ball as ob Ss all ben GO Sly Gesetsl hag G2yleey ish eo iS Ul, 
PIP - fiall BA MIT rely GB Hil oy 31 9 Sead gl LG fag LI 
etd ae sy Copenh 5 ob 5 Gill ull Glo oyoall Gly sy go fill 
Ara daly tow Jaall 9 lla dye 5 Glybliy yo Lal Lill by Slee 5) yo 
(Sey We ay BS Bl idl aoe Milian BO $5 pal 9 9 5S ULE 
Ssh ctl eh ye isl soly i Ys GEE Y Jil b sely eee gy 
Pll 3F line ayome Jill I be Slow SLI 3 aye Spael lye aol, 
UH out oe fae le ping OCIS. Yew trail Jill 3 ae 
CE & aye gow dela’ y re oF dtl part Js dye 


Stas yl TE op Ae oma al oly 


\O 


oO 


10 


20 


30 


157 Book Five, Chapter Two 


(29) This form, although a universal in relation to individuals, is an 
individual in relation to the particular soul in which it is imprinted, being 
one of the forms in the mind. And, because individual souls are numeri- 
cally many, it is possible for this universal form to be numerically many 
from the aspect that it is individual. There would be another universal 
intelligible for it, standing in relation to it, as it stands in relation to what 
is external. [The universal intelligible] differs in the soul from this form 
that is universal with reference to what is external in that it is predicable 
of [itself] and of another.'® We will speak of this again shortly, expressed 
in another way. 

(30) General things in one respect exist externally, and in one 
respect they do not. As for a thing that is numerically one and the same 
being predicated of many—[in the sense] that it is predicated of this 
individual [such that] this individual is identical with it—and in the 
same way being predicated of another individual [with which it would 
also be identical], the impossibility [of this] is evident and will be clarified 
further. Rather, general things, inasmuch as they are actually general, 
exist only in the mind. 


Chapter [Two] 


On the manner in which universality comes to 
belong to universal natures; completing the discussion 
of this [topic]; and on the difference between the 
whole and the part, the universal and the particular 


(1) You have thus ascertained what, among existing things, is the 
universal—namely, that it is this nature to which one of the meanings 
we have named “universal” has occurred. This meaning has no existence 
by itself in concrete things at all. For, the universal inasmuch as it is a 
universal does not exist separately, by itself. What raises a doubt about 
its state of affairs is [the question] of whether it has an existence as 
occurring to some things whereby, for example, there would be some- 
thing in concrete existence which is human that in its very self exists for 


Zayd, “Amr, and Khalid. 


eles] Sa oll ov 


Bh Bb AK EA A LBL CIO Gly by pall day (14) 
OMe FD A anal Roly ay add yb cal Sahl 
OF 20h 3ST 5 all ode GSS gh 3] jynd coadl Saad pill 
Meee Nell lh 8 AT STUN] dyer Wy anedd Wy ge Al 
CE AM Se Miya de ge pth 8 jody Ge UI rill 
SPN igka a8 OF Ie BPS eng Lad ey Ye Bb 9K gh 

Pea em rater TE op eee he y lal AB (¥5) 
CS etl le VS 5K 55 cle liar alae oath 
Halal sgAIL Je Oly slajgeny cGy ab NS ST ast bey « ga patel 
[¥°V]. Laed fell > ba ym ye call dale al tye oy 


[ sl Jail] 
j23(~) 
lS Daal ply A501 Lal SI 9 SHAS 
ty Sy ob, Kw Goal By 


Lele eda ce gaye ge ole ll je SS Gl g3] eit 2B (1) 

KN GLEN aie apy del ull dy AE Ue I lal wel Y 
2929 8 eal yl yo AE Ue cas lng lageege Bo Le SI ped 
va Dell 2 2 GLE GOK > cL y th Beal Ue 


My gy nty oy loge ye are ald 


\o 


10 


20 


30 


3S 


158 Book Five, Chapter Two 


(2) We say: As for the nature of human inasmuch it is human, it fol- 
lows as a concomitant that it should be an existent, even though [the fact] 
that it is an existent is neither identical with its being human nor included 
therein. [Now,] with existence, this universality may attach to [the nature; 
but] there is no existence for this universality except in the soul. As for 
universality in external [reality], this obtains according to another con- 
sideration which we explained in previous topics.! Indeed, among these 
natures there are those that require matter neither for endurance nor 
for their existence to commence. As such, these cannot become multiple, 
but each [of their] species would exist as one in number.” For such a 
nature is not rendered multiple either through differentiae, materials, 
or accidents. As for [its not becoming multiple] through differentiae, this 
is due to its being species; and, regarding [its not becoming multiple] 
through materials, this is due to its being denuded [of matter]; and, as 
for [its not becoming multiple] through accidents, this is because accidents 
are either necessary concomitants of the nature, in which case the multi- 
plicity in them will not vary in terms of species, or else [the accidents] 
occur [to it] but not as necessary concomitants of the nature, in which 
case their occurrence would be due to a cause relating to matter. Hence, 
it would be the right of such [a nature], if it is an existing species, to be 
one in number. 

(3) [The one] among these [natures] that requires matter would 
exist only in conjunction with the existence of matter rendered ready 
[for its reception]. Its existence would thus have been affiliating external 
accidents and states with it, through which it is individuated. It is not 
possible for one and the same nature to be both material and immaterial. 
You have recognized this in the course of what you have learned. If this 
nature, on the other hand, is generic, we will be showing that the nature of 
the genus can only subsist in the species and would thus have the subsis- 
tence of the species. This, then, is the state of the existence of universals. 

(4) It is not possible for one specific meaning to exist in many 
[things]. For, if the humanity in ‘Amr ([taken as an entity] by itself, not 
in the sense of [a] definition) exists in Zayd, then whatever occurs to this 
humanity in Zayd would necessarily occur to it when in ‘Amr, excepting 
that among the accidents whose quiddity is predicated [only] with respect 
to Zayd. As for that which settles fixedly in the essence of the human, its 
settling therein does not require that it should become a relative—for 


let ye oly \OA 


52 gy GSS Gl Yorks GLUL pp tem oy GLY deb LI Jed (1) 
SU ad agonal ae Yad ay AS Es Vy GL Vl pedo MG Gol ob 
shape ST Leh ba lk ye AS LL, . atl BWA ly ope Y, 
Wy aa gl Basle ig ten nb lye GOL Lbs de J AaLIN gylll 9 
LSB ae poll GS Lb SG Gl Laced OSG rey Wet al 
Ll gel ell Vest Yy diel SS cade ell sate oY soll lial, 
Si aL el 8b Leh Ll, caapactle old [VA] Lily cates eld J pail 
wb bea yle OSS gh ly cpl) Caen 550 bed GLE 9 Hela BY 9S 
5 an La Ge KD ah ha ee eae AK tac 
J sual Lely 9g) «lagey 

GSB thy BU song gl a vey UB sll Gl etow Ie Gh Ly (1) 
dace SS Sl jem eds cle Rt Worl, Lal el a, Wino, 
ara ci8 gl lly cake Le DME 3 he cdye aby dle poy dal inet, 
ASI GL pote PLAN 2 V pai gh lew Ged deb goad ce Repl 
DUS ayy Sle ody 

VL 6B SB ley eet ow OS! ey (6) 
PRY 0g 2pm b OF ay Gdsery Se Y ly OT Lye 9 
LD [yee] ale G2 plod ge ELV cy ee a ty Be ee Yay 


arti dl Bl Legon Ab lal pal GLY lb Lb Day GSE Ly 25 Go 





is cA gas . A) gene’ 


\o 


10 


20 


25 


30 


35 


159 Book Five, Chapter Tivo 


example, to become white, black, or a knower. For [in the latter case] if 
it knows, it is only related to the object known. From [the supposition that 
a nature exists as an entity in many], it then necessarily follows that con- 
traries would have combined in one essence, particularly if the state of 
the genus in relation to the species is [akin to] the state of the species 
in relation to [its] individual [instances]. As such, one essence would be 
described as being [both] rational and not rational, No one with a sound 
temperament can rationally perceive that one humanity is embraced by 
the accidents of “Amr and that this very same [humanity] had embraced the 
accidents of Zayd. If you look at humanity without any other condition, 
then definitely do not consider these relations. For these are as we have 
taught you. 

(5) It has thus become clear that it is impossible for [a] nature to exist 
in the concrete and to be a universal in actuality—that is, that it alone is 
common to all [things of the kind]. [Rather], universality occurs to some 
nature if [such a nature] comes to exist in mental conception. As for the 
manner in which this takes place, you must reflect on what we have said in 
the Psychology.? That [aspect] of “the human” that is intellectually appre- 
hended in the soul is the universal. Its universality [however] is not due 
to its being in the soul but due to its relating to many individuals, existent 
or imagined, that are governed for it by the same governing rule. 

(6) As for the fact that this [universal] form is a disposition in a par- 
ticular soul, it [itself] is one of the individuals that are the objects of 
knowledge or conceptions. And, just as the one thing can be a genus and 
a species through different considerations, similarly, through different 
considerations, it can be a universal and a particular. Thus, inasmuch as 
this form is some form among the forms of the soul, it is a particular. And, 
inasmuch as many share [common characteristics] with it in one of the 
three modes we have previously explained, it is a universal.* There is no 
contradiction between these two things. [This is] because there is nothing 
to prevent the combination of the one essence and the occurrence to it of 
participation in relation to many. For participation in many is only possible 
through relation. And, if the relation is to many essences, there would be 
no participation. Hence, there must be many relations to an essence that 
is numerically one. And the numerically one essence, inasmuch as it 18 $0, 





elees| Sa oly N04 


ria pall NYE Bice a Spl be Ua ng Spake eva esos 
podl Se GS Gl Lepasty slacell M2 acel o Rely Ob GS gl lke y 
didot Wb Mpegs oo roly wld 5 Kd poles ae Pel Je gig we 
Piel PEST Bao ly WSL Gh che dhe a ye Jim I SS ey bl 2, 
iby GLY Yo ob ay alel [VA] CHEST lee Lally gee 
lade Le Je go obey oie I) yas 9b 

AK Jel Gy GLE J ef dal 9K gl Se tal gh ad (0) 
agall b Conby IB] Le dads ASI Go Lily pel Sp loony ul 
P dgialle pull IS ob be Jot gl Cond wd 9.8 ASU, «sil 
oe LA ee adel Bal Jo VLG «IS 0 Gill g0 GM Gy il 
soely Ke exe YS dae glinge ye BS GLel J 

pall eth ol pita pdb PE rindldaghte y Uy (1) 
Ke IS cle gy Lee GS tut Uebel 31 Sy ol pall 


LS yale. ol Lol 
MAM oe Sh ool ge iy Yb Ane Glee yy Ae pill ype 
GS Gl plc ae ed AY cyl pie ow Ga Vy Ap pie Ld My 
YL SEV 3 S20 5b. GS BLA Ks Y yee wel fl obs 
oblal Nd. 54 SG LS oi aay avy Lasley 
PMS ge Lm ye sadly ell oldlly [YV-] soak iol) IN ET 


1 pat 5 yo 5 pall oda Gh tee Ged gery 


\o 


Nn 


10 


20 


30 


160 Book Five, Chapter Tio 


is necessarily individual. The soul itself also conceives another universal 
that combines this form and another in this soul or in another soul. For, 
all these, inasmuch as they are in the soul, are defined by one definition. 

(7) Similarly, there may exist other participations. Thus, the other 
universal would differ from this form by a governing rule specifically 
belonging to it—namely, its relations to things in the soul—whereas the 
relation of [the latter] form that renders it a universal pertains to exter- 
nal matters by way of [their] being such that any one of these external 
things that happens to come first to the mind could have, as its result, the 
occurrence of this very form. If one [such external thing] comes first [te 
the mind], and the soul is affected in this manner, then that which follows 
it will not have a new influence, except in terms of the possibility consid- 
ered [above]. For this influence is similar to the form of the former, haviug 
been abstracted from accidental accretions. This constitutes coinciding. 
If, instead of one of these influences or what is influenced by them, there 
is something other than things known [through this influence] and not 
homogeneous with them, then the [new] influence would be other than 
the [former] influence, and there would be no coinciding. As for the uni- 
versal in the soul in relation to these forms in the soul, this consideration 
belongs to it in relation to any one of these forms in the soul that first 
comes to the soul. Moreover, this [form] is also an individual form with 
respect to itself, as we have said.® 

(8) [Now,] because it is within the power of the soul to apprehend 
intellectually, and to apprehend that it has apprehended, and to appre- 
hend that it has apprehended that it has apprehended; and [because it 
has the power] to construct relations within relations and to make for 
the one thing different states of relationships ad infinitum in potency, it 
follows necessarily that there will be no stop to [the progression of | these 
mental forms that are arranged dependently on each other. It follows 
necessarily that [these] must proceed infinitely—l[infinitely] in potency, 
however, not in act. [This is] because it is not necessary for the soul that, 
when it intellectually apprehends something, it [must] apprehend in 
actuality the things that are its proximate necessary concomitants, bring- 
ing them to the mind—to say nothing [of those] that persistently recede in 
remoteness. For there are, here, relationships in irrational roots and in 
numerical relations that are easily accessible to the soul, but it does not 








rlecdl oy oll ‘1. 


bi Dg epi nall ods mom STU Lal syed Yd lly hee Vat 
wedge aE pall Bp Same IU Lad lB al ul 

imal ode ge VI 5 95S cg sl Tal seg 0b I (V) 
AS Lab Le Lh Gon SIE Long «ath bagel Bead pay ol al Soe 
fd) Fld pill Jed ole Bla ghar Je we jor ly 
EU So ol Renal ody ae pall OF soly ge Lily. geen By pall ods [Yr 
27 8 Gl iyo She ge SV Ne gb call hdd Ibe Sy Y] ous Sl 
rb ood West gl Opal ade vol Joy gh gy Rallall go ag’ aylyll oe 
Uy Xallan G90 fhe pe FM I Ip allen poy Mya A ult 
cme IEE W IG cell 9 SN yall de SLi all 3 git 
Lal aed lh I alll A pull op le by gl Il etl 
lL et Lem Gy Rated By pe 

Vil cis Wp Jandy coe Ugh Jay Jans gi atlas aly (4) 
of Hilo Vyol soll etl ety obLal § obLal OS gl, edie 
Npdans i pl Lea pall oy GSS Y gl Cond cogdl Sill eG oll 
[YNN ] fail Y5sBb 5 SS $0 daly 5 Bas Gl ejhy <ny Gaw Ge 
Leg Ait CS yl dee fod bal SS SNS lie 13, itl ihe yal a 
pra goth polls lye GB. oadl ja Lae Shad JUDY Lass gly « Lag 
JD tll SS eth aly cui po Jl abe obLal 8, 


o) 


\o 


10 


20 


30 


16] Book Five, Chapter Tivo 


follow that the soul in one state would intellectually apprehend all of 


these or that it would be constantly preoccupied with them. Rather, it is 
within its proximate power to intellectually apprehend this—as, for 
example, bringing to mind infinite multiple progressions (bringing to 
mind the infinite doubling of numbers and, indeed, the infinite recur- 
rence through doubling of the [same] relation between a number and 
one similar to it). This is the closest thing to what we are after. As for 
[the question] of whether it is possible for the general meanings of mul- 
tiplicity to exist separately from multiple [things], and from intellectual 
conceptions, this is a matter which we will discuss later. 

(9) If we then say that the universal nature exists in external things 
we do not mean inasmuch as it is universal in this mode of universality: 
rather, we mean that the nature to which universality occurs exists in 
things external [to the mind]. Hence, inasmuch as it is a nature, this is 
one thing; and, inasmuch as it is something from which it is likely that a 
universal form is intellectually apprehended, this is something else. 
Again, inasmuch as it is intellectually apprehended in actuality in this 
manner, this is one thing; [but] inasmuch as it is true of it that, if it itself 
is associated not with this matter and accidents, but with that matter and 
accidents, then this [latter resultant] individual would be other [than the 
former], this is another matter. This nature exists in external things in 
terms of the first consideration, but there is in [this consideration] no 
existing universality in external things in terms of the second, third, and 
fourth considerations. If this consideration is taken in the sense of uni- 
versality, then this nature with universality would be in concrete things. 
But the universality which we are discussing exists only in the soul. 

(10) Now that we have come to know these things, the difference 
between the whole and the part, and the universal and the particular, 
becomes easy for us [to understand|—namely, that the whole inasmuch 
as it is the whole exists in things, whereas the universal inasmuch as it is a 
universal exists only in conception. Also, the whole is enumerated by its 
parts, each part being included in its subsistence, whereas the universal is 
not enumerated by its parts and, moreover, the particulars are not included 
in its subsistence. In addition, the nature of the whole does not render 





ele ye OLY! \W 


Sins SV Ral ES By colle yall le AR OSG gj} Yl Jes troy 
JUL WAY slack sus denghey UL WALY Molded lhe! fa als 
pe be eb acal lae ob entl ALB LL de a aa kee pe 
Ny pel 96550 jo Fa SU LI flall ed gl jem eal Lb 083.9 
68s oe AB pa al 

ae ye gett Leal GLEN dog ye AIS Reda g] LS BB (4) 
peer SY Re elgg hag dey 
bye pe Js SY Hn pee py blak ptm ye Ole 
Me Golo ate ey ob US fat cli om yy Lal 1 BS 
NS gS Pi cVL, soll MS egal eV, soLl ode Y Yow Ci8 9) Yl 
Ad Cound cg LEVY GLEN bagenge Aecdll oheay 6 gt SN Gace 
Was Jee GB LYOV] -Gte (p Lal ally GIO, GOI EL tay A 
BP MAS U, SLE BAT po dada ode IES ae je 
wall 2 VW cals LS 

I gy Ely IO gy yal U pee a LB ode Lye a8 Ly (9°) 
5 BI Uy LAN Sage KE em oe Bl gl chy Gl 
te Sa Kiy ale Sa, I Lely palll (3 VI lagers eld US > 
alg pales SLL Lal Yy catlyad we VSB I Ly Calg 3 Els 
p38 WG dab Uy ee pa J ad eb BY Slab gb Lad 


\0 


10 


1b 


20 


30 


162 Book Five, Chapter Three 


the parts it includes subsistent, but [the whole] is rendered subsistent by 
them, whereas the nature of the universal renders the parts it includes 
subsistent. Likewise, the nature of the whole does not become at all one 
of its parts, whereas the nature of the universal is part of the nature of the 
particulars, because these are either species that are rendered subsistent 
by the nature of the two universals—I mean, genus and difference —or 
else individuals, in which case they are rendered subsistent by the nature 
of all the universals and the nature of the accidents that, conjoined with 
matter, embrace it. Again, the whole is not the whole for each of [its] 
parts, even if [the part] is set aside by itself, whereas the universal is a 
universal predicated of every particular; also, the parts of every whole are 
finite, whereas it is not the case that the particulars of every universal 
are finite. [Finally,] the whole requires all its parts to be simultaneously 
present, whereas the universal does not require all its particulars to be 
simultaneously present. You can also find differences other than these 
that [will let] you recognize that the whole is other than the universal. 


Chapter [Three] 


On differentiating between genus and matter 


(1) What is necessary for us now is to know the nature of genus and 
species. As for [the question] of how many things [the term] “genus” 
denotes, at the time of the Greeks it used to indicate many meanings 
whose use in our time has disappeared. Genus in our discipline! refers 
only to the well-known logical meaning and to the subject.? We may at 
times [however] use the expression “genus” instead of “species” and say, 
“This is not the same genus as that”—[saying this,] that is, of its species 
or [that which is] among the things that share in its definition. Nowadays, 
in our time and in our custom in scientific books, species also refers only to 
logical species and to the forms of things. 

(2) Our objective at the present is with the use the logicians make of this 
[term]. We thus say: The meaning that is designated by the term “senus” 
will not be a genus unless it [accords with] a certain manner of conception. 


ii 














rletll oe obey \vW 
Adak Uy adatiel je lege pes Vall dak GB US 0 Sl he 
Lay «ily ued rl go be ye pd pL aN Ld WY obs ab yp oj 
SoU po YESS SU LEM Reb ey WSLS bb oy gE ols 
Be Vor WGK Sly c opdil by rey oj I WU KY Al 5b Lal 
Si Lely Rake SP elel ay date Peel ob Lal, Ge 
AK, by Ler ailjerl ona gl ic ten Y lly « ber adljerl oat gl ites 

[VT] 50 nb SU gl ed de Lal By 2 ue 


ene 
ja(¢) 
Bolly adh oy hadll 3 


SBS bl SIU ply pal deb sys gl ge Ml Loh silly (1) 
P haat Cad aby BS glee ge ailigll Gly Uo dae GS ob Ja 
(Fare all hey «pall Boll all de Wd olwo oo pedle iby 
Dae pe SS pe op WS jad i ell 9K eed Lad Ulead Ley, 
Boley Ly oN base Jay ged Lal pelly ade BSH be the yy 
EY se hey « dal pl le Waals 
Ja GON geal ght Jgid Ud Ge pte dey La gM Lee (1) 
Jk By ce 8 DL ely god do Lee Kt pal dal abs 


\o 





10 


30 


163 Book Five, Chapter Three 


If it deviates from it—even in the least respect—it would not be a genus, 
This holds true in the case of each of the well-known universals.* Let us 
make our explanation in terms of genus and in terms of an example that 
has very frequently proven problematic for the mediocrities in theoretical] 
reflection. We say: 

(3) Body is spoken of as a genus of man and as the matter of man. If it 
is the matter of man, it is necessarily a part of his existence, and it would 
be impossible for that part to be predicated of the whole. Let us, then, 
examine the manner of difference between the body when considered as 
matter and when considered as genus. For this provides us with a means 
for knowing what we wish to explain. 

(4) If we take body as a substance possessing length, breadth, and 
depth inasmuch as these belong to it, and on the condition that no other 
meaning is included in it, and such that, if some other meaning—for 
example, sensation, nutrition, and the like—is combined with it (this 
[latter] meaning would be extraneous to corporeality, predicated [of] and 
added to it), then body would be matter. If* [on the other hand] we take 
body as a substance, having length, breadth, and depth; on the condition 
that it is never at all subjected to some other condition, so that [the condi- 
tion] does not necessitate that its corporeality be due® to a substantiality 
informed only with these dimensions, but [to] a substantiality in whatever 
manner it happens to be, even with a thousand meanings that render 
subsistent the property of that substantiality and its® forms (these dimen- 
sions, however, being with it or in it, for the aggregate will have three 
dimensions, as these are with body—and [this] obtains in general with 
whatever combination that comes to be after their aggregate forms, a 
substance having three dimensions when these combinations, if there be 
such combinations, are included in the haecceity of that substance, not 
[however] in [the sense that] that substantiality has become complete 
through the dimensions followed thereafter by these meanings,’ being 
external to the thing that has become complete), then the thing taken [in 
this manner] would be the body that is genus. 

(5) Hence, body in the first sense is not a predicate, since it is part of 
the substance composed of body and form that is posterior to corporeality 
in the sense of matter. [This is] because this aggregate is not simply a 





oles ye OLY \ayr 


tlh BL feels Bye UN y rely FEMS Lee Gah Ll 
Joie ath 8 yan gh le AE] SG ILL, 

G6 5b GLY dale wl al Je, oy GLY! asm ald Sle wd LG! () 
BE LYNE] BI US Jere gl Seculy nagery Gp Hje dlewe Y gh glad aol 
Luce pel By diy cole ol aby pad gy yall 9S GS au . 
Aly ayy be Byee dt fe poses 

Al Loptay aad Ledge op pay U2 Fy Sab Lage ped bash bb (4) 
J spo fe gb parallel Jamey ae oe ga bE 
pbb Ml de eal B Upnoe abl ge Leslt gae wl 
Pl depts ps Vi dope pel y yey Sab Ib aye oe Gas oly iol 
Sine | «Maid lab cig 5) pa” yah Cee VK seen ls ra 
LiMo sl Fy ey pey yeh li ob pie gale 3, ot 
OS ge GSE lane gl aby <a go le Je DU Ul aL 
~ Slade She 8G) - Olacodll alli SG, AW lbeil 1S Lage Yee 
i ab A es eae bI Ms 9 SG GhY pagdl ols ye odes 
= eel 92 Gall endl ge 5S Le gh oF 8 gall etl yo Ree lal 

Aa pally edly Sh ad je jeg LMI Gall ab (0) 
Sa Bd rye dyes cel OU GY Spaces eld fall gas dae 


\o 





or 


10 


15 


20 


30 


164 Book Five, Chapter Three 


substance possessing length, breadth, and depth, and nothing more. As 
for this second [generic meaning of body], it is predicated of everything 
of matter and form combined—whether one or a thousand—having the 
three dimensions. It is thus predicated of whatever is combined of corpo- 
reality that is akin to matter and of soul, because the aggregate of this is 
a substance even if combined of many meanings. For this aggregate does 
not exist in a subject; and this aggregate is a body because it is substance 
and, being a substance, has length, breadth, and depth. 

(6) Likewise, if one takes animal as animal with the condition that 
its animality includes only corporeality, nutrition, and sensation—every 
thing that comes thereafter being external to it—then perhaps it is no 
improbable for it to be matter for the human or its subject, whose forr. 
would [then] be the rational soul. If [on the other hand] one takes [animal] 
on the condition that it is body in the sense in which body is a genus, 
[where] the ideas of that body include only those forms that are by way of 
allowing sensation, even if rationality or a difference of the same sort is 
not subject to either affirming or negating any of these but allows the 
existence of any of them in its haecceity (where [however] there is by 
necessity a power of nutrition, sensation, and motion with [these forms], 
and where there is no necessity that these should or should not be anything 
else); then [animal, taken as such,] would be animal in the sense of genus. 

(7) Similarly, understand the state of affairs with respect to the sen- 
tient and the rational. For, if the sentient is taken to be a body or a thing 
that has sensation, on condition that there is no other addition [to this], 
then it would not be a differentia, even though it is part of man. Ina sim- 
ilar way, animal is not predicated of it. If [on the other hand] it is taken 
to be a body or a thing to which, in which, and with which are allowed 
whatever forms or conditions, so long as these contain sensation, then it 
would constitute a differentia, and animal would be predicated of it. 

(8) Hence, whatever meaning you take from among these, where 
either the state of its being a genus or of its materiality is problematic, and 
find permissible the combining with it of differentiae (whichever these may 
be), being in it and belonging to it, then [such a thing] would be a genus. 





elec ea oly 


iaaly Bynes bale yy aco Be dpe lb gO a bly bi jury U2 69 
ieaeedl op acondl de [192] Jpoe gilap Ol a Gaye Wa 
iLabl ull gb 5S gle gy ecel ly Pye Od thar oY « pill UE 
PEI ICN oem gy By WW ertlbio pron sViey 
daar Vale Pam Glee Wm del bl gl tl ge ellis (1) 
sale Kgl wee VOT UB care Leyte Koby Gry Say 
oll lene Kgl byt S41 gly RLU tll Spey boy sola 
CUS bY bl pit foes he pel ald glee ty Lee pad 4 OK sil 
canny 3\ gn High Ga) ee rb al lle Jad 3) gal SS By reall y 
oy WOE 5B Bypadl Yor Des Ly cays 3 OF ws Sh ages bem dh 
sgobl eat Bee SOK gl ye KY I Gin? Vy bye Sey 
SCS gl Loe Ld! el gb Sabb, pd! psi pb wtsy (v) 
MIE, Gla 5 lp SO oly hed Kop) es eliods OMY glee p> 
aol Sh cay aby A Upon Cb gl Lane SEL Gly Ale Jpowe nb abel ob 
Ae Vyrow Sib GE had Te pe WO Kigl ae ITLL, 
Maen boa Ge Cyale gh Cece JUL Ry asd ge gh gab (A) 
GSN [VT] Sly - Lae GO cainy 43 Ugh fe GO ela pall plat jon 8 


\o 

































































oO 


10 


20 


25 


30 


165 Book Five, Chapter Three 


But if you consider it with respect to some [of its] differentiae, complet. 
ing thereby its meaning and finalizing it in such a way that, should some 
other thing enter therein, it would not be part of this group, being some. 
thing added from the outside—[such a thing} would not be a genus but 
would be matter. If you make it necessary that its meaning should be 
complete, so that [all] that is possible to include in it is included, then it 
becomes a species. But if, in refsrring to that meaning, you pay no atten- 
tion to [the latter condition], it becomes a genus. Hence, on the condition 
that there should be nothing additional [to certain of the differentiae], i: 
would be matter; on the condition that there would be [such an] addition , 
it would be a species; [finally, cn the condition] that you pay no heed ty 
[the requirement that all that it is possible to include should be included] 
but allow that each of the additions [individually] is included in its general 
meaning, then it would be a gerus. This [question] becomes problematic 
in that whose essence is composite. But in the case of that whose essence 
is simple, it may well be that tae mind imposes within itself these con- 
siderations in the manner we have mentioned in this chapter. In existence, 
however, there will not be something distinct among them that is genus 
and something that is matter. We thus say: 

(9) Corporeality, in some ways of conception, exists for the human 
prior to animality, if you take corporeality in the sense of matter [and] 
not in the sense of genus. Similarly, body exists for [the human] prior to 
animality only if body [is taken] in a sense where it is not predicated of 
[the human], not in a sense where it is predicated of it. As for the corpo- 
reality which one supposes, tegether with the possibility of its being 
posited as entailing a necessity for every idea attached to it, that [said 
idea] should include the three d'mensions; it would not exist for the thing 
which is a species of animal, unless the latter includes animality. Hence, 
the meaning of animality woulc constitute some part of the existence of 
that body in actuality, after [animality] itself has had the possibility of 
entailing it. The meaning of an_mality would thus form some part of the 
existence of that body, this being the opposite state of affairs of the body 
if it is realized. [This is] exemplified by [the fact] that body, in the sens¢ 
of matter, is part of the existence of animal, and [by the fact that] the 
existence and the coming together of body [in the] absolute pe 
not in the sense of matter—derives from the existence of its species. [T 
species] subsumed under [abso.ute body] are causes for its amet 
not being the cause of their existence. If corporeality in the generic ae 
were to have a realized existence prior to the existence of specificity 






















\V0 


otis y oe 


Bap ih Fa ea Se Saba gal lal org 
pe galigle Weal db al lee Sol Gye ye Ble J abl 
ppp) galled ELEY GES oly eg she earl K bas oo 
4K Sl bitly ib gS toly 95 Vg) Litt gab. Lee oS cals 
pe chil ye vals SK ol see be alld 2p Voy be gSooly 
i sly AB VA, AS 15 Lad ty Lil Nang « Leer GK colenw lace Sas gl 
Bo 3 695 gill pull Jo ad POLL a ope ll ol abl 
Bid canbe ye toy eee eee pb ae DKW ope gl SUL, . Jail 
Bil WL nal ogy am GULL SLL GLU ary Ul (4) 

OF Wa] ASS YS adh ad very Lf MS « podl pas V gall par Qandt 
ST Sle eo DILL UL, ade Jeon gas Veale Joon Y pat ped 
deg ol ple SoU} sat nts loses ly Lye Gow ee ag 
Wie ASN me GSS AND ja By Vola dl ye ES 9 Gl tl 
Br OS All ea adh Be SOG) om Jal dtl sey y be 
AS’ vam 131 aauc| Sle Ke pobl [YVV] MD ose9 oy Darerer epee 
fc) Gill lal dl ob GLb oyeny ye ejer dalll eas 92 Gall ead gl 
93 oll PMS BOs Ley ASI S| ope y ye AeLe ay oogey Li soll 
I b3 Jatore 9 gong acd cas SN daonll GT sy. Lage gd Lee gt ely 























Q 


10 


20 


25 


30 


166 Book Five, Chapter Three 


even though its priority would not be a priority in time but in essence 
it would then be a cause for the existence of specificity, as with body in the 
material sense, even if its priority is not temporal. Rather, the existence 
of that corporeality in this species is nothing other than the existence of 
such a species. 

(10) In the mind, also, the rule is similar. For it is impossible for the 
mind to posit, in any corporeal thing belonging to the nature of genus, an 
existence that is realized first, to which something else is [then] combined 
so that the specific animal comes to be in the mind. For, if it were to do 
this, then that idea belonging to the genus in the mind would not be 
predicable of the nature of the species but would also be a part of it in 
the mind. Rather, there comes to be for the thing which is a species the 
generic nature, in both existence and in the mind together, when the 
species in its completion comes to be. Differentia would not then be 
extraneous to the meaning of that genus and added to it, but entailed 
therein, and part of it, in the manner to which we have alluded. This is 
not the rule pertaining to genus alone inasmuch as it is a universal, but it 
is the rule governing every universal inasmuch as it is universal. 

(11) From this it is clear that, if body is taken in the manner whereby 
it is genus, it would be akin to [something] as yet unknown. One would 
not know what form it takes and how many forms it comprises, the soul 
seeking knowledge of this, since, thus far, something which is a realized 
body has not been established in actuality. The case is similar when we 
take color, making it occur to the soul’s consciousness. For the soul is not 
satisfied with the realization of something that is not established in actu- 
ality, but it seeks, regarding the idea of color, something in addition, so 
that color is established in actuality. 

(12) As for the nature of species, it is not the attainment of its meaning 
that is sought, but the attainment of what would indicate [it]. Regarding 
the nature of genus, [on the other hand], although the soul, in seeking 
what indicates it, would have performed the necessary and that which nec- 
essarily causes conviction, the soul may also, prior to this quest, seek the 








etl je lel wi 


Jockey a3 La GR oth fe Glagh VALS hs iW Gly cde gl 
Lar Pant l Ol ogy alt YLLG Si yy cas pak gill aed 
& Vesdll os ery PEs 

wig Gps EY Jal gb 43 KL gb Lal Jost ay (0) 
Pll tay Vile fees bogey tl bd Ll La 
ood Sill all ab GH al Jed JAB. Leal 3 Goal ghd Gore le 
ao Uy Lal Jill 9 ae jm 3 pst dale le Spare pb Jil 3 
Anke ppl Sam 13 ee Jal by Sed pall dab pS go ill «tl 
den ory Ad beae be call Bhary pebl Wd gar Ge Ly Lal bSY, 
See Spm Ge steey ed Ke ae dy ML OL gi lay 
[V8] 8 ptm ye SE 

IPSS Ler KS AAD te Sel Ul edt gl be ye gtd (19) 
COS Joes patil ley «Jat 5 pe Sy chy geo gh le ail gas V cow 
dhe cb beck, 5b basi I IS « uae me gt Hig ail oy ye al 
5 lh ae Ble Jai ye eb fos lV alll 5b $l 
Od Sadly te 

LEY oat pc Labiee Jatt pd lle cb pall deo’ Lily (0) 
Ae oS ISG LEN fat Gb cl lal a Gly YB pcb Gb Ul, 
Ne J lane Joss lS ae La ll 28 pb SD ctor sl coy bey oly 


\o 


10 


15 


20 


30 


167 Book Five, Chapter Three 


attainment of its meaning, so that [all] that remains for [the mind] is to 
become more prepared for this quest; and the soul would [have the power] 
to impose it on whatever indicated thing [the mind] wishes. [But] the 
soul cannot render it such that it would be whatever indicated thing [the 
mind] desires, except after adding to it other notions after “coloredness” 
prior to the indicative act. For, without adding something designating jt 
as color in “this” matter, [the mind] cannot render color, when it is stil| 
color, to be that thing which is only color. It may be specified through 
accidental matters that have occurred externally where it itself can be 
imagined to remain with the ceasing to exist, one by one, [of the things 
that specify it]—as the case would be with the things that specify the 
nature of being a species. The case is similar with measure, or quality, and 
others. The case is [also] similar with the body which we are considering: 
the mind cannot render it something to which one points by confining it to 
being a substance entailing anything that happens to be when the totality 
[has the dimensions] of length, width, and depth, so long as the things it 
entails or does not entail are not delineated, whereby [that something] 
becomes a species. 

(13) If someone says, “We would [then] be able to combine in this 
[kind of ] combination anything to be a thing,” we answer: 

(14) We are speaking of a special kind of combining where the things 
are combined in the manner of combination [that takes place] in the 
nature of the genus inasmuch as it is genus—namely, that manner would 
consist of the things combined being species that are included therein. 
Our discussion here, however, is not concerned with indicating the nature 
of the genus [with respect] to the manner in which it includes differen- 
tiae and nondifferentiae and which things are combined therein in the 
manner in which differentiae [are combined]. Rather, our discussion 
pertains to the manner that leads to the distinction between genus and 
matter. It does not follow that, when we wish to distinguish between 
things, we must go beyond making the distinction to demonstrate other 
states. Rather, our purpose is to know that the nature of the genus which 
is body consists in its being substance wherein it is possible for things given 
to combining in it to combine therein. Hence, the totality would consist of 








lets y ol¥y! yav 


ste glace ging ell Say SST AN ag sala had LZ cla 
shoe VU tL lee sl gS gl gam tne abet gl ttl Se ebb al] 
53 29 8 Jen dl Ke nd 5 5 LAY SAIN am oth fle al Gas 
Wy So UY YL ed Fpl Saal ode 3 9 al al Lt et daly Oy a 
voly dls ee Bh ae Pend jee pee hoe yh aay 
aes gl Lua (b WS e gll debe cheate 9 KIS c lye vey 
[yl pall [YY8] thao 5] Si ed Aa (25 Gill endl BAUS Lae 
days Wage UL! 9 SS yl ow Gal eet sh getty page al fe |palle al 
eg yd \pantis Y gl paar ft +L soot) [Le] Che le tine 
seh hs LAM ol al Kae fe aad GI LS HUB GB (14) 

Ab LAV pont GS cep ate LRN ye gos 8 LISI (\t) 

OSS ol oe pull by ee ge tee Ge pb dec Bolen oi Ue 
Al pel Rake Jo AVI 8 Lys LOS uc LY call eid Vped olen 
LOE Ye Spall goo ead aan LEM ly Spall by Spall ot OS 
Gd cy Syl jl boy] UL pay dally ecb ow Spal I gall ull le Ys 
yetlink slay gl Lage lily ool Sel oth, Yl gyitl gcd ol keh 
GSS 0 ch ST LE ye eLtl pled A jy pagel ge pel gm il 





alae 


\o 


ay 


10 


15 


20 


25 


168 Book Five, Chapter Four 


being long, wide, and deep, and [such that], even though these are things 
whose conditions are known, it still remains unknown, It is only to this 
extent that we speak in this chapter. 


Chapter [Four] 


On the manner in which ideas 
extraneous to genus enter its nature 


(1) Let us now discuss the things whose assemblage within genus is 
possible, pausing to consider establishing [that] its nature and quiddity, 
as realized in actuality, are due to them. We say: This quest divides into two 
parts. One of them consists [of the question]: What are the things that the 
genus must contain within itself and that become assembled [therein] 
whereby these things would render it a species? The second is [the question]: 
What among the things contained within [the genus] that are not as such 
[so as to render it a species]? 

(2) This is [because], if whiteness is contained within a body in the 
[oft-]mentioned manner,! it does not render [body] a species. Nor would 
animal, if divided into male and female, become thereby a species while, 
at the same time, it becomes a species through other things. Moreover, it 
is possible for animal to attach to an individual having many accidents 
where the sum total becomes an animal to which one refers. 

(3) We thus first say: It is not incumbent on us to undertake estab- 
lishing the special property of the differentia of every genus with respect 
to each species, nor, moreover the differentiae of one genus. For this is 
not within our capability. What is within our ability, however, is knowing 
the law in this and how the matter in itself ought to be. But, if we reflect 
on one of the intelligible meanings that occur in specifying the genus— 
namely, whether or not this is a meaning belonging to the genus according 
to the condition of this lav—we may well be ignorant of it in many things, 
perhaps knowing it only in some. We thus say: 


PAV WoAl| oy oly VA 


Log pll dagles LBV GSS VIO gly GSS) Ane Lane ah b ALI 
[XV]. Juaill Lae bi Lod Le dy ae Dye 


[ell pail 
}.23( 3) 


ced deb le ped ye dey) Sh Joo aS 0 


PBN Ky aed Bee! bm SN LEV BV EB (1) 
BI peer lal La sl syed. Wen ob, Ul Jat thane Caley Cab lt] 
senth B pel parm I coe all LE go LA hal Lavell ses 
FI GK LAM lal Gly Seg sale LAM alk 9S acd, 
SIS pnd oper 
(No § alan ol S3L pull Je PLN Ad parc! BL aabl gf allay (1) 
Bl Lah pe US ae gay callie petal Sh 53 dled boldly 
A) Ube Upm abt all 5 SSIS ale ad art Ye ah gl jem ole! 
Po Fe ne F pedicle oll] GS gh leg ad WLI 8 (1) 
PU pike 2 ll J Lage 9 pd IS GB caely pee gs dyad Lal Y, \o 
a BUYS DL Ly aed 3 IG Sol px GSE, calla 3 g Slll yee 
YS boyd le gece gall he aail pebl pened bdadl gl agiall glall 5 
pied « lpia (obese Legg «PLE jo SSB olelye Led pad gl 

























































































on 


10 


20 


25 


30 


169 Book Five, Chapter Foy, 


(4) If, to thegeneral meaning, a nature is added, its addition must 
first be obtained hrough the method of division? in order for you to reduce 
it to being a speies. The division must {also be such] that it would be 
impossible for itto change when the substance of that thing referred to 
is constant. so tlat, for example, the one in motion of the two becomes 
immobile while eing individually one and the immobile [one becomes] 
mobile while beng individually one, and when both the immobile and 
the mobile consitute the two parts of the essential division. Rather, the 
division must benecessary so that the special meaning will not separate 
from its proper hare of the genus. Moreover, the affirmative of the two 
divisions or bot! must not have occurred to it accidentally due to some- 
thing that preceles both. The nature of the genus entails that it has that 
meaning first. Fr, if it were second, then it is possible for the meaning not 
to be at alladiference, but a necessary concomitant of that thing which 
is a difference. br example, one engaged in division would have changed 
his judgment, dviding substance not into body and not-body, but into 
what is receptiv: of motion and what is not receptive. For the receptive 
of motion doesnot make an immediate attachment to substance, but 
only after [the ktter] has become spatial, corporeal. For the receptive of 
motion is a necssary concomitant of body. Many things are necessary 
concomitants o body, each of which mentions body, none of which, how- 
ever, are differatiae, but things that adhere necessarily to differentiae. 
[This is] becase substance, through the mediation of corporeality, is 
one of the thins to which these meanings occur. Its division into that 
possessing corpreality and that not possessing it is by virtue of its being 
substance. not hrough the mediation of something else. 

(5) Itis posible for one of the things that do not occur at first to be 
a differentia, bit it would not be a differentia proximate to that genus, 
but, rather, a dfferentia succeeding [another] differentia. An example 
[of this] is to sw, “Body divides into what is rational and what is not.” For 
body, simply imsmuch as it is body, is not disposed to be cither rational 
or irrational bit requires first to possess soul so as to be rational. And, 
if genus finds . differentia, then the differentiae that come thereafter 
must make knwn what that differentia specifies. For, being the posses 


sor of rationaliy and being devoid of rationality make known the state of 












ets oy oll \vA 


roe wight Spl aed Race a! SLB EYTN] Bh pl Gall gh (€ ) 
jiibacn eel OS Gly cel Boos fo eel fo te all Leb 
py Byers oF beer Fee poe > Cad Bl al] pl ub, Cs 
Jypedly Spd by partly oly gy See Doll by arth rely 
Syle, Yo gall GS RY RMI OS gh Con pf IM ei Lau 
a0 gh peel ge oral US GI cond OS ony «pad ye eth alent 
Gl Bd GS oI poll eb ety Lyd te pega Le 
BUN byl gS atl ahd al ald oY gl gle Lt gO gla YJ 
Spe PB pn BASS Fb eb KG| fe fall 5 il 
PHI SLY Sood Wal ob Spal YB pb Ny BH Yb Saks ee 
pod pig ced pik LN YU Gl LE ey 5h omy Syma Syl 
spall ea) Vagal J Vyscd cased YS cpunbl Sgr aly BEST esl 
BOK al Seley glial d ys TU] ded Phe] rod i 
let le ae pl pian hb hae 
Led hed OY Sy red yl om YG jon GSI bee aby (0 ) 
aE Asay [VUY] el ace ead gl SSlla gl She « Joab se, Mad yc ued | 
Clee ds bt by Ut OS oY ace pad La ee ge eed el 
OSS gl cod ad jell sony laly Web 3S > nd BY OK gl Ul 
Bell Grey ghetl  Glb « rad US janes BS Ved oom, SI Spell ull 





Bid pcbcs hil Zid bag Leah! 


\6 


10 


20 


30 


170 Book Five, Chapter Four 


its differentia in being a possessor of soul. For one is in possession of 


rationality or is devoid of rationality by way of being a possessor of soul— 
not at all by way of being in actuality white, black, or some other thing. 
Similarly, a body’s being in possession of a soul or being without a soul is 
not at all due to any of the intermediary genera. If there also occurs to 
the nature of the genus accidents by which it is differentiated, then the 
propensity to be differentiated by them is due either to the nature of the 
genus or to a nature more general than it, just as it was previously due to 
a more particular nature. If this is due to a nature more general than 
[that of the genus|—as, for example, in [the fact] that animal [divides] 
into white and black and the human into male and female—then [such a 
division] would not constitute its differentiae. Rather, animal is white or 
black by reason of its being a natural body, when such a natural body has 
become subsistent in actuality and has then become subject to these acci- 
dents, being receptive of them even if [such a body] is not an animal. And 
the human becomes disposed to being either male or female only by reason 
of being animal. This, then, does not become a differentia for the genus. 

(6) Moreover, there would be things belonging specifically to genus 
that divide it, as in the case of animal into male and female, but which do 
not in any respect whatsoever constitute differentiae. This is because these 
would be differentiae if they occurred to animal by way of its form, whereby 
its form becomes divided by them in a primary way, and [provided] they 
are not the necessary concomitants of something which a differentia at 
first rendered subsistent. But, if they are not so, occurring to animal only 
(because some accident has occurred to the matter from which it is com- 
posed, so that [the latter] becomes of a certain state that [neither] pre- 
vents the realization of either the form or the quiddity of the genus of the 
two parts of the division in matter, nor, moreover, prevents the occurrence 
to the genus of another division by way of its form through differentiae), 
then the two parts of the division do not belong to differentiae but are 
among the necessary accidents in it—I mean, things like maleness and 
femaleness. For, the sperm suitable for the animal form and assigned to a 
special differentia of the universal animal may undergo an influence that 
is hot and becomes thereby male, when it itself could have undergone in its 


composition a cooling influence, rendering it female. [Now,] by itself, this 


PAVWOA)| y oll \Vs 


cpa gd pe Lege ye let Caney gles 9) wild uti 1 S fad Je Syst 
J po 3 abl SAMS «Jal CH eT tl opel gl gl dle GY 
hada 236 (8 Alone gh le ye RIN ep a Nd a lo 
Ul ly Shadi ale 5S gt Ll Joe al cle pet ylse Lad yuck 
tale SEG Nee pat decd 5 GT US «Nye el deeded gl pad eds 
PND edd «ly SB ase SLM coperly Gayl ane Glad Gl fhe « lee pl 
pedbeld jbo aby «gabe peer il fo apely gaol she Ui gladly faba 
Stay Une Koh oly « ese oy <U2zlodl dye oy od Jat Lb al 
peed Mari) ie ie al A Ny Sah i oY 
ViGlgtly ANly Sule eee Lal asi, (5) 
dia he IE gh Vad 3 SS CIS Li] GY lds foe ll pe dey Ved OK 
[VX] SS ly Lgl LEI ype ly Candid > ype Ree 5 Gla 
Gob N glad Gabe Ui) fp AUIS SG ol 5] LB Ay! ad weg «ta 
abl iype Spam EV SLAM yy Sw cshed ole Wee le OK 
Sey SOL pol abl Lal Vy cial d Aaudl bY, cele, 
ADEN 2slall y  cSpradll pe Aaadll Bb gud Spal 4 pe 
UE rad one 98 Gly dl Sy pal Ube gh gill oll gb 8 gML, 5 SiN 
Stadt aie a eye Sl 522 OSG 1S sled > Jlull d G25 IS GIy 


Eh gl ae tam ye dacs Vong JBM ally Shy KS ctl LB oe 


\o 


Qo 


20 


30 


171 Book Five, Chapter Four 


receptivity to action does not prevent it in itself from receiving whatever 
differentia that occurs to animal by way of its form—-that is, by way of its 
having soul that is an apprehender and moves voluntarily. For it is possible 
for it to receive rationality and what is other than rationality. [The former, ] 
hence, has no influence in its becoming a species. Even if we were to deem 
it, in our estimative faculty, as neither female nor male, it would, paying 
no heed whatsoever to this, [still] be rendered subsistent as a species by 
that which would so render it. Hence, neither does ignoring this prevent its 
being rendered a species, nor does heeding it bestow on it specificity. But 
this is not the case if we deem it, in the estimation, as neither rational nor 
irrational, or if we deem color to be in any manner neither white nor black? 

(7) If we wish to distinguish between differentiae and the properties 
[of things] that divide them, it would not suffice to say that whatever 
occurs from the direction of matter is not a differentia. For [a body’s] 
being one that partakes of nutrition or does not partake of nutrition comes 
[to it] only by way of [being] matter. But you must observe the other con- 
ditions which we have described. For this reason, we find among bodily 
species the class of things that partake of nutrition included in the group 
of things that do not partake of nutrition. We find the human, who is 
inescapably a species of animal, included in the group of both male and 
female—the same with horse and the like—while male and female are 
also included in [the species] human and horse. Howbeit, even though 
this meaning (which is a certain concomitant through which division for the 
thing divided obtains) is one of the conditions of differentia, it may exist 
in something other than differentia. Thus, that which is not differentia 
may be a necessary concomitant to one and only one species—this if it 
happens to be one of the concomitants of differentia. 

(8) ‘To resume, we say: You know that, if matter moves toward the 
reception of the true nature of a form for a species to come to be, there 
may occur to it accidents arising from the bodily humors and other things 
that render its state different through acts that proceed from it and not by 
way of its receiving the form of genus or the form of differentia. For, not 
all the states it receives and accidents occurring to it belong to the aggre- 
gate of things included in the purpose toward which it moves [in the 


process] of coming to be. [Now,] you have known about the collisions of 


natural things, the opposition of some of them to some [others], and the 
reactions arising among them. It may well be that the obstructive reactions 
cause diversion from the intended purpose. They may [on the other hand] 


lest ye OLY \V) 


cial Yu Syoce yo ob BAS Re yp Sky po tee 5p Glee eye fa? 
Vobars J Say Amst BUG ld Solo Glatt py ell Josh jen gh 
5? Geille eg ub WB dee L leg WINS Meah d, IS YS 
Sh pemel My Wet Yolen (SL LIS pay all SUEY pth ack Vy a] OLE 
sAomy Syl Vy saul Y gyll bans 

GO GL ee Glan pal Dy J yeaill op Bya gl U5) NL SG pel CV) 
Boll gem ye oye UL SUE gl USIB ASG. eats pac dal Sym oy Ge 
op Cod Vids [TYE] bey gs Lilt ols ol oe 
pry QLsY aby ke pb ge thee Ob oo abl gl op Sie ge ble 
soyhy pil DS clone AY, Soll dhe 3 Jew ghd y dee Ves 
Le pide gy gall a gl le eal ay GLa 3 Lal Jos AM, Sil, 
LB. pail pb PgR ab - fail Lt y OGL — ppl andl a a 
« heaill oiI3 ge OF US) dy Salads Yael leg fret pu! Le 

bye eke S43 Apc SS UL soll gl pled cil, syd sy (A) 
Seal Yle ly BESS Layaby RN y 2ylpe Wi ee ob (F9 Caee) 
7 AG Le Fad be hall ype gl Gadd Bye LU Lee ye V pe pana 
PAP Mel DAL LB ol ye Lethe ye 9S UY Gaye Ley Le 
MRM, «aed paw Le ylery cAanedal ppl Globes cule oid 9 KI 
CE keyg doped AW ye dale do Tall VLE Ske le & A 


\o 


a 


10 


15 


20 


30 


BS 


172 Book Five, Chapter Four 


bring about differences that are not in the intended purpose itse]f but 
are in matters that, to some extent, accord with the purpose; or [finally] 
they may be matters very much removed from it. Thus, whatever occurs 
to matter in this respect, matter continuing to move toward [its] form is 
extraneous to the meaning of purpose. Maleness and femaleness are 
only effective in the qualitative state of the reproductive organs. [Now,] 
reproduction is inevitably something that occurs after [the occurrence] 
of life and after life has been rendered a species as a concrete, realized 
thing. Thus, these two and their like, although concordant with the pur- 
pose, are among the states that become concomitant after the species has 
become specified as a species. Thus, whatever affections and necessary 
concomitants are of this description, let it be known that these are not 
among the differentiae of genera. 

(9) We have made known the nature of the universal, how it exists, 
and how the genus from among [this nature] differs from matter. [We 
have made this known] in a way from which other aspects that we will be 
discussing hereafter branch out. We have also made known which things 
included in the genus are the ones that render it a species. There remains, 
however, two investigations connected with what we are after. One of 
them is [the question]: What are the things included in the genus that 
do not render it a species? The second is: [Regarding] this rendering of 
[things] as one, how does it come about, and how is it that from the genus 
and the differentia, which are two things, one thing is realized in actuality? 

(10) As regards the first investigation, we say: Since those things are 
not differentiae, they are inescapably accidents. Accidents are either nec- 
essary concomitants or not necessary concomitants. Those that are neces- 
sary are either necessary to the genera of the genus (if it has genera), or 
to the genus itself by way of its differentia, or to differentiae beneath it, 
or to the matter of some of them. [Now,] with respect to those among 
them that belong to what is above [the genus], the necessary concomi- 
tants of the genera that are above, and of the differentiae to which the 
differentia substantiating the genus belongs, and of the necessary con- 
comitants of the materials of these and their accidents (for accidents 
may well be the necessary concomitants of [other] accidents)—all this is 
necessary to the genus and to what is beneath it. As for [the accidents] 


eles» OLY \vy 


cde Res bs lS oyal 3 Bo yaall A pads OY OEY A yo 
GoW Ane ay Able Gp Soll oe LS. Lae ode yl BE Ly, 
ASD IF Ey 5 Silly AB oan 3s ELE ANB gall Sel 
IL am Bole pla V [V0] ull, Ltt oS | teal ge 
BamHI SoM thee jo lag, tld 9 $5 ue, Shane Caitdies on, 
Atal ade pilally Orbat 5 GELS Lb Ral Ely Leg pl 
LN Syeedll ye ceed \jl plate 

ish te AS lee ped ly wey GS al, IRL Whe 8 (4) 
Wend LSU ol Lage y cay Lang ageny ane Ba Gl many op inl 
Went AD Lael ae Jos eae en sy Mp e pal 
wth RBS KGS seb tos gl gt, Sel pet ued LE cdl 
SJ parte aoly et Gl Leay « pall os, 

cb Vad 9S Y 3) LAY le gl 43 Js JM Cau Lb Oy 
LAVA URS YF Ly Ro Ll asl eylge de Y 
chad ip Aandi saioal Ly caliorl Jpad Ly — ebel ad eG] — 
LIM GB Ob ee GIT Ly er UL Ly A Spel Ll, 
oe holly Aad paso) gill gl al Ye A Sp adlly Ab al plo SN 
AB Uy perl WY 3 Sls ead — ici Zi eM gh a5 31 — Qoled, 


\o 


10 


15 


20 


30 


173. Book Five, Chapter Four 


that adhere necessarily to the differentiae below the genus, none of them 
are necessary concomitants of the genus, since it would follow from this 
that two contradictories may adhere to it; indeed, one would have to 
allow both to be included in it. 

(11) Regarding the second investigation, let us suppose something to 
which one points, this being a collection attained from the differentiae of 
bodies and many accidents. If we speak of it as a body, we do not mean by 
this simply the collection of the bodily form and the matter to which all 
these things occur externally. Rather, we mean [by it] something not in a 
subject, having length, width, and depth, regardless of whether this predi- 
cation on it is primary or not primary. Thus, the aggregate inasmuch as 
it is a specific aggregate will have bodily predication in this sense befall- 
ing it. Body in the other sense—namely, its matter—is not predicated of it. 
Hence, if [the former] is spoken of as a body, that body would be nothing 
but itself, neither a part of it, nor yet something external to it. 

(12) Someone, however, may say, “You have rendered the nature of 
genus nothing other than the nature of the individual, when the philoso- 
phers have unanimously upheld that to the individual there belong acci- 
dents and properties extrancous to the nature of genus.” We say: 

(13) The meaning of [the philosophers’] statement (that to the indi- 
vidual there belong accidents and properties extraneous to the nature of 
genus) is that the nature of the genus that is predicated of the individual 
does not—in having the nature of the genus inasmuch as it is general— 
require those accidents in actuality. [They do] not [mean] that the nature 
of the genus is not said of the aggregate. For, if it were not said of the 
ageregate, it would not be predicated of the individual but would then be 
part of the individual. But, if these accidents and properties did not exist, 
there would also [still] be this nature which we have said exists in the 
above mentioned sense—namely, that it is the nature of a substance, in 
whatever [sense] its substantiality exists, that is rendered subsistent by 
such and such of the things necessary for it in being body. 


elect jy oly \vr 


7 DH BL Nee eB pt gO c pel oe SU alll ah NLL, [1] 
L043 pl yom 8 J eghaddl aah gl all 

Sed ye fare Fynree pty All Lyle ayield Slt toatl Ll, (19) 
ball Eger dye all gad bald cpr a) LB NBS 5S Galyely plc 
prey PV LS gai desis, le See aie sal pe Raed 
idabl oe 9S. Bol pe gl shale abl Nae GS elpe guey u2yey Jed 
path Nhe Jace Vy call Loge pendsl Jam Ul pl dices Mla 8 tom 
Y cAendi 92 Y] pebl US So ol anor ad JF BB alae go sill SI all 
AE TE Hd Vy ae oid 

28) <artllier  o pebldeb ler ob Sash ld SL (V1) 
JH weblink ip dese elyty Lolel abt gl de “LSI nel 

Ppt deb Ge Lek olyey Lalel past slag dw (\Y) 
See ie pall eck WOKS gl ott Y etal fo aN Leek gl 
JY OS Zab WL Jo SEY jab edb gIY fad 21 eV lt at 
BAS edetll oy 5 GS IS bc Gabttl oe Vn Kd dd le 
Lag Boge LAS Ske da os Lal GG el bly Gal eH ole SG 1 
WIS WS pods Cayre IT GS page deb Ugh gay YY] SAN al 
pee tl od Com lt 


or 


20 


30 


174 Book Five, Chapter Five 


(14) Thus, these accidents and properties lie outside being needed 
by the body that is from the genera—in order, for example, to be a body 
according to what has been said, unless it is [something] specified. And 
there is nothing in this [to imply] that, if these [accidents and properties] 
exist, then “body” is not said of them. For there is a difference in saying, 
“a nature that, in its meaning, does not require something,” and [saying] 
“it is not predicated of [it].” For something may be predicated of that 
whose meaning is not needed. But, if it is predicated, then it becomes 
specifically related to it in actuality after having had [the prior] possibility 
of being specifically related to another. The same is its state with [regard 
to] differentiae. Had it not been for this manner of considering the predi- 
cation of genus, then the nature of the genus would have been a part of 
[something], not a predicate [of it]. 


Chapter [Five] 


On the species 


(1) As for species, it is the nature realized both in [extramental] 
existence and in the mind. This is because, if the genus is realized as a 
quiddity through matters that realize {the genus], the mind thereafter 
ought to realize [the quiddity] only through direct reference; and, once 
the nature is realized as a species of species, in realizing it, [the mind] 
ought not to seek anything except direct reference. Then there would 
occur to [the species] necessary concomitants, consisting of properties and 
accidents through which the designated nature becomes specified. These 
properties and accidents would be either [(a)] relations only, without 
being at all a meaning [inherent] in the essence—these being the things 
that occur to the individual instances of simple things and to accidents— 
because their individuation consists in their being predicated of what 
they describe, whereas their being individuated through the subject is 
accidental (as is the case with natural forms, such as the form of fire); or 
[(b)] states additional to the relations, some, however, being such that it 
would follow necessarily that, if imagined removed from this designated 
thing, then this designated thing which differs from others would not exist 





LEE ye oly \ve 


re eb iy pel dl ztee al ge desks vl bly alee (6) 

COLO paly bead OK SIM Ls ble Lee g Kgl g 
th bbe below Vek gl Ste al oy G8 ped ple Sle pale 
Mid Joo lal Vly vale clon Y Le he aoe aid abe ow V Sal guy 
Y dy Snail eo dle WS, onde jaar Sl yen gO Gl ow Jail a janes 


[YA]. Ypres Y eye ped dee GS pach Jao BEV yp acrgl boe 


[Bl Jail] 
p22 (0) 
ae: 
OY by fle Jilly ayer 9 thant dail beast Uy (1) 
Waar SI abd ow a ies Ui) Jil 3K thes soe [Rae] ead lal cht 
delat chat 5h om Li 5,LANY) Yet ob LS lle, Vy bid a Le 
fecal Ny ope Lely el Ll 5 ld ews Kee GK pings 
E> OSS Sh yb ge bad ble] UY Sie, idl ol 9S, . Yl LI 
Mast MY «ley thas) sll betel oye, b gaty IN 
Art ard ay OS gyal atts  Ybpey le don YS 
PAF 3 Soom pan SS oblall de sth Weel oS gl bly Slllay pe ft 
GF phe ye sill tLe be SY gle ad} LA Lie Ge Leos 





b ive Tchicea Lal | 


\o 


Qn 


10 


20 


30 


175 Book Five, Chapter Six 


but would have become corrupted in accordance with its necessary differ 
ence {from these others]. Some [on the other hand] are such that, if 
imagined [as being] removed, it would not be necessary through [this 
removal] that its quiddity, after existence, would cease to exist, nor [that] 
the corruption of its essence after it has become specified [would follow]. 
But its being other than and different from others would have ceased to 
be in order to become some other difference without any corruption lof 
its essence]. 

(2) This may well become problematic for us and is not achieved [for 
us]. Our discourse, however, is not about what we ourselves know, but 
the state of affairs as it is in itself. 


Chapter [Six] 


On making differentia known and ascertaining [its nature] 


(1) Differentia is also [something] we must discuss and whose state 
[we must] make known. We say: Differentia in reality is not [something] 
like rationality and sensation. For such [a thing] is predicated only of that 
which has no differentia but is either a species (as, for example, [predi- 
cating] sensation of touch, as you have learned elsewhere) or an individual 
(as, for example, predicating rationality on the rationality of Zayd and 
‘Amr). For neither rationality nor sensation is predicated of individual 
people, so that of no [individual] among them is it said that [such an 
individual] is rationality or sensation. From [the latter] names, however, 
a name is derived for [the individual].! If these are differentiae, they are 
differentiae in another respect, not in the respect where they are the 
parts of what is said univocally of many. Thus, it is more appropriate for 
these to be the principles of differentiae, not differentiae [themselves]. For 
they are only predicated univocally of what is other than the individual 
[instances] of the species of what are said to be their differentiae. This 1s 
because rationality is predicated univocally of Zayd and ‘Amr, and sensa- 
tion is predicated univocally of sight and hearing. 

(2) Thus, “differentia”—such as rationality and sensation—is not 
such that it is said of anything belonging to genus. For neither sensation 
nor rationality are at all “animal.” As for differentia which is “rational” and 








elecdl oy oll \Vo 


pad cee Weaney [TN] RDU ai plee god 168 28 SG J lage y 
Sis Weaast an lb SL, Lagny ay ae alla Yay Comal ley 
«hed ob ye gy ligne Il pel ailleaey  ylie elle 

je cgpe Aabd Ld LO july «ents ob lS Lele Sl ley US (1) 
[VT] Ale And 9 yl 


[pala Jaa] 
22(9) 


asst y \aill wa 2 


Bacay Jal 5): yied ale pay a3 SS Gl Coe Lal filly (1) 
A Mead yard ee VY} eb Ne Syme nF lS gle. Sadly ghadl fe ye 
Ball Jao fo based gh ST aay Gecade Lee poll uall Jo ley 
“Al Sle dy slat Iple Jao Vets etl gb. gay 225 Ge Je 
Jb oo Vad oe CIT GB peal lanl joa Fite Sc ue gl ale al ge 
AME SAL G3 se Ja Ll gs Ta gy Cols cstlnve y 
ltl 5 te sbi Jae Lig cdpall Y pail nese oie 9% oI 
PS aye Shey 5 Bs Jo Joon gett Mola Yad Wl le I pol 
SoIsTY anlly pall Ie Jere abl 
Ctl i eo Ne Stem yh yl Ly shall yo ill pail (1) 
Path web LLL, boll go cil jaill Ul, a Wg m ett Y, nd ls 


\o 


10 


20 


30 


3D 


176 Book Five, Chapter Six 


“sensitive,” genus is potentially [this differentia]; if it becomes it in actu- 
ality, then it becomes a species. As for the manner of this, [it is something] 
we have discussed, showing how genus [becomes] differentia and species in 
actual existence, how these differ from one another, that species in reality 
is something which is genus when it becomes described as actual, and 
that this distinction and separation belongs to the mind. If, however, one 
devises a way [that] genus is separated and distinguished in composite 
things that are in [extramental] existence, then it becomes matter, and 
differentia becomes form—[in which case] neither genus nor differentia 
is predicable of species. 

(3) One of the doubts that arise relating to this discourse—nay, con- 
cerning the nature of differentia—is as follows:? 

(4) It is evident that each species is rendered separate by a differen- 
tia from its associates sharing the [same] genus. Moreover, this differen- 
tia is also one of the [universal] ideas. It would, then, be either the most 
general of the predicates or an idea [subsumed] under the most general 
of predicates. [Now,] it is impossible to say that each differentia is the 
most general of the predicates. For “the rational” (and many of the 
things that are of the same order) is neither a category nor within the 
governing rule of a category. Hence, it remains for it to fall under the 
most general of predicates. But each thing that falls under a meaning 
more general than it separates from another sharing this meaning 
through a differentia proper to it. Hence, for every differentia there will 
be a differentia, regressing infinitely. 

(5) What must be known in order to resolve this doubt is that, in 
[some instances] of predication, the predicate renders the quiddity of 
the subject subsistent, while, in some, it is only a necessary concomitant 
[of the subject] that does not render a quiddity subsistent—as in the 
case of existence. [It must also be known] that it does not necessarily 
follow that every meaning that happens to be more particular, falling 
under a more general meaning, is separated in the mind from others 
participating in [the general meaning] through a differentia that consti- 
tutes a meaning other than its [own] essence and quiddity.> This is only 
necessary when that which is predicated of [the subject] renders its quid- 
dity subsistent and would thus be, for its quiddity in the intellect and the 
mind,* [something] akin to the part. Hence, whatever shares that mean- 
ing with it in the intellect, in the mind, and in definition? shares in some- 
thing which is part of the quiddity. If, then, it differs from it, it must do so 








rletll » oly! vr 


Ail ety Ad EAKS [YTV] oa AS LL, beg she Jal gm glo lily «ya 
of Wan 2 O58 BS, ell oped Beall pay hall yo hl pRGS 
pel IB ly call Byers gle UBL pcb go ok MALL pall gly «jam 
pall le ASN D aed 3 sly dy ool BD «Jill 22 gm yl 
Eph Je Vk fal Vy ed! Sol By ye praily ial 
lL jeailaeb ayey Je Pa Le 2,8 AKAN ye! (1) 
fall 25 ais pdt 2 at oe Joa ps Kol all yal (€) 
eee My an Kgl lly Mgt pel gl UB c lal ye Lal ge 
5S eLtly Gob Sib Vad el ga ead SL s Seal Jleey oN pat 
Mtl pcled Wily Kg) Ao Ay So BY, dye pl dee ee 
5 a pate frais SL Le faite rare ctl gar cd Bly 90 be SG 
alg QVM cay «had jad SS gl 
So Bh SSL Job yy Gl eA Lae Jo Ze ln gl com silly (2) 
tly Sagal pyie pb ad LOY Ul GK lary cppaall Mall Lye a 
ES Ge rata Ll nol eae CF ay Goth oS ee FoR gl co pe! 
Le B15] US Caw Lily EOPY] Conley ail plas gas go «Mill Od pals a3 


Gel sos Shey Ld acaall sailly Jal 3 LOY KG Call Lye ale ary 
O! Gow adls [als Cal Pm gh Sy Lb call ldo aeclly sailly 


\o 


10 


30 


177 Book Five, Chapter Six 


in something the two do not share, this being—for the intellect, mind, and 
definition—something other than its quiddity. Hence, its primary differ- 
entiation would be in terms of something which is [part of] of the aggre- 
gate of its quiddity, not in terms of all that is included in its quiddity—I 
mean, with respect to mind and definition. The part, however, is other 
than the whole. Hence, [the predicate] differs from [the subject] in terms 
of something which is other than it—namely, differentia. 

(6) But, if participation was in terms of something which is a neces- 
sary concomitant, basically not participating in the [constitutive] parts 
of the quiddity, where the quiddity in its [entire] self (not [only] in part) 
is separated—as, for example, the separateness of color from number— 
then, even if these two share in existence, then existence, as it has become 
clear to you from the rest of what you have learned in philosophy, is a 
concomitant [of quiddity], not included in the quiddity. Hence, in terms of 
its being defined and in the mind, color, in being separate from number, 
does not require something other than its [own] quiddity and nature [for 
this separateness]. If number were to share with [color] a meaning 
included in its quiddity, then it would need to be separated from it by 
some meaning other than the totality of its quiddity. But the totality of the 
quiddity of color has nothing at all in common with the quiddity of number, 
but only shares with it something external to the quiddity. Color, hence, 
does not need a differentia through which it differs from number. 

(7) We say, moreover, that genus is predicated of species as part of 
its quiddity, and on differentia as a necessary concomitant of it, not as 
part of its quiddity. An example of this is animal. It is predicated of the 
human as part of its quiddity and on the rational as a necessary con- 
comitant of it, not as being part of its quiddity. For by “rational” is only 
meant something having rationality and something having a rational 
soul, without our very statement “rational” entailing for that thing a 
demonstration to show that it is either a substance or not a substance. 
Howbeit, it is necessary that that thing cannot but be a substance, a body, 
and sensitive. These things, however, would be predicated of it in the way 
that that which is a necessary concomitant is predicated of that which must 
be [its] concomitant. [ This is] because [these things] are not included in 
what is understood by “rational”—that is, the thing that has rationality. 


eledsl yo ol gl \vV 


of apenlly Pilly Jal ase eT eye Ib Gy AGHA Y addy 
ple Boon Legare se abel oy UNI GS al 
» padll 98s op tt dalle 5 $3 S51 2 oly srorlly jail ace ool 
delat se ele SOV iY pl SSN L, (4) 
Sy ily ap sual 35g Ul Slat oe ge eae Valiente Rall KG 
PEN 5 OY — Medill jo cali be Sle 8 ail LS oye SB cage dh 8 
we lt Sl Gallly apedll ase sud Ge hail Pos glo 6 Kall 
Jainsl Mle dS ab Bob gx Boas GU fy ay Cal 
cca LEIS Ute 5b yglhal the SI Calder pe 5] paras 
- dell ay alee Jab Sos gal chew Wb alll 6 ele te ISG LES Uy 
Be poy tal pel le pst de foe bl ol Lal ody (¥) 
Riad cae ne pom ren wareres ail ge Yai ail Je jail 
seal Je Ya pV al le blll Je joy Cal y sel fe gL 
Se SN bop ML ab ae oty hi dt GUL oe UB aly 
SEY ST pkl Maye ne ol pape al atl la OL bl 8 al 
pW I Ale Ase yy ake GSS Lelie Vy Lae Vy Lage VI 6 tt 
«Sali gd + AN sl bu per Silos e ig ral Je 


\o 


er 


10 


20 


25 


30 


35 


178 Book Five, Chapter Six 


(8) We now say: As for differentia, it does not share with the genus 
that is predicated of it anything in [terms of] the quiddity, so that its 
separation from it is in itself. [On the other hand,] it has something in 
common with the species in that it is part of it. Hence, its separation is 
due to the nature of the genus which is included in the quiddity of the 
species, but not in the quiddity of the differentia. As for the state fof 
differentia] with respect to the rest of things, if the differentia shares the 
quiddity with them, it must separate from them through a differentia; if 
it does not share the quiddity with them, it is not necessary to separate 
from them through differentia. It is not necessary that each differentia 
should share something in terms of quiddity. Thus, it does not necessarily 
follow that, if a differentia should fall under what is more general than 
it, this subsumption under it should be a subsumption under a genus. On 
the contrary, it is possible for it to fall under what is more general than it, 
where the more general is included in its quiddity. It is [also] possible for 
it to fall under that which is more general than it only in the manner in 
which an idea falls under what is its necessary concomitant, not as one 
included in its quiddity. An example of this is the rational. It is subsumed 
under the apprehending in that the apprehending is a genus for it, while 
the apprehending is subsumed under substance in that it—I mean, sub- 
stance—is a necessary concomitant of it, not a genus in the manner to 
which we have alluded. It also falls under the relative, not in [the sense] 
that relation is its substance or is included in its quiddity, but only in that 
it is a necessary concomitant of it. 

(9) Thus, in its separation from the species, differentia does not need 
another differentia. Nor, in separating from the things that share exis- 
tence with it or from the other concomitants, does it need a meaning 
other than its own quiddity. It does not necessarily follow that it should 
inevitably fall under what is more general than it in the manner in which 
the species is subsumed under the genus; rather, it falls in the manner 
of the subsumption of the more particular under the [more general] nec- 
essary concomitant that is not included in the quiddity. ; 

(10) If, however, you take differentia to be, for example, rationality, 
then its likes are necessary in the differentiae of composite things- If 
by rationality you mean its being in possession of a rational soul, then 
it would be one of the meanings composed of a relation and a substance, 
as you have learned about its governing rule in other places. If [on the 
other hand] you meant the rational soul itself, it would be a substance 





tll OL \VA 


| salll LB Ale Jae sill dl ALE Y lb ail View areca ep 
1s Mail 3S ae Hh al de pel Lia ally we lait gil Ko 
| pie Uy. pallial Bondy pel ale 3 tS ed ade 
c pas Wee paisa gl ey Rall LGU gl pail gb CLAY gL, 
| 5 SI ee aly «eis yer ates St oe ol Aalll LF USL ol Sly 
plcF jaill by dle Yoo ab dal GLb aly jab 
| Ld cin) Ke 8 fe pd ot ney pelt ahs 9K glares 
ain esl gh lect a Yul Kay eal Bre pM Ky ar asl ys 
SO ie Pepe eo 
gel — sl be pedo e a Dally ca) pee Ayal gl le Allo d 
- lal Lal aay ag) UL gl ill anal le jae Va sl zap 
[YE] Sa Ul de fe - al Basle jlopaye GLY gl de Y 
PCE ly FT bab pall ge hail acl Jab (4) 
chetle al pb gan SM pilall fley apegl 3 a GLAM +La} jo wail 















3 C8 de LCS poll psig ace el pw lod tle ab gl coe aly 
_ AUD Soon Y ll il oF at pyilll egy 
MY Jad al Cow Lib othe Bei Jaa ode bl ul, (9+) 
Pay Ret ye NG GU ye QU abt us AS ded oe gb AS 
UML itl i ce oly esl aly GK y cule Le ile 


\o 


10 


15 


20 


30 


179 Book Five, Chapter Six 


and part of the composite substance from which it differs through a 
differentia that obtains between the simple and the composite among 
substances, as you have ascertained many times. 

(11) Let us now return to the premises of the doubt [previously 
raised]. We say: 

(12) As for the premise stating that, because differentia is a certain 
idea, it must then be either the most general of predicates or subsumed 
under the most general of predicates, this is admitted. As for the other— 
namely, the one stating that whichever of the predicates is the most gen- 
eral is a category—it is false. For the category is only the most general of 
generic predicates that render the quiddity subsistent, not [simply] the 
most general of predicates. [Moreover,] it does not render subsistent the 
quiddity of everything beneath it but is a necessary concomitant of [the] 
things [beneath it]. The other [premise ]—stating that each thing that is 
subsumed under a more general meaning is separated from another that 
shares [this meaning] with it through a differentia proper to it—is false. 
[This is] because, [for] those things that share [a meaning], if the shar- 
ing is in terms of the necessary concomitants without the meaning being 
included in the quiddity, then the separation from it is not through a 
differentia, but through the quiddity alone. With this, [the point has 
been] specifically made that it is not necessary that for every differentia 
there is a differentia. 

(13) It must be known that the meaning of the statement that the 
differentiae of substance constitute a substance and that the differentiae 
of quality constitute a quality is that the differentiae of substance must 
constitute substance and that the differentiae of quality must constitute 
quality, [but] not that there exists in the meaning of their quiddities the 
definition of substance in [the sense] that they are themselves substances, 
nor that the differentiae of quality include in their quiddities the defini- 
tion of quality in that they are qualities [in themselves]. [They do not 
include this] unless we mean by the differentiae of substance (for example) 
not the differentia predicated univocally of substance, but the differentia 
predicated of it derivatively—I mean [for instance] not “rational,” but 
“rationality.” It would then be as you have learned, and it would be 
differentia derivatively, not univocally. [But] true differentia is spoken of 
univocally. Moreover, it does not necessarily follow that, if differentia exists 
in the univocal [sense], that the differentia by derivation must also exist. 


rattle OLY \va 


PIA PSM, beady ly Lal ails Se rye 5 OIG Lage 
ApS ett Le gos le 

‘Us AE d A obaill JLoVl ey (19) 

eel oS) LB Slap ae aN) frail sLabstal aid LT 649 
BANU, tL oped cele ily eee i Sol Ly cc padl 
ApH! esl ail! Ly SU sie gb NV tl acl eo L Sy abla oy 
MAL Saale asd dy OM atl nel ge NY al aged ad 
Me pate gi ae esl sar cd ly wl Sul ge abla, LV ot 
Ga? pI Bye 85] OGL GY AS ca ate fa, ad SL 
Ge [YO] dalll aon by hale leo Sbai ll Soo) tall 8 Je tatl call 
«utd ad SIS gl oe Vall lve we 

SI Seay sre abl Joa Sl oy Uli sill gl bel ony (1) 
UV Gh AS Say laser GS ale peak Syed gl cals Gene cS 
her \Gl ge wal am Wilale pggie 9 ey, prodl nad gh Y tS GS 
OW AAS Ul be AS ae Yon ey AS Spay cluutl 
se sill ad Je shld yak de Jill Jail VSG pad Jets ot 
VOB hab 5 Soy cake be Kem 5K. shell GbUY ool GULEYL 
Solsth sill Jal 31a) oe paddy EIST Sli ill Ged Jailly  shL tL 
LE PV USGS Uae y SLL gill Laill Lal 3S gl clayey 


\o 





Qn 


10 


15 


20 


30 


180 Book Five, Chapter Seven 


This would not be the case in everything that is a species, but only in 
that which is substantial species {and] not accidental species—nor yet 
in every substantial species, but only in what is composite and is not a 
simple substance. 

(14) Thus, the differentia which is spoken of univocally means some- 
thing having a certain description in an unqualified [sense]. Thereafter, 
by way of reflection and contemplation, it becomes known that this thing 
with this certain description must be either a substance or a quality. An 
example of this is that the rational is something possessing rationality. 
There is nothing in its being something possessing rationality [that ren- 
ders it] either a substance or an accident. It is, however, known exter- 
nally that this thing cannot but be either a substance or a body. 


Chapter [Seven] 


On making known the proper relationship 
between definition and the thing defined 


(1) Someone may say: 

(2) Definition, as those engaged in the art [of logic] agree, is com- 
posed of genus and differentia, each of the two being separate from each 
other, their sum constituting the two parts of the definition. [Now,] 
definition is nothing other than the quiddity of the thing defined. As such, 
the relation of the meanings that are denoted by the genus and differentia 
to the nature of the species is the same as their relation in definition to 
the thing defined. And, just as genus and species are the two parts of the 
definition, likewise their two meanings constitute the two parts of the thing 
defined. If this, then, is the case, it would be incorrect to predicate the 
nature of the genus of the nature of the species, because it is part of it. 

(3) We say: 

(4) If we define and say, for example, “Man is a rational animal,” 
our intention by this is not that man is the sum of animal and rational. 
Rather, our intention by that is that the animal which is that animal 





lett oly 
\As 


Sr bs So Lal aly Laoyll pL ago cage 65 9s eb hc ge 
- ten Lae Kly Sy oF Ls 
go yt «Ulan |S hie “ot oleae Sigil Sle gill Lads (14) 
US as WS hanes gill « 2H laa gS ol oe al abe Jay Jel ja 
2 3 tse al ga gle CaS 3 ald. she al tt ys blu gl ale 
[TPT]. team gl Iyage Ye at MIKI SG Val ett Gaal Yl 


[a lall reid] 
cha>( 5) 


da abl duke ay 


Jaa! Silly (1) 

eta ie Ely dell Jal yo GU ae by WS ahi gl (1) 
SelM ol ly cL Tleje] ge Lyegennny « SHU Qyler lage nals 5 
PS Gelli I ally eb Uple Jolt gl hi SO «aya | 
= 2508 ej ae hiss cod ey fuailly abl ILS, 2041 adl 
eee Gall hace Se all tal Jom nash AIS 56 

Foe a . ‘Syed (1) 

bole acl cet le — yt ~ QLsYl s Lhd tore la} GL (€) 
SH YS sith gd al abl, Bole oh SbUy Sled epee 0 GLY gl 





sled cleye vey 


QQ 


10 


20 


25 


30 


181 Book Five, Chapter Seven 


is rational—indeed, that it is specifically the one which is rational— 
[speaking] as though’ animal in itself is something whose existence is not 
realized in the manner we discussed earlier.? If this animal is rational, 
so that the one of which we have said in a general way that it has an 
apprehending soul—that is, that it has a soul—is [the one that is] not 
realized, then [this latter] becomes realized by virtue of its state of being 
sensitive and rational. This, then, would be a realization for its being a 
possessor of an apprehending soul. Thus, it is not the case that a body 
having an apprehending soul is one thing and its being in possession of a 
rational soul is something external added to it. Rather, this thing which 
is an animal is the body possessing an apprehending soul. Its soul being 
apprehending is an indefinite thing. But that which is in act in existence 
cannot at all be indefinite,’ but is realized in [existence]. This indefinite- 
ness would be only in the mind, since the true nature of the apprehend- 
ing soul remains problematic for it until [this] is explicated, where one 
would then say (that it is] “apprehending through sensation, imagina- 
tion, and rationality.” 

(5) If sensation is included in the definition of animal, it would not, 
in truth, be differentia, but only an indication of differentia. For the 
differentia of animal consists in that it is a possessor of an apprehending 
soul [and] that it moves by volition. The very haecceity of animal does 
not consist in that it senses; its haecceity does not consist in that it imag- 
ines; nor does its haecceity consist in that it moves by volition. Rather, it 
is a principle for all these, all these being its powers where the attribu- 
tion [of animal] to any one of them has no priority over its attribution to 
another. In itself, however, it has no name, these being its concomitants, 
and, hence, we are compelled to invent a name for it in relation to them. 
For this reason, we combine sensation and movement in its definition, 
making sense as though it has a meaning that includes both the external 
and internal sense; or else one may confine oneself to sensation, where 
it would indicate all [these powers]|—not by entailment, however, but 
through concomitance. 

(6) You have encountered a clear exposition of [all] this and its like. 
[To resume, then,] sense in reality is not the differentia of animal, but one 
of the branches of its differentia and one of its necessary concomitants. Its 
differentia is the existence of the soul, which is, for it, the principle of all 
this. The case is similar with the rational [with respect] to man. But the 
absence of names and the paucity of our awareness of differentiae—either 





elects ye OLY 
See) NAN 


PB eas sary phat BV SSE sll aay ga 550) et 
unt sala Soe Sill be GG lib Gleb alld QB. Lo Ls 
SI 5 Dare jhe ub yt pli 93 al ol hare nb gh C5) Manes 2515 
BOK eb So i BCS ad ng Ko cdi ole ak 
es ies ota aa 
cptee ph S3 hdd Seb 3 Lyall pall pad sa glam ge gill Lag KS 
OK Uy Sta 4d oS b ccule LSI Lge ogc ob hell GY, 
SS ak so SLll pill tie abe Ke 9S 3 pith yl rs 
 Gedly Joa, uth Sih. 
Fe b> 9 edly yo ied seo dl sel tal, (°) 
VSNL paid ags ays, Se S19 pad gb al Gleb! Juad 1b . Jal 
#89 AS coe 98 OLY cs Shag Vy SS hatin Uy cp 
PSD Somdly ul hn ghemash ot aap 
valet IN lal, mh SSI Dade cal say pl 
pay 5| «elily yallas) dt (nee ae BE Ll Jaks cate ble Dy 
HEM dl YS rer Je Vs 3S te 
J Sledl Ja LY LI is, pct oy ne gly a Gy ody (1) 
HAS ae go Al tll ogeny aed Lily taj) only Aas a 
Mo Ll — Ghee J pail Lygat als, LM ewe i, OL abil wlisy 


\o 


10 


20 


30 


182 Book Five, Chapter Seven 


this or the other—force us to swerve from the true nature of the differ- 
entia toward its necessary concomitant. Sometimes we may thus derive its 
name from its concomitant, intending by “sensitive” that which has the 
principle from which sensation and other things come out. Sometimes 
differentia itself may be unknown to us, we being aware only of its nec- 
essary concomitant. Our discussion of these things is not in terms of 
what we ourselves intellectually apprehend, what we ourselves do, and the 
way we manage [such things], but in terms of the manner in which they 
themselves exist. Moreover, if animal were to have no soul except the sen- 
sitive, then its being a sensitive body would not be a genus purely in the 
sense of the corporeal sensitive nature—on the condition [that is] of its 
being only [this], but only in the sense we have stated. Hence, the union 
of the differentia with the genus is only something which entailed the 
genus potentially, not as something which is potentially the necessary 
concomitant of the genus. (On the other hand,] the union of matter with 
form, or the [one] part with the other in the composite, is only the union 
of one thing with another thing which is external to it, whether a neces- 
sary concomitant or an accident. 

(7) Thus, the things that have union are of different kinds. One of 
them is like the union of matter and form, where matter would be some- 
thing which, by itself, would in no respect have existence but which 
becomes actual through form, on the condition that form is something 
external to it, where neither of the two is the other, and where [their] 
combination is identical with neither. The second is the union of things 
where each is independent of the other in subsistence, except that they 
unite so that there results from them one thing, either through composi- 
tion or through transformation and mixture. Among [the different kinds 
of union] is the union of things where some do not subsist in act except 
through that with which they combine, while some subsist in act [inde- 
pendently of the other]. Thus, that which does not subsist in act becomes 
subsistent in act by that which subsists in act. From this, a united combi- 
nation takes place—as, for example, the union of body and whiteness. In 
all these divisions, no one thing is identical with the thing it unites with; 
the aggregate fof the two] is not identical with [each of | of [the] parts, and 
neither one is at all predicated univocally of the other. 


rec Go ole VAY 


AN oy deel Lael He MY Ol jail dade Ge Gla 515 lly 
Sraitl SF beng Sony LI EVITA] au tay gil Waal as ans 
ee se yl eS LO aly MAIN Y pathy bass gee Ae 
Ip. Weal 9 ageny aS Igo ye (Pe petty os ny god fee 
Dye ptt Late ad um I ener AS QT RaLLI YY ad jal od OS 
aA LB 6S oll le fe Ld yn SS esos eran Aa—lall 
chbh bl oY Bab adh yal ge Lal de Yl ut ath paul 
COE Ht ot EI ys Lib Shp eV 5h Halse sé, 
piles ae 
MEY Kghe asl, thal le sl oS LG G (v) 
Jad pres Udy amy ald obal d ogey Y Cs Ul SCo pale soll 
fra Sy eV Lasso od cae belt Ili, pall 95 5 Banal 
UF ple hands Ie dol SOS esl lA SU) Lye nly Wo ed 
Mee Lely OST Ul aoly ed Myer feared coed (gl Y) ol 2 e5 
st Ney cA ail Le YI fall ogi, Y aw Lil sl ye en IM 
ee ane een Jat pst Y sit gid S Jest 
clan [14] lpaew Mee Dla SS Y YL eday ol A ol 
Sls Je BY de ge 2 Lay clases YRS YY, 


\o 


10 


20 


30 


183 Book Five, Chapter Seven 


(8) Among [the kinds of union] is the union of one thing with another 
where the potentiality of one of the two is to be that thing, not to be 
[merely] joined to it. For the mind may intellectually apprehend a mean- 
ing where it is possible for the meaning itself to be many things, each of 
which is that meaning in existence. [The mind] would then join another 
meaning to it whose existence is specified in that the [latter] meaning is 
entailed in [the former]. It would only be “another” with respect to 
[mental] assignment and ambiguity [in thought], not in [extramental] 
existence. An example of this is measure. For it is a meaning that can be 
line, surface, and depth, not in that something else conjoins it so that the 
combination is line, surface, and depth, but in being that very line or that 
very surface. This is because the meaning of measure is that it is some- 
thing that is receptive of equality, for example, without this having the 
condition that it is only this meaning. For the likes of this is not a genus, as 
you have known. Indeed, unconditionally it is something else—so that its 
existence in itself is the existence [it has]* (that is, after it is predicated 
of it in itself that it is such [a thing]), regardless of whether [this is] in 
[terms of being of] one dimension, two dimensions, or three. 

(9) This meaning in existence will be only one of these. The mind, 
however, creates a separate existence for [this meaning] inasmuch as it is 
intellectually apprehended. Moreover, if the mind adds to it an increase, 
it would not add the increase as an extraneous meaning attaching to the 
thing receptive of equality such that [the latter] is in itself receptive of 
equality while [the former] is some other thing added to it, extraneous 
to [it]. Rather, the [increase] would be a realization of its receptivity of 
equality with respect to its being of only one dimension or more. Thus, 
the receptive of equality in one dimension in this thing would be the very 
thing receptive of equality, so that you can say, “This [thing] receptive of 
equality is this [thing] that has one dimension, and vice versa.” This would 
not be in things that have passed. And, here, if there is some multiplicity 
that one cannot doubt, it is a multiplicity not by way of being [composed] 


let ye OLY VAY 


ONY ce BSB Kgl Lage Vag ce ta eb MAL ery (A) 


SiS Baa sll lS OS Gl bore see in 8 all BA pas 


PUBS Shears ae oT partllead oedl Ballas evel 
OB  saall fo oe oT Ney ctl to oe BT GS lily cab lem 
ae see SB SMa gl Je Y aly clautly Ll 55S 51 jm ge 
Ady. 3 claatl pd gl AS Ld as 9 S gl le Sealy cheat ged 
pl We GS Sad Log ythe pe calyledl a tog « tt ge shoal gee gy 
SN ime So el pb bt hf ccale WS Lee gSY bi fe gai 
BIS 9299 IK gl ae GS eg Gland 3 yal, Ll plait + tl Lae g X 
ay J got ha 398 rlyee (Sail aS ache Vynone 9K cl coger ga 
ee lage (A 
or ge bl fe ashy aay) ily all Lal 15] sill Ges ie lpey ie 
Wy Mead nm agli Sa bs 9K om styl pal ‘tlh mY 
als i\glanll Alyd nat old 9S Ub oF Ly all Gla. oT es 
Ie Pacts we alLal jlal 93 [re-] BPS) Sil esas Ss 
Ve gb alglad (tal Lae gl sya Sh jem fe algal li yall ga et 
Oy Ley nee ol LAY 8 oe SY, SIL, ely Ja, 93 9 il 
SiS HN 3S Madly oS yb DULY Ls Set” 


\o 








10 


15 


20 


30 


184 Book Five, Chapter Seven 


of parts, but a multiplicity by way of something not being realized and of 
something being realized. For the thing which in itself is realized can be 
considered as being realized for the mind so that “otherness” thereby 
obtains. But, if it becomes realized, it would not be some other thing except 
through the consideration which has been mentioned [and] which belongs 
solely to the mind. For realization does not change it but ascertains it. 

(10) This is how one must intellectually apprehend unity in genus and 
differentia. Even if it differs and some species have composition in their 
natures—their differentiae arising from their forms, and their genera 
from the materials belonging to their forms (even though neither their 
genera nor their differentiae are their materials and forms inasmuch 
as {these latter] are materials and form, while some [species] have no 
composition in their natures, having composition, if at all, [only] in the 
manner we have spoken of )—then each of the two things in each species 
would be other than the other only because at one time it has been taken 
not in its state of realization but only as potentially realized, and at 
another time taken as actually realized. This potentiality does not belong 
to it in accordance with [extramental] existence but only according to the 
mind. For it does not have in existence the realization of a generic nature 
that remains realized in potency as a species, regardless of whether or 
not the species has composition in terms of natures. 

(11) [In the case of] genus and differentia also in definition, inas- 
much as each of them is part of the definition qua definition, then neither 
one is predicated of definition, nor is definition predicated of either. For 
+t is not said of definition that it is either genus or differentia, or vice 
versa. Thus, neither is it said of the definition of animal that it is body or 
that it is sensitive, nor conversely. But, inasmuch as genera and differen- 
tiae are natures that arise as [one] nature, as you have known, they are 
predicated of the thing defined. Indeed, we say: Definition in reality 
yields the meaning of one nature. For example, if you say, “rational ani- 
mal,” from this is realized the meaning of one thing which is the very 
animal which [in the definition] is that very animal which is rational. 





elects ye oll VAG 


pp rl oe et pet pV OB heme ely deeb pl ig Gy 
ld Soph eae slo 15] 0 Syd ste y SC gail we aoe pb pete 
Adlon, obs ped Srsaoel GD odor Saal old gall Soll eV YL ST 
Wee OT aly ily - padly ecb op gill ae sl fea gl coe USS (1°) 

op Werlenly lay pe e pad Lady lh 3 SF We ls paw of 
Pee op ypey baalye pad Vy eral Y Sal gly Layne 3 obgl 
Pl Me BSF aT aL Lb BOS Ub yd pany rey aly 
dew Vay S81 BAY SN nb 65 5 le otal ool gS Lb « Ls gil 
Aa) steay «a baste day ala Oss e banda lle jpavbeaslss 
Awe hale Spar dysl Pal pal le. jAdll noe hp oo 9 gl me pd 
[YEN] Kgl gl GU BSG py SO elpeny beg thane Sg om 
gp do ee 8 lage Joly Seem oy Lal Lh B Jails pel, (9) 

pee Shae ME VSG abe fog abt, abl he fame Va cae po tum 
Ul, SAL Uy pe gb Sl Yy eee ol Gly bt ob Ste SIL Y, ad Yy 
Ge SA Vib cade Le le dace Eas] abe Spailly vba toe y 
Oly 1B Va] Ch Moe Gaely dee eae MeL oe, EI g] Sy op ogadl 


dey 2 jlydl alld (gill Glpbl any gh aly (gt cae ud yy ame, « GbLI 





\ 


Fl «Pp «ue r Pree wet a Cas 


\o 


oO 


10 


20 


25 


30 


185 Book Five, Chapter Seven 


If you consider that one thing, there would be no multiplicity in the mind, 
But, if you look at the definition, finding it composed of several of these 
meanings, and consider them from the point of view that each of them, 
according to the aforementioned way of looking, is a meaning in itself 
other than the other, you will find that there is multiplicity in the mind. 
If, by “definition,” you intend the meaning subsisting in the soul according 
to the first consideration—namely, where the one thing which is animal 
is identical with that very animal which is rational—then the very defini- 
tion itself would be the same as the defined thing apprehended by the 
mind. But, if you intend by “definition” the meaning in the soul according 
to the second differentiated consideration, the very definition itself would 
not have the same meaning as the thing defined but would be something 
leading to it—-[leading to] its acquisition. 

(12) Moreover, the consideration that necessitates that the definition 
itself is the thing defined does not render “rational” and “animal” the 
two parts of the definition; but, rather, [it renders them] predicates of it 
in that it itself is [one thing], not that they are two things of a reality that 
are different from each other and each different from the composite. 
Rather, by it, in our example, we mean the thing which is itself animal, 
being that animal whose animality is perfected and realized through 
rationality. The consideration that necessitates that the definition is 
other than the thing defined prohibits genus and differentia from being 
predicated of definition, but they would be two parts of it. For this reason, 
definition is not genus, nor is genus definition; and species is neither one 
of the two. Nor is the totality of the meaning of “animal” as compounded 
with the rational identical with the meaning of “animal” not [so] com- 
pounded; nor is the meaning of “rational” identical with [the meaning 
of what is] uncompounded. What is understood from the meaning of the 
combination of “animal” and “rational” is not what is understood from 
[the meaning] of each [separately]; and neither [of the two separately] 
is predicable of [this meaning]. Thus, the combination of “animal” and 
“rational” is neither animal nor rational, because what is combined of 
two things is other than [each of the] two, but it is a [third thing]. [This 
is] because each of the two is part of [the combination]: the part cannot 
be the whole, nor the whole the part. 











less » ole! \Ao 


$5 BL IS  saall BES Kl wats Hl alls Gols BB . gbuul 
Be Weal Ste y Gycely Ghul sate ge je Gags abt 
ae SD Pill BANS te Cary SN pb aed Oo ee Sl LEO 
Ga glad 9& all vege 2th gay cA CVG aah oil all ub 
cpl bh See Oly Speed go Bl ye ace dl Qe ght yo gl dl ols 
OS de «2g0l gas cline Aime, LI SG «peal gO LEVY tl pill 
14) Lead bogs Ct 

Slably gel Jao Y og Bl rare dh gS coe Gul ed (\¥) 
SNpliey lpia Red yo GLE Lgl Y ye wh abe glare be abl oy ose 
Lil y> Sly dh US gall Glyde 92 gill ell Le ba, os SS. gato 
Sol es dH pb adh 9S Con GUUS, . gatl dent AS. 
Ys gece dL ac) USS ase oie fp cob! Ge alarm pailly [YEN] Good 
Ce oh Sel a Wye Ghd sae Mae Vy c lage Lamy alll Yy roe Good 
Bobs Shem Pyare come i cogis Vy He nF Geb pe Vy ly yt oh dl 
lm 39 Gels Slam Eee pad fale Lease Jeo Wy lero je opis 
ral cain 5m Lage oly JG LIE eae Gd y Peal oY ght, 
[ver] obi eoK NY Mi poKY 


\o 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


186 Book Five, Chapter Eight 


Chapter [Eight] 
On definition 


(1) What we must now make known is the manner in which things 
are defined, the relation of definition to them, and the difference 
between a thing’s quiddity and form. We say: Just as the existent and the 
one are among the things common to the categories (but [this] by way of 
priority and posteriority), the case is also similar with things that have 
quiddity and definition, for this is not on the same level in all things. 

(2) As for substance, it is one of the things which definition treats in 
a primary and real manner. In the case of others, [definition treats 
them] inasmuch as their quiddity is connected [either] with substance or 
substantial form in the manner we have defined. As for natural form, you 
have known its state. You have also known measures and figures. These 
other things are thus also, in one respect, defined only in [terms] of sub- 
stance. From this it occurs that they come to be.! As for accidents, there 
is in their definitions [something] additional to their essences. For, even 
though their essences are things that in no way include substance as a 
part belonging to them—this being the case because that whose part is 
substance is substance—substance is included in their definition as a 
part, since they are necessarily defined through substance. 

(3) As for composite things, there occurs in them the repetition of 
one and the same thing twice. For, since they have substance, it must be 
included in the definition; and, since they have an accident defined 
through substance, it becomes incumbent to include it once again in the 
definition of accident, so that definition in its entirety becomes inescapably 
composed of the definition of substance and the definition of accident: 
there would thus be duality and multiplicity. [This] becomes clear if the 
definition of that accident is analyzed and reduced to [the components] 
it entails. Thus, substance would be found twice in the definition of this 
composite, while in the essence of [this] composite it occurs once. Hence, 








lets ye OLY! AN 


[Ul jue] 
J2i(¢) 


roane) 


bi nd BS csc GS LAY gl Wadi gi oer gully (9) 
op PU Sly aged GI SESS say pall yy pt alll yp yall Ly « eh 
Lt gS baal WIS pry eat foe gle Sy oY ial) Ltt Lah 
Bday Rye le WS OLE alld ald caey Ral ol,d 
GAM EM ULL, Ug Ygly wre al Kab abi Lb (1) 
Bypall UI Goae be goo Je Ayal ayyall gl adh Aa Yale il Ls 
ADV oll 3S «Lal Yoge 6 IAM, yolilly Yl Cie db Lala 
LEU SS gh als jp Wend ahh Y sued Vary oy Lal go 
Med atl Joan Yosh ei oly Wha CMGI Ge tals Lague 3 ob 
Lage OB aye ab tee je LV ul copa gl doy YY ye ail Je 
Ble Y abl sod CIS) eye al le os pad Joy 
Me SLAB oh ae oly ISS bd oe Gb ISI LL, (7) 
AW Ph sre 256 yo Sly all OB [VEE] Whoa] ye a WO aye 
2pal day abl oo oy My dl thee 9S gSlip Syl we dass 
cA liman ayy ppl WS vo Jl Lal gtry 355 dell UI ley Lu Y 
Baal de SN OND 85 coh ad ab vey 03 Sh bie ae i 


) 


\o 


13 


20 


29 


30 


187 Book Five, Chapter Eight 


in this definition there is an addition to the meaning of the thing defined 
itself. But true definitions ought not to have additions in them. An exam- 
ple of this is that, if you define “snub nose,” you must inevitably include 
“nose” in [the definition] and include “snub” in it, in which case you would 
have included in it the definition of “snub.” But “snub” is a concave nose, 
and you cannot take concavity by itself; for, if concavity by itself is “snub,” 
then a concave leg would also be “snub.” You must, then, inescapably 
include “nose” in the definition of “snub.” Thus, if you have defined 
“snub nose,” you have included “nose” in [the definition] twice. Hence, it 
must either follow that the likes of these things cannot be definitions, 
definitions pertaining to simples only, or else that these are definitions in 
a different respect. [Nor] ought we to confine definitions to lexical expla- 
nations of a name, making the examples of these [real] definitions for 
this reason. For definition is that which indicates quiddity—this you have 
known. If it were the case that every statement beside which a name can be 
imposed is a definition, then all the books of al-Jahiz? would be definitions. 

(4) If this, then, is the casc, it is evident that the definitions of these 
composites are definitions in some other respect. 

(5) The quiddity of every[thing that is] simple is the same as itself 
because there is nothing receptive of its quiddity. If there were something 
receptive of its quiddity, then the quiddity of that thing would not be the 
quiddity of the receptive thing that is realized for it. [This is] because 
that thing received would be its form, and its form is not that to which its 
definition corresponds. Nor are composites [the things] they are through 
form alone. For the definition belonging to composites does not consist 
of form alone; rather, the definition of a thing indicates all the things that 
render it subsistent. Thus, it also, in some respect, includes matter. It is 
through this that the difference between quiddity and form in composite 
things is known, Form is always part of the quiddity in composite things, 
while the form of every simple [thing] is also identical with it because 
there is no composition in it. In the case of composites, however, neither 


ry 





elec oe oly! NAY 


con YAEL] opadly and 8 ott car le dol abl le 3 9 SG 
ad 5b jl ond La GY cone laltl te Jey lal Wak gl 
ple ob oe as del 95 ba a Sky calle YS 
BM po ose Gall GS BSB corey line eb GT jem Vy «gene Gil 
ola go BAM eb shallow Vicon fy colds Lal Mined Litt cit 
BSS Vl Ud doa 8 gi GN ad O54) 3 9S ba GI one ols 
Ber Je logam che SG gh Laid LiL ogadh 9 SG LL, layae oe Stil 
ia Stl fend ed opt Kal le ab i padi ol ea ely gel 
JB FOE By aye By all Je Jon eo ob GY Rize lygae al 
logae Bat OS pea gS Lae alalgh Sy gl 

aya Largar LSS ode gl gd cle be pS GIS bb (4) 
elie le 

[Yeo] hl bt tke aa al ob be Sy (0) 
ham sill pall aol Dab 2 Ws Soo) call WB et dhe oS, 
AS Yy care ables git Pd Sy mey Spe 9S Spall alld GY cal 
to je rey iy prall ye 9 ped OLS all LI Gd coe bgp Lrg typ 
onlay tor fall gaits La 9S alld ogi bam he San eal 
CAS aU Ge ope La5> 8) pally 8) pally GLU oo aU ew Gaal 
YE Baye WLS Ul, 45 55 Val ald Lal cyye jb ben 6 





\o 


10 


20 


30 


35 


188 Book Five, Chapter Eight 


their forms nor their quiddities are identical with themselves. As for form, 
it is obvious that it is part of it. As for the quiddity, it is that by which it is 
what it is; and it is what it is only by virtue of the form being connected with 
matter, which is something additional to the meaning of form. The com- 
posite is also not this meaning but is the assemblage of form and matter, 
For this is what the composite is, and the quiddity is this composition. Form 
is thus one of the things to which composition is added. The quiddity is this 
very composition that combines form and matter. The unity that comes 
about through both is due to this one [composition]. 

(6) Thus, there belongs to genus inasmuch as it is a genus a quiddity, 
to species inasmuch as it is species a quiddity, and to the particular singu- 
lar there also belongs a quiddity by way of the concomitant accidents that 
render it subsistent. [Here,] it is as though, when the quiddity is said of 
that which pertains to genus and species and of that which pertains to the 
singular individual, it is said equivocally. This quiddity is not separable from 
that which renders a thing what it is; otherwise, it would not be a quiddity. 

(7) There is, however, no definition of the singular in any respect 
whatsoever, even though the composite has some definition. This is 
because definition is composed of descriptive names that necessarily do 
not refer to anything specific. For, if it were [such a] reference, it would 
be sheer naming or some other indication by way of motion—a pointing 
at and the like—and would not include making the unknown known 
through description. 

(8) Since every name confined to the definition of a singular thing 
indicates a description and [since] description has the possibility of being 
applicable to many, composition not removing this possibility from it,* 
then [it follows that], if Ais a universal meaning and B, [also] a universal 
meaning, is added to it, it is possible that there would be some specifi- 
cation. But, if [this is] the specification of a universal by a universal, then 
that which is A and B would remain a universal, having the possibility 
of sharing [a common characteristic with others]. An example of this is if 
you define this [person as] Socrates, saying, “He is the philosopher,” there 
is a sharing [with others]. If you say, “He is the religious philosopher,” 
there is also a sharing [with others]. If you say, “He is the religious philoso- 
pher unjustly put to death,” there is also sharing [with others]. If you say, 








elestl yo oly NAA 


Ly Ale Wale PAA Lily oles oye Ugh lads yall Ul Yb Yale 
I ed Sally «5 pall ene of S| ay iol BU idl YK sb ea 
Las tally Spl aL yo Kha gl Siallly by yall Pyare yo Jy Lid al 
CUS oe aio ally SF al Sle be el gb SI 
dal ag Leger BolLl sro Sy cdaWly 3, geal 

Lal Sb) oily chabes go ep lly ale ee ga Ls perl (4 
Be AS IL alll 3G aapDUl ALE y 4 pss UL pe ke pL 
Oe candy «eel Lt, OF edttl oil SN 6, Coty dl Sl 
ale SG ol Vy ce Le ly ge Ua Le Doll 

lay be ae Spall SS Gly copes 5 eoeeye apiall we VOSS (v 
“ae os MSL) Ye ad Wl Vet Lol Gy. LY preg] 
yey als atl Ly Lb, Sow gels i Lida as SNEWS, 
cath Seenll Gy 

CPI Jarom cantly ai le Ja asad am 3 pan etl GH S]y (A) 
Lnal, LS gael OF lal ol  JLLeM Ina i eee Y GIO, cine Ue 
U4ra55 IE TL Sy peed A GK GI je — US ew gy — Gal 
AUS Jey 5 4 ol Spey LG 9 T ge sill tthe ee KK” 
pba 218 gly Sb ad Spade a] toed ore gl ibl yew be 
Sb Se La ad lb JSAM pth Spal 28 3B Sp Lal ad «yall 


\o 


15 


20 


30 


RN) 


189 Book Five, Chapter Eight 


“He is the son of so-and-so,” this [description] also has the possibility of 
being shared [by others]; moreover, [the latter] would be an individual] 
whose defining would be as the defining [of Socrates]. If that individual] 
is then known by direct reference or by an agnomen,’ then the matter 
reverts to direct reference and an agnomen and ceases to be [identifica- 
tion] through definition. If one adds [to this] and says, “He is the one put 
to death in such a city on such a day,” this description, despite its indj- 
viduation by an artifice, [remains] a universal that can be said of many, 
unless attributed to an individual. 

(9) If that to which it is attributed is an individual among a group of 
individuals [belonging to] some species, there is no access to knowing it 
except through direct observation, and the mind will arrive at knowledge 
of it only through sensation. If [on the other hand] that to which it is 
attributed is one of the individuals of which each individual fulfills the 
reality of the species so that it has no similar, and if the mind appre- 
hended that species through its [sole] individual instance, then, if the 
description is attributed to [such an individual], the mind will have knowl- 
edge of it. The mind will not fear any change of state resulting from the 
possibility of the thing’s corruption, since the likes of this thing is not 
corrupted.® But the {the former] thing described [the corruptible indi- 
vidual] is not [something] where one has assurance of its existence and 
of the permanence of the description said of it. The mind sometimes 
may know the period of its duration, but [its description] would also not 
be a true definition. It is thus clear that there is no true definition of the 
singular. It is only known through a proper name, a direct reference, or a 
relation to something known through a proper name or a direct reference. 

(10) Every definition is an intellectual conception where it would be 
true to predicate it of the thing defined. The particular is corruptible. If 
it becomes corrupted, it is no longer defined by its definition. Thus, the 
predication of definition of it would be true for one period, false in 
another; and, as such, the predication of definition on it would always be 
conjectural, unless, besides intellectual definition, there is some direct 
reference or observation whereby it becomes defined by its definition 
through such a reference. If this does not obtain, however, it is [only] 
believed to have a definition. As for the thing truly defined, its definition 
would be a certainty. Thus, whoever undertakes to define corruptible 
things undertakes to render them eternal and gocs astray. 














lett yy obey VAN 


Bb «Aan apt Ladt 00 G6 Lal Bs JLo ab gS gob Gl tes 
5H flay «Cally LAY LAI le Cal liga Godt alls ye 
g bal esl Ve Soy WS hae 3 JF oil ge tb 5 Gly. werd 
pd Shoes IM eS le Stl jy ML watts 

Fi Bol oy po elathale 5p Lent oil all gob (4) 
Ad) NN FOB GLY GB, ale Jill coy aly SaaLedl Y] at] Jo 
(pls pate Wb - pelle oo lee Gath S [rev] OI poll 
Geol SS ee pens Jar ISN tases Pell OMS all Joe 25 GI ca 
+ gall law fe dL ce tN US sles sd JULI as Leal er ply ale oyby 
fe eall 96 Leng Cale mel JS lyay cages in Y ppl Sy «randy 
wth ye Ul coy eke ae Val gd Lie ae Lal be Kolb cal 
LB) Cah ye Ses haley | 

melo SAL. a de Jory jl Gale Gir pad ald we BS (1+) 
Lye dy Bale Leia ale abl Jao (KS verre lagoons Sil «sed 1 
fh) Jal oped 2 Hhe 9% gh cLitls lath ae ILI po 9X5 US 
Brae IS calls FoI Dy roe Lagaoee 5,L2YI aly ed caaaleny aL] 
Chualdl Joy gheLb yO Lad de gS aay spAi Ul, sued ole 
[tA]. Uelet Spy Ygley yoy ob 


10 


15 


20 


30 


190 Book Five, Chapter Nine 


Chapter [Nine] 


On the appropriate relation between 
definition and its parts 


(1) It is often the case that in definitions there are parts which are 
parts of the thing defined. When [however] we say, “Genus and differen- 
tia are not rendered subsistent in existence as parts of the species,” it is 
not as though we are saying, “The species does not have parts.” For the 
species may have parts. This is when it is one of the two kinds of things 
(namely, accidents and substances]: as to being accidents, [the parts] 
would consist of quantities; as to being substances, they would consist of 
composites. The outward state of affairs suggests that the parts of the 
definition are prior to the thing defined. But, in some instances, it so hap- 
pens that the opposite of this is the case. Thus, if we wish to define a 
segment of the circle, we define it in terms of the circle; and, if we wish 
to define the human finger, we define it in terms of the human; and, if 
we wish to define the acute angle, which is a part of the right angle, we 
define it in terms of the right angle. We do not ever define the right 
angle in terms of the acute, the circle in terms of its segment, or the 
human in terms of [the human] finger. We must know the reason for 
this. We thus say: 

(2) None of these are parts of the species with respect to its quiddity 
and form. Moreover, it is not a condition for the circle [to be a circle] 
that it should have a segment in actuality from which the form of the cir- 
cle is composed in the way that it is a condition for it to have a circum- 
ference. Nor is it a condition for the human inasmuch as he is human 
that he should in actuality have a finger, nor [yet] is it a condition for the 
right angle that there should be an acute angle that is part of it. For all 
these things are not parts for the thing by way of its quiddity, but by way 
of its matter and subject. It only happens that the right angle includes 
an acute angle and that the circle has a segment because of an affection 
undergone by their matter. This is [something] on which neither the per- 
fection of their matter through form nor the perfection of their form in 
itself depends. Know that the surface is [abstract] intellectual matter for 








PAVWOA)| Sa oll \a. 


[eet jail] 
J.2( 1) 


dibyoly abl duke 3 


I} yedy 2908 ebjerl a elped apd oo 9K LSA dy (1) 


a V al: Ls WOK caps Sep bye alesis Y ally wall ol s Ub 


Pu AN fae sol SS ltd, cell aS Spstlgh ehelp gl 
sll ae ead pally ISU pd ald lly LS gs aici 
gl boy! BLO SEG lh jam GIS SI Ge AT coy ye ps atl 
gly labore gly nl 05 jl basi Wily ca glall labore sflsl aaded aos 
LEWIN soc, RoldL tse ld jo ej ay daLLt aos gl bast 
J geb Ne Sila 58 goed. aE GLAM, [fae] a fll Vy slbt 
VALE peg Cal de y pel elel Ye et take gh (1) 

Wet WS islalliyye ys AIG Jail td Yo oS slaplal byt 
eld oKgl ~ hel om oe — GLAM byt ye Vy dae YOK Gl 
‘elon WP lee je role Shag S glastal but ye Vy «Jail 
O) ASD YEN] eye UB Ae a gey dale om ye Cale om ye 6 tl 
Bes NS pad Wall Gaye JUAN Sold 45.5% laplally cds Yo 
Bale Theat ely. Yaad 3 Bye SUS Yy Magyar ale JLT a 





Sed «Mpa . abr 


} 


\o 


10 


20 


30 


35 


19] Book Five, Chapter Nine 


the form of the circle by reason of which it undergoes division. If the per- 
fection of their’ matter were to depend on [such parts], then [the latter] 
would be among the necessary concomitants of which a thing is never 
devoid, not among the things that render [a thing] subsistent, as previ- 
ously explained. But [the things] with which we are concerned are not 
like this; rather, a thing may be devoid of them. 

(3) Also, in the case of the example of the finger, man, to be [defined 
as] “a rational animal,” does not require [the possession of] a finger. 
Rather, [the latter] is one of the parts belonging to his matter by which 
his material state is improved. Hence, whatever parts there are that are 
caused by matter, form not needing them, these are not at all parts of the 
definition. If, however, they are parts of matter but are not parts of matter 
absolutely, being only the parts of that [specific] matter for the purpose 
of that [specific] form, then they must be included in their definition of 
that form. That species would also be with matter in the way that the finger 
is not a part appropriately related to body absolutely, but to body which 
has become animal or human. Similarly, the acute angle and the segment 
fof the circle] are not parts of the surface absolutely, but of the surface 
that has become a right angle or a circle. For this reason, the form of these 
wholes is included in the definition of these parts. 

(4) From then on, these three examples differ. For the finger in the 
human is actually a part. If the human is defined or described inasmuch 
as he is a perfect human individual, the finger must be included in his 
description. [This is] because this would belong to him as an essential 
part in being an individual having perfect accidents. But it would not 
render the nature of its species subsistent since, [as] we have said 
repeatedly, that through which the individual is rendered subsistent and 
complete as an individual is other than that by which the nature of the 
species is rendered subsistent. This division, then, is among the group 
wherein the part is in actuality a part. These two other divisions [on the 
other hand] are not [such that] the part in either is in actuality a part. 

(5) [With] the circle, it seems as though, if divided in actuality into 
segments, the unity of its surfaces ceases to be and it ceases to be a circle. 
For the circumference would [no longer] be one line in actuality, but 
many—unless the divisions are [made] in the estimation and by suppo- 
sition, not in actuality and through segmentation. The same rule applies 


to the right angle. 








rledsl oy oly yA 


“pO Woke Sal ly aes ST By PLY) pis Amey Ball 5 pa Lae 
ope dy tet ll ae Solel yo Vie lpr etl an YS obyptl 
«Nps egtll glee alias 

We DSI BOLD clon pl ab Lal Al gem oem by (¥) 
Gf SELB -Aiabe Je Wp jurred all SN ebay Dee J egeel yl bt 
MV aL else ye ace iy pall aM gE aly Halll Cy go Ul eed 
jlld UD ehyrl 3 SG Ue yc Ulles tL elpel SS oly alll eel otal YS 
po al Spall aly 5, pall lt Ue pieg sheep dda lke) 
J tye she Gall peel Jp les pec) Lake Be ed ell Late sol 
INAS se gall chal Jy Willan cla Ie5o- uc delay sot! ISG . BLA} 
Lhe ode aye 3d OI she dyye S85 WS sls 

> BBS adh oye GLY bell ob AIAN a Sze SF (4) 
ail dor Sh ery Glell LO ahd satin y per] Shay ety gh 
Ys AEN LO Leds OK ol oo Uh bye lb pSV ane 3 ee 
Phare 9 adil a cay pty bol Ly EB 3] ary dell Lye GS 
Uy ceil ojo Yb eh NAL jo pal Lyd op dae a pytd L 
x Sadly leo Laged opt add gL oa bla 

Medan Gael cll, ad 3 Jad aud 5) sot OSS glatyy (0) 
OSS IV pall Lh atl bly at Lt SY 31 gla Yl les Slay 
Ast So LUIS daly Jal Y Syahy eagh Les 


\o 


10 


20 


30 


192 Book Five, Chapter Nine 


(6) The circle and right angle, moreover, differ in one thing—namely, 
that the segment of a circle can only be from an actual circle, whereas 
the acute angle does not have [as] its condition for existence that it 
should be part of another angle, nor that it is acute in relation to the 
obtuse or the right [angles]; but it is in itself acute by reason of placing 
one of the two adjacent sides by the other. But [with respect to the acute 
angle]? from the perspective that that position [has], inasmuch as it is 
position, a relation comes to be therein?—[this] because inclination and 
proximity between lines, or distance between them, are among the things 
to which some [kind of] relation attaches—it came to be that the expla- 
nation* of the acute angle is connected with relation. If, because of its 
difficulty, [the explanation] does not indicate this relation in actuality, it 
indicates it in potentiality [as regards]° bringing in a relation in actuality. 

(7) Moreover, since the plane angle comes to be only through the 
erection of one line on another, the inclination that comes into being is 
an inclination away from a certain equilibrium and a certain direction. 
[This is] because, if we take the proximity of one of the two lines from 
the other absolutely and its inclination to it absolutely, without making 
specific the inclination away from it, then there would be only an absolute 
inclination existing for the acute, the right, and the obtuse angles. For 
the lines of [all three] also have inclination one toward the other. Thus, 
if you consider the connection of two lines perpendicularly, you will find 
the obtuse angle having an inclination of one of its two lines to the other. 
But this inclination is an absolute one decreed by the parting of the two 
sides of every angle. It is, hence, necessary that the inclination is defined 
by something. Since this thing must be a linear distance, it is impossible 
to imagine lines from which [the lines of an obtuse angle] incline other 
than the line connected perpendicularly with the other line and the line 
that makes an obtuse angle, that makes a right angle, or that makes an 
acute angle. As for the line that is not in contact with this line, nothing is 
defined by it, and the consideration of the inclination from the line that 
is straight [in the] absolute [sense] would, in this domain, be incorrect: 
otherwise, the obtuse and the right [anglés] would also be acute. 

(8) The case is similar when considering the inclination away from 
the line enacting the obtuse angle. [ This is] because the inclination away 
from obtuseness may [still] conserve obtuseness, since one obtuse angle 
can be smaller than another. The rule governing this acute angle is also 


: 
i 
| 





elecdl Sa oll NAY 


iflo ye MSS Va pl des gl yay + 5 gle Asta, splat (1) 
So Gly stl aly 5m GS Gl age Fleer ped olbly « Jal 
pak sol aay oe Hale Ged Dep la, deal J LDL 
BY BLY] 3 ay poy tim y adsl ul gli y YS FM oe 
ee Ue RLol ay GE LE Ug, Ld 2a gl jam ptm beady Oly Jl 
Jo ob Ysa Ja BLEYI che le dav gly ABLEYL doled glu shes gl 
Jel tL Jlsol pay le 

[OS] bee le Lt old jo Sud Lar Ai OU! (Vy) 
solo Gel J YL dye yey LICE [Y00] Ge fe pe dace gill LL! 
Je W Kgl case MM yesh yb ye Ulan afake Lastly Ulan SH sy lal 
ON aed Je ed Lal Ybybee yb Ao yacally Alay sola Wd roy lee 
2 Jos Meiy doje eng LN le gas Jbl oye! 13] OLE . aw 
Sond dash Sat cll ana las be ye ll io $s ps 
1a Kol Ge etl ls QF Uy eg ge lagaone J ie gS glday po 
MEAN te Jacl LbNY] tas pe Jog bas ass gh Se [ela] « Las 
Mash) nds Gill gl AG aagly Jae, gill gl Aerie Aagly Jae cgilly «tI Lb 
Ot Jo SEE gy ety sue VA LS oy Lach tt Ld) Ub wis 
isle Lal Aslily 2 lb Vy OUI eB rove yb Liles tt Lab 

SB CAEM Ge LU GY cde yell Jolt LIN 55 LU Lol WIS (A) 
Ol ean tL So IS tern yp rel dade WS 5] ech ein 





er clo cole aly | of 58 ' 


\o 


a 


10 


20 


30 


193 Book Five, Chapter Nine 


similar, even though the acute angle cannot be defined in terms of an 
acute angle, [since then] there would be the defining of an unknown 
by an unknown. It thus necessarily remains for it to be defined by the 
right angle whose right angularity is not preserved after the inclination 
[of one of the perpendicular lines} away from it. It is as though one says; 
The acute angle is the one resulting from two lines where one stands 
over the other and inclines more than the line of a right angle (if it were 
set up so as to be smaller than the right angle)—if it were to be [at all]. 
We do not mean by [the acute angle] that it exists in act measured by a 
right angle greater than it—for then the definition would be false—bu: 
by a right angle with [the previous] description.® The right angle with 
this description—inasmuch as in potency it is that which actually exists 
in potency—is a right angle in potency. For potency, inasmuch as it is, 
is the potency of an existence in act. Potency sometimes also exists in 
potency, this being the potency which is remote from act but which 
becomes in act a proximate potency. For the proximate potency for the 
formation of the human exists potentially in nourishment. Then, if [the 
nourishment becomes] sperm, this proximate potency exists in act. It is 
only that its action [while it is still a proximate potency] does not exist. 

(9) Thus, the acute angle is defined by the right angle not absolutely 
in act, but in potency. It is not defined by that which is similar to it, nor in 
terms of that which is never realized. For that through which it is defined 
subsists in potency, this being inasmuch as it is, as such, a realization in act. 
It is proper, then, to define the acute angle and the obtuse angle in terms 
of the right angle. For the right angle is ascertained through equality, 
similarity, and sameness, whereas the other two are ascertained in terms 
of deviation from equality. As for the right angle, it is realized in itself. 

(10) It could have been said that the acute angle is the smaller of two 
differing angles resulting from the erection of one line over another, the 
obtuse being the greater of the two. But, then, when this is ascertained, it 
[shows] that one would have pointed to the right angle. For the larger is 
that which is similar and in excess, while the smaller is that which is less 
than the similar. Hence, it is through similarity that the knowledge of 
smallness and largeness is realized and through the one similar [thing] 
that [knowledge] of the multiple that is dissimilar and varied is realized. 

(11) It is thus that one must conceive the state of affairs with respect 
to the parts of things defined. Moreover, one must remember what we 
have also previously said about the state of affairs of the parts of matter 
and the things that adhere to it. 





eletll ye Og vay 


5S ol bape A dest Jee Gas gS lll, 56 gl SG Vaal 
PIU ih Sgt, Dayenn (ge Jl ae Wel Bd el GU ASDL ay 
PP ob JAS Lt ye Ol ly SN lo Lael 6b hs jo 
ple ou daily Aunts Bagge fall yl le et yedy I SII jy sel 
op Weal og, LSlilly Ral ody [YOY] ASL My LSS WL 9K teed 


or 


298d Pm oy bei Ob ddl ASB 258 Jl doe Mad ote 
Jad pret « faall ys Brpall Bgal Ly Bg do ym ys Lally, - del 
phe lah ciple GSS Hlaall 8 GLY OSG le Lalla I ob aga 
1 ery ob ded OK Uy all doy Ayal Syl US Gale [Ue] 

Uc Lal Uy Wp plas 221 ag « Lier Jil Vast ad said 3b (4) 
cal, Sem MIS ye Dom yd allby Bgl iba opa8l gb Spar al ja 
ATLL BlyLall po Geet ASU! 5d SASL de paelly BLL Se gl gdh, 
Milby Geb ASU LL, algLidl Ge cy bl yp gliiect Ub, Skog 

1B je GUIe gine oagly aro soll gf Sle gl Ke gh aay (1+) 
GM cdatlal J) ath sis gam 13] Sham GW Cagdael ae yelly cao cle dos 
GIS JUL Me pal tl ya peel calay Ee SS ill 4» SM 
HSL Lech pall SCH gees WUE nelly «SH, rail dae 

Sieh rom od Solagatl ebyel 3 JUL peta gl ow UKE (19) 
Agidhey salll eljol Je Uo Lad J oll 





sl le Le! 


\o 


10 


15 


20 





BOOK SIX 
Consisting of five chapters 





Chapter [One] 


On the division of causes and their states 


(1) We have discoursed on the matter of substances and accidents, 
on considering the priority and posteriority pertaining to them, and on 
knowing the correspondence between definitions and the universal and 
particular things defined. It behooves us now to discuss cause and effect, 
because these two are also among the things that attach to the existent 
inasmuch as it is an existent. 

(2) Causes, as you have heard, consist of form, element, agent, and 
purpose. We say: By the formal cause, we mean the cause which is part 
of the subsistence of the thing and in terms of which the thing is what it 
is in actuality. By the elemental [cause, we mean] the cause that is part 
of the subsistence of the thing, through which the thing is what it is in 
potency and in which the potentiality of its existence resides. By agent 
[we mean] the cause which bestows an existence that is other than itself. 
In other words, it would not in itself, by a primary intention, be a recep- 
tacle of that which acquires from it the existence of something that is 
informed by it—whereby it would possess in itself the existence [of the 
former]—except accidentally. Notwithstanding this, it is necessary that 
that existence should not be for the sake [of the agent] by way of its being 


— 194- 








Awd Lea) A Lal 


Jorvad dines \ydg 


[Osi Jail] 
}43(\) 


\lyaly Jlal Lush 


Py pall Lol oy cae, ald pl 9 LSS 8 [YOV] (1) 
FM SS Gi GAL Ahly AI Slayrrall yb Mallen Byer By YS 
Layers ee ape all ees SN Ge Ll ye Lal Lg cS shally ala 
Aah gai UL Syed Rey Jobey party dpe ccna LS belly (1) 
CJD 8 Le ge Mg ech SG Hel old ge pe Ct I All Ay pl 
CBs ee 98 2 Ne SG HN LS oe he A dl pail 
OSS Y gh AID Lobe Lagery oa ALI! cJoltly Sooyny id ke 25, 
Bd PG Se cle amen od oy lee aedlew Uke UNI alll, WIS 
peg op dled je oe Sl lb GS VI Coed ald aay ce pel Vcogery 88 


~\AC- 


10 


15 


20 


30 


195 Book Six, Chapter One 


an agent, but, ifinevitably so, then through some other consideration. This 
is because the metaphysical philosophers do not mean by “agent” only the 
principle of motion, as the naturalists mean, but the principle and giver 
of existence, as in the case of God with respect to the world.' As for the 
natural efficient cause, it does not bestow any existence other than motion 
in one of the forms of motion. Thus, in the natural sciences, that which 
bestows existence is a principle of motion.” By “purpose,” we mean the 
cause for whose sake the existence of something different from it is realized. 

(3) It may appear, then, that there is no other cause beyond these. 
We say: The cause of something is either included in its subsistence and 
is part of its existence or not. If it is included in its subsistence and is 
part of its existence, then either it must be the part where, in terms of 
its existence and definition, it is not necessary for it to be actual, but only 
to be in potency, and is termed “hyle”; or [it must be] the part whose 
existence is its being? in actuality—namely, form. But, if it [the cause] is 
not part of its existence, then cither it is that for whose sake it is, or not. 
If it is that for whose sake it is, then it is the purpose. If it is not that for 
whose sake it is, then it is either the case that [the effect’s] existence derives 
from it in that it does not exist in [the cause] except accidentally—and 
this would be its agent—or else [the effect’s] existence derives from it in 
that it is in it, [in which case] it would also be its element or its subject. 

(4) Thus, all the principles would be five from one point of view, four 
from another. This is because if you take the element which is receptive 
but which is not part of the thing as other than the element which is a 
part, then there would be five. And, if you take both [as] one thing because 
of their participating in the meaning of potentiality and disposition, then 
they would be four. You must not take the element as a [causal] principle 
of the form in the sense of the recipient which [constitutes] a part of [the 
composite] as a [caused] principle of the form, but [you must take] the 
[entire] composite. The recipient is a principle only accidentally, because 
it is first rendered subsistent in act through form, while its essence, con- 
sidered only in itself, is in potency; the thing which is in potency with 
respect to its being in potency is never at all a principle but would be a 
principle only accidentally. For the accident requires that that subject for 
it should have been [first] realized in actuality, becoming thereafter a 





JPR sim (yee og Reo BY ly FT el a Yy oO ol he Jeb 
ell SU for caactey aserl Lae Jp cpacdal Ae, LS Oh eal 
LOK piI eledl eb kpc pF lagey ag Wb adel lela asl Lily 
rare YoY Saal lil (gy She Lye oladal 3 og nee GS 
[YON]. gle +b ayers 

Soe etl ll) std ods ge le de Val yl 5 (1) 
DIED STOR SY gl coapey yp ley OLS Ld Eb OK gl LI 
SA ares oO sry ye Come cued Gill FEI SG GT LB ao grey oe leary eal 
pages SIRI GS sl ae ey bb adh oS ol Gul aK 
PUK! UB ages y le Kal Lily a yyall gay «adh yyy 
Me ale ye Lb Se ols Call ob ale ge b GS GB OKY gl cle 
1099 9K gl Ale W gay Vp Wad GK Vo ae aoyey GSO! Ll hy 
AS y2y 3) D emeal Lal say 48 3K Sh au 

BEN SLAY tal age joy head tye ye WO YS] gold! 9S (€) 
SE yee gt Sa pacall nb Ce el ye Ie ay hb ot Gl peel 
SIE ahacanly bydl gee 2 LST LAY cols Cb Ly Sods oly aust 
SM fy By prall Lae coger ga il idl pat pall aot Vi Cony de 
LB Gls joe aly Jeb dalle Vy pg WAY c eyil Le gS plat Ul 
WS Ne GLY cag yo Lge Gy Bab ge alll + tly <a GS 
peed eyo gll fam 3 GS GI Yictoe epll gb ayh be GK Ut 


X- 


& 


10 


20 


30 


196 Book Six, Chapter One 


cause for its subsistence, regardless of whether the accident is a necessary 
concomitant, in which case the [subject’s] precedence would be essential] 
or perishing, in which case the precedence would be both essential and 
temporal. These, then, are the kinds of causes. And, if the subject is a 
cause of an accident which it renders subsisting [therein], this would not 
be of the kind in which the subject is a cause for the composite, but is a 
different kind. 

(5) If the form is a cause for matter which it renders subsistent, [this] 
is not in the manner in which form is a cause for the composite, even if 
both agree from the perspective that each is a cause of something whosr 
essence does not separate from [such a cause].* For, even if both agree i: 
this, in the case of one of the two perspectives the cause of the other does 
not bestow on it its existence;® rather, something else bestows existence, 
but in it.® [In the case of] the second, the cause would be the proximate 
principle for bestowing on the effect its existence in act—not alone, how- 
ever, but with a partner and a cause that brings into existence the cause 
(I mean the form). It would then render the other [that is, matter] sub- 
sistent through it. Thus, it would be an intermediary with a partner in 
bestowing on that [matter] its existence in actuality. Form would be as 
though [it were] an efficient principle for matter, if the existence [of 
matter] in act comes about through the [form] alone. It seems that form 
would be a part of the efficient cause, as in the case of one of the two 
movers of a ship, as will become clarified later on. Form [however] is only 
a formal cause for the thing composed of it and matter. Form, hence, is 
only a form for matter, not a formal cause of matter. 

(6) The agent bestows from itself an existence upon another thing, 
which this latter did not possess. The proceeding of, that existence from 
this [thing] that is the agent is such that the essence of that agent is 
neither receptive of the form of this existence nor internally connected 
with it. Rather, each of the two essences would remain external to the 
other, neither having the potentiality to receive the other. It is not 
unlikely for the agent to bring about the existence of the effect where [the 
agent] is, where it would meet [the agent’s] essence. For the nature which 
is in the wood is an efficient principle of motion. Motion, however, takes 
place only in the matter in which the nature exists and where [the prin- 
ciple of motion] itself is. But the connection of the two is not by way of 








ett oy» ole yan 


ASM gS gh ctl AIM 3 So LY Gayl GO eg cael Lew yee 
MS pacld caacks Ue tle Ppa glh oT Lily «all pigl a op .glafly wall 
[YON] Alps 92 Sil tle prying a 9K illest le 

irl OSS Mid fe Cob ed toll dle sy pal IBY (0) 
ASTD Als Yet le Lage ely Wl dye Ge glide US Gly «_Sall the 
doit el Jp codsery S51 Ml 2 al yer gl vel 5B cel 3 Weal gly Lyle 
Jal BBY at Lad gab abl 9S Bt 143 Sy pele ot ope gl 
«Ball 98 ee 92 many Dla a SS ly corey gad Sy Jal oo peng 
Sri oo gery U3 F518] Bk ae Masly Sg STN ED iy pall gol 
day omy AF OS Jal Leoyey GY lek lee oll sy yall 3K, 
von Ce eo dtl Sipe sol Sho etl dla lee 5 pall G5 gl 
Sy ol bye oe Libby pad SOU ey yer Spall geo the iy gall Ul, 
BUN A po We Cu) 

ld yyne SKy AIS Ge FTW pod lagey TLS oe Jolily (1) 
23 5 yal ALG Jol a ols GSS VY Lem 5 cob ye cll Lhe Ge age gl 
F ye GS py el, BOK p add DW ATL Y, cope gl 
Y=» Jelal sKo) Da ped y ig) 353 lel gS aul 
Bool Joie Ado Aida ob SI) Linley ga tae Jal 
Bo lagi rlie judd Sy alld tomy Yd dada si aalll b SLI sud La, 


\o 








10 


20 


25 


30 


3S 


197 Book Six, Chapter One 


one of the two being either part of the existence of the other or matter 
for it. Rather, the two essences differ in their real natures but have a place 
shared by both. 

(7) Among [agents], it would so happen that an agent at a certain 
time would not be enacting, and what is enacted by it is not enacted. 
Rather, what is enacted by it would be nonexistent. Thereafter, there 
would occur to the agent the causes by which it becomes an agent in 
actuality—we have previously spoken about this—and it is then that it 
becomes an agent so that, from it, the existence of a thing comes abou: 
after not existing. To this [latter] thing there would [occur] existence, an.i 
to that [same] thing [also] belongs [the fact] that it did not exist. It doe; 
not derive from the agent [the fact that] it did not exist, nor that it came 
to be after nonexistence,’ but from the agent it derives only its existence. 
Therefore, if nonexistence belonged to it from itself, it then follows nec- 
essarily that its existence came to be after nonbeing. It thus became a 
being after not being. 

(8) Thus, what it has essentially from the agent is existence; [also,] 
the existence it [now] possesses is due only to [the fact] that the other 
thing [that causes it] is of a sort from which there must ensue an exis- 
tence for another, derived from its [own] existence, which belongs to it 
essentially. As for its having been nonexistent, [this] is not due to a cause 
that enacted it. Its being nonexistent may be attributed to some cause — 
namely, the absence of a cause. As for its existence being after non- 
existence, [this] is not a matter that came to be through a cause. For it 
is utterly impossible for its existence to be except after nonexistence.* 
That which is impossible has no cause. Yes, its existence is possible to be or 
not to be. Its existence, hence, has a cause. [Similarly,] its nonexistence 
may be or not be. It is possible, hence, for its nonexistence to have a cause.? 
But its existence, being [an existence] after nonexistence, has no cause. 

(9) If someone says, “The case is the same with its existence after its 
nonexistence; it is possible for it to be and possible for it not to be,” we say: 

(10) If you meant its existence inasmuch as [this] is its existence, 
then nonexistence has no entry to it. For its very existence would not be 
necessary—that is, [it would be only] possible. [Now,] it is not the case that 
it is not necessary inasmuch as it is [something that has come to existence] 








olatsl » Oley \Av 


GAN Co gta gblall fp cal dole NM oy yp oe bel gl 
Ape Joe 

3h ae dpe Vy HEB OSY yl Uy ges Le fell yd (Vv) 
aby [VV8] Jed NEW bp pres St LAN Jolill soya abc Legs Alpe 
ph be one Ssill ageey Ae QS MED ey Mod the Lad Lhe Cd LS 
Sal Jew ye a aly Spd al AN allay cogery «tlh al 9K 
WI A ISEB Oily orgy JEW yd LL SEL om GAY, KG 
Sigh b oe WE slab Koad b ae oagey she Gigi) «opespil 

rgtll GY go Ud cal all agell gly cogegl fell ye lalla gis (A) 
Ul, clash a gall argey je a2er9 ai) GK SI lee Com tla eS 
Lie Mm opr ye POS Gb Cbdile Go ab bye ye Kl al 
GS SITS SE VAI cabal pag pal dn 0099 SUID he pas gay 
SIV Sly gig! Kero sey et wile 1 Ke bey pas ae Verges 
OS Lily te dead 3S SI jeed GK Y oy GK B drey cle voy 
AAS I Kal be aw orgy 

Sl ixemay Ki ol apees ene de oo peng AUIS: JG JL Gd (4) 
: Jed GRY 

uni SB Sab peal Joe IS caagery gh Lam Gp aa gey Cue Gl (V+) 


"POE De PL ye Soy e p& gh pel ‘Ko Baap? yh Sergey 


\o 





10 


20 


30 


40 


198 Book Six, Chapter One 


after nonexistence. But that which is not necessary is this existence 
belonging to it which happens to be now and which had been nonexistent, 
However, inasmuch as its existence is taken as existence after nonexis- 
tence, let its existence after nonexistence be noted, not just its being an 
existent—[namely,] the [one] that came after nonexistence and happens 
to be after nonexistence. That [former] has no cause. Hence, there is no 
cause for its existence being after nonexistence, even though there is 
a cause for its existence which came to be after nonexistence, [considered] 
inasmuch as it is its existence. It 1s, hence, true that its existence has the 
possibility of coming to be or of not coming to be after the nonexistencx 
that obtained; but it is not true that its existence after nonexistence inas. 
much as it is an existence after nonexistence has the possibility to be an 
existence after nonexistence or not to be after nonexistence, unless to 
begin with there is no existence, in which case the consideration would be 
about existence [alone].!° 

(11) Someone may think that the agent and the cause are needed 
only for a thing to have existence after nonexistence and that, once a 
thing is brought into existence, the thing would [continue to] exist as 
sufficient unto itself [even] if the cause is no longer present. Thus, some- 
one has thought that a thing is in need of the cause only for its origination, 
but that, once it is originated and comes to exist, it no longer needs the 
cause. For such a person, the causes are thus only the causes of origina- 
tion, being [temporally] prior [to their effects], not simultaneous with 
them, This is a false belief because: 

(12) Existence after [a thing’s] origination must either be necessary 
existence or not necessary existence. If its existence is necessary, then 
its being necessary through that quiddity is either due to that quiddity 
itself{—so that that quiddity requires the necessity of existence, in which 
case it would be impossible for [the thing] to be originated—or else it is 
rendered necessary by [the quiddity] through a condition. The condition is 
either origination, [or] one of the attributes of that quiddity, or something 
different. The necessity of its existence cannot be through origination, 
for origination itself is not [something whose] existence is necessary in 
itself. How, then, can the existence of another be necessary through it? 
{Moreover,] origination has ceased. How can it, now that it has ceased to 
exist, be the cause of the necessary [existence] of something else? The 
alternative is to say!! that the cause is not origination [itself], but a 
thing’s having undergone origination, in which case this would be one of 
the attributes of the originated thing and thus included in the second 
of the [first two of the three] divisions.” 








ae op ely. Legane G5 aby «SMI gil gill Ihe oagey cgagpall pl Sy 
Bi Laid Lager SY cpr a SS Lead pas oe lagery oagery De 
cpdall oa ods OS a dad el ld, pot dw Htily pas aa 3 
aagery Gl Ged od gery Lam oy pat en GT gall agg Lew SO Sly [TV] 
pol ae 22929 OST Gow ely « pelbl pall ans GSE Y Sly OKI gle 
paul 2 bY ly eral rw loge Kgl fle pal da, Sym y Poem 
129 LE 9 SO el layny OK GY a 
Lea 25g ell gS all cline Ld dally Jolal gl gb Gb ley (9) 
Cf a cheney Lptlene tll goed Abell ad lb ce tll ay UB, (Ke 
All op gal AB songy bar 15 cigar dildl ites Lil e ptll gl gb 
Jeb Gb gt cle Vande ay Lid Syadl le fal are 9 3 
ab lager 9) Lorly logery SKS! Ul doe Veg an ages (00) 
Fe Ral lb SAW A ages GG! LB Lely lagey gH OB Lely 
Wacom gl bly cae GS gh dam fod opel ges alll Us aks 
«he 65 Lely Aa IE cleo ye dane aly cyodl ble til alldy ety 
CASldy Loy 00 ery ud Aunt Dgadl BL Sybh oreryoyrs Kid! ioe Vy 
ard dle are 25 5S GS fle Bohl Soe oy 4 or AH 
CSgadl ad jar 2 6 ptt OS fe cdyadl pe cand Abel gf Sle gl YL Soe 
“peed jo ASW ALL Load Goll tb) J oliall ye he oS 


\o 








ws 


10 


20 


30 


199 Book Six, Chapter One 


(13) [‘Turning, then, to the second division,] we say: These attributes 
must either belong to the quiddity inasmuch as it is a quiddity, not inas- 
much as it is something that has been brought about into existence (in 
which case what is a necessary concomitant for them must be a necessary 
concomitant of the quiddity and, hence, necessary existence becomes a 
necessary concomitant of the quiddity), or else these attributes came 
into being with existence and thus what is said about the necessity of its 
existence is identical with what has been said about the first [alternative, 
that of origination]. Thus, either there would be infinite attributes, all of 
which are of this character, so that all would be possible of existence, 
[and] not necessary in themselves, or else they would terminate with an 
attribute that is necessitated by an external thing. The first alternative 
renders all the attributes in themselves [only] possible in [their] existence. 
But it has become clear that that whose existence is possible in itself exists 
through another, so that all the attributes become necessary through 
another that is external to them. The second alternative necessitates that 
the originated existence remain an existence only through an external 
reason—namely, the cause. 

(14) However, you have known that origination means nothing other 
than existence after not having been. Thus, [on the one hand] there is 
existence, and [on the other] there is being after not having been. To the 
originating cause, there is neither efficacy nor indispensability in [the 
thing’s] not having been, but its effectiveness and indispensability consist 
in that existence comes about from it. It then so happened that that 
[thing] at that time came to be after not having been. But that which 
happened to have occurred coincidentally plays no part in [what] renders 
a thing subsistent. Hence, the prior nonexistence plays no part in the 
existence of the originated thing’s having a cause. Rather, that species of 
existence inasmuch as it belongs to that species of quiddities deserves to 
have a cause, even if it continues [to exist] and endures. For this reason 
you cannot say, “One thing has rendered the existence of [another] thing 
such that it comes to be after not having been.” For this is not within the 
power of [being enacted]. Rather, some of what exists must necessarily 
not be after privation and some must necessarily be after privation. 

(15) As for existence, inasmuch as it is the existence of this quiddity, 
it is possible for it to be by a cause. But, as for the description of this exis- 
tence—namely, that it is after not having been—it cannot be by a cause. 
Hence, a thing inasmuch as its existence is originated—that is, inasmuch 
as the existence belonging to it is described as being after privation—in 








lath» old! \A4 


LY dale a Rall gS GIL 6s Vole de gl dyed (17) 
oars Weg tall 9 SCo aU ope ljh 8 LK gl od coaeey 2B 
Laagery ary 2 I OS 29mg ae Male Sleall os BK sl foes) 
BS Aad oy WR W olee dhe 5 Kgl Lb SV 3g PIETY 
IE te SF Hie MGS Gl Lely Agha Holy pb coger gll AE YS 
aed) Kall gl gb By «peal Boge gl AK Woeotin Jen dal emily 
Jt pep Nps GIL se FS pee GS coh ayer cel 9 
Ha gay Ee Gee bogey Ge LiL Sal oe Jl glee 
Meg Sigh Lae lagery Volos pued Syabl gl cade wd ctl le (14) 
Ie Sepbal J elby SORA aly Ki Lae GS lary oye 
ph oe BSS cells GG) eye doe sl an GiB lagkey byt 
pel poll Sa bce cell esti al Upto VOY 26 colll ay baly 
Lally pall OU yo Le oye sl pe pyle cde Gob oe WK al G 
Sy der Ct LS IAS Ny ay al gly tle WK ge 
Sorly aye ys gh le am Jp Ae pyar nb ING. Kiel gh eG tone & gt 
pie oe OK Slingo Cel, Any Cent dns BY gliy ye 
{Ae 56 Kgl jyed Kalbele ogey ete cope Lib (V2) 
OF ANB Sle 55 SG ol ben db Kid Lae dl ay cage ade Ui, 


aie oa cpadall dar ih 9 go ge al gal sgergl ghtem yp ol (Sra\> 03 gy Sam 


\o 


Qn 


10 


20 


30 


35 


200 Book Six, Chapter One 


reality has no cause. Rather, the cause belongs to it inasmuch as the 
quiddity has existence. Thus, the state of affairs is the opposite of what 
they think. Indeed, the cause is only for existence. If it so happens that 
nonexistence precedes it, then it is originated and, if it did not so happen, 
it would be not originated. 

(16) The agent which the common people call “agent” is not in real- 
ity a cause with respect to the way they render it an agent. For they make it 
an agent when one ought to consider it to be inactive, so that it is not an 
agent inasmuch as it is a cause but inasmuch as it is a cause with some- 
thing that is a necessary concomitant of it. For it becomes an agent inas- 
much as it is considered in terms of that in which it has an effect conjoined 
with that in which it has no effect. It is as though, when the cause is con- 
sidered with respect to what is acquired from it conjoined with that from 
which something is not acquired, it is called an agent. For this reason, 
everything they call “agent” has as its condition that it should necessarily 
not have been an agent at one time, after which cither it exercised will, 
was compelled, or some other state of affairs that had not existed occurred 
[to it], so that when such a conjunct attached to it, then its essence 
together with that conjunct became the cause in act, when it had previ- 
ously been devoid of it. It thus became for them a cause in actuality after 
being a cause in potency, not inasmuch as it is only a cause in actuality. 
Thus, everything that they call “agent” must necessarily be that which 
they call the recipient of action. For they do not release it from the con- 
junction of that originated state that conjoins it [and] by reason of which 
existence proceeds from it after nonexistence. 

(17) Hence, if it is clear that the existence of the quiddity is con- 
nected with what is other inasmuch as it is an existence for that quid- 
dity, not inasmuch as it is [something that comes to be] after not having 
been, then that existence in this respect is caused—so long as it exists. 
Likewise, it is an effect connected with what is other. Thus, it becomes evi- 
dent that the effect needs that which bestows existence on it by essence— 
(conferring only] existence itself!*—but [it becomes evident also] that 
origination and other things are matters that occur to it accidentally and 
that the effect needs that which bestows existence on it always, perma- 


nently, as long as [the effect] exists. 





PAY BAA Sa ole Yes 


Abad p< agin be Key AV c oyery alll tum Goad dlall p cal dle Y 
Sale 5 IS Glad oly tole gh pre aie gl Gel gb Lb sya 

Se ye Ue Midh ye A be EW ud GNI folilly (99) 
BED Se ah ad po hom tee Gp NED A em afd NEL Hany 
NEB SAB sae oY ply the pr tem jo fp cdle otin ye eb oS 
ihe oy 261 I] Ae haba pad LU byte fla dl Uel te ye 
Ai gael SDI ED goer lg shiny Y UU yles po obcng be tem Gy 
eps uid (Job pb bye OF Big pall OK Slabs y GK eb 
the Lidl NS a ald gS yj Lill ells 4,8 We Kal JLo y Se oye 
BS ae Jae ga Lm je pre Web SS Ul jo ME GOB, « alll 
SK ol jh WED Agee be GK Li ail de pen ye Y cag tle 
L YoY ale Je yp ails L Byles oe wise Vag  dhekee Aga Lal 
Sig be ww ore as a0 

VRAD oye y pe cim oy pill GLAU ogey gl gb BB (1V) 
SE AIT. ta ergo la Le Iles Reh cdte oy 29mg odd « Sl Le ney gh tam 
CONG apg pd opel ends ites Jabal gl gh oB cal We Yala 
WSlo oye odcke zie Jalall Shy 8 ep yy] lB sy by Syd SI 


[X14]. l>ge-5 el \. Va yaa 


\o 














QQ 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


201 Book Six, Chapter Tivo 


Chapter [Two] 


On resolving doubts directed against what the 
adherents of true doctrine hold, to the effect that 
every cause coexists with its effect; and on ascertaining 
the true statements about the efficient cause 


(1) The cause of [the error] of the one who thinks that the son [as 
the effect] continues to exist [independently of a cause] after the father 
[as the cause], that the building continues to exist after the builder [has 
built it], and that the warmth continues to exist after the fire {is removed] 
is a confusion resulting from the ignorance of the true nature of the 
cause.! For the builder, the father, and the fire are not, in reality, causes 
for the subsistence of these effects. For the builder, the one mentioned 
as the maker [of the building], is neither the cause for the subsistence of 
the mentioned building nor, moreover, of its existence. 

(2) As for the builder, his movement is the cause of a certain motion. 
Thereafter, his immobility and refraining from motion, or his ceasing to 
move and affect transportation after having transported, constitute a cause 
for the termination of that motion. [Now,] that very act of transporting 
and the termination of this motion are a cause of a certain combination, and 
that combination is a cause for a certain shape taking place; and each of 
[the things] that constitutes a cause coexists with its effect. 

(3) As for the father, he is the cause for the movement of the sperm. 
The motion of the sperm, if it ends in the above mentioned way, is a cause 
of the occurrence of the sperm in the womb. Its ogcurrence in the womb 
is then a cause for something. As for its becoming formed as an animal 
and its continuity as animal, [this] has another cause. If this, then, is the 
case, then every cause coexists with its effect. 

(4) Likewise, fire is the cause of heating the element of water. Heat- 
ing is a cause for annulling in actuality the water’s disposition to receive 
or sustain the watery form. This is because some other thing is a cause for 
bringing about the complete preparation in such a circumstance for the 
reception of its opposite—namely, the fiery form. The cause of the fiery 
form consists of the causes that clothe the elements with their forms, 


[these causes] being separable. 








FAV BAA Sa oly Ys\ 


[Ul pest] 
j23(w) 
ile Bg) 5 GH lalla be leg UE Le 
‘helt al 3 DAS jas Wslen ae Ue 


Hi goal «AUD oe gis ehlly NI om ae GM ol gla, willy (9) 
My ESI GB ALLY lh po yee ly Lads A lB GIST a 
Ale gad SOUS Joba GUI gb AL ode ld ALY We Gd lly 
saogerg Lal Vy «SOU Ll ld 

Alig Soo pre | SAIS 5, KK Ube Sod Lh ul (") 
plcey dle SLi efsly ay Jes lldy SLI all AY ale Lest alls ow 
Lee Aang silo s2 UF vol Se Kedale plea ald, cL 

SM aL le GI BL MI Spay hi Shale Wu, (4) 
tiling Ulm op mai ly SV ale LAI Sapam ed hl Ball Jpad tle 
Wfglee ae tle SF gS US yO ab fg sl dle ab Um 

FUN slant Slay abe spotty eI pare poen’d dle lI Sy (¢) 
OH alc a olaay ale ST Lt gl allay {yleim glassy ye Jpd ball 
FN al 2 AW 5 pall they ALN 5, yall ay lowe Spi Jbl ode fo 
[V0] bjt oy Leypo polal 5 


\o 


wa 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


202 Book Six, Chapter Tivo 


(5) Thus, the true causes coexist with the effect. As for those that are 
[temporally] prior, these are causes, either accidentally or as helpers. For 
this reason, it must be believed that the cause of the building’s shape is 
combination, the cause of [the latter] being the natures of the things 
being combined and their remaining in the way they are composed, the 
cause of [these natures] being the separable cause that enacts the natures. 
The cause of the son is the combination of his form with matter through 
the cause that endows forms. The cause of the fire is the cause that 
bestows forms and the total ceasing of the complete disposition opposed 
to those forms, both together. We thus find that the causes coexist with 
[their] effects. 

(6) If we judge—in connection with our discussion—the causes to be 
finite, we refer only to these [above mentioned] causes. We do not dis- 
allow that there are assisting and preparatory causes that are infinite, one 
[temporally] preceding the other. Indeed, this must necessarily be the 
case, because every originated thing becomes necessary after not having 
been necessary by reason of its cause becoming necessary at that moment, 
as we have shown, its cause being that which had also been necessary. It 
follows necessarily in particular matters that the antecedent things— 
through which [the particulars] are rendered necessary in [terms] of 
causes that actually exist [so that these antecedent things] become, for 
[the particulars], causes in actuality—are infinite things. Because of this, 
the question “Why?” does not pertain to [these things] at all. 

(7) The difficulty here lies in one thing: namely, that those [things] 
that are infinite are such that each of them must exist either for a “now,” 
so that there would be a succession of “nows” duplicating one another, 
between which there is no time—which is impossible—or each [must] 
endure for a time, in which case it would follow that their necessitation 
would take place in all that time, not at [one] extreme of it. The idea 
necessitating their necessitation would also, then, coexist with them in 
that time, where the discussion of the necessity of their necessitation 
would be as it applies to [this idea]. An infinity of coexisting causes would 
then ensue. And this is the thing which we are disallowing. We say: 

(8) If it were not for motion, this difficulty would necessarily follow. 
Motion, however, does not maintain the one thing in one state. Thus, 
what occurs anew in one state after another state, in one “now” after 
another “now,” neither duplicates it nor touches it. Rather, this [change] 
is continuous. Thus, the essence of the cause does not necessitate the 
existence of the effect but [necessitates] it by being in a certain relation. 





leds oy» Oley vey 


LL fhe ge obadll Lily Spall aioe ye MEAL! Lal 9 (0) 
lS hey cpLORNI ya ell SCs de gl ade gl oe yb oles bly Bll 
Ge Je ll oA ey “fel Ue lly olacenl lb 
dill endl Ul bey «pall sll dl isl ae dipper plod alg dle, 
Mall ar Jhal gl g3] vee Lee y yal ol au) oll shaneM Spy pal 

whe Bl th UB ake Jha gk, Loe Juste Lb Lad Maly (4) 
worl 2S J an JS ae NE Bay Sat he 9 SS lk My ll 
bey WS ae he ye) coe al ba Cony ab ale SY cay 
Aa Aes aA Seopa eae ce: 
YA, ANH Lgl Jal Y Me peat gl «Jubb dager oth OS ly 
NS Se Wb 

IU ee VAG ah tho ol gay cet 8 bye dA SI, (V) 
Hid Uy Hibs Gays Met peed ALA ET STS OT lee ely Brey 
all eal gSy ee Bb SV GLYN IS lela 9K jl Co thy 
rats 43 IIS Up len bend 3 DG Ky cla LS 3 ger Leal [plend 
98d Aare (3 spd Sally lay. Lee Alp 9h fle 

Yet gs ttl 45 SLU Gh YY WAY as Ce J GLY all (4) 
Raley acdkts Sl oo, SI BOE we We Gy ore KB cael Je Ge 
WSS Jp Sse oy3 [YI] kanye 2 alll O89 SLM ells” J 





a 
cad eal * 


\o 


Qy 


15 


20 


30 


203 Book Six, Chapter Two - 


That relation would have motion either as its cause or as a sharer of its 
cause. That through which the cause becomes a cause in actuality is 
motion, at which point neither would the cause persist in existence in one 
state nor would it cease to exist and come into existence in one instant, 
It follows by necessity, then, that the conserving or participating cause in 
the order of these causes—Ithe cause] by reason of which the difficulties 
are resolved—is motion. We will be clarifying this more fully in its proper 
place. It has thus become evident and clear that the essential causes of 
things through which the existence of the essence of that thing comes 
about in actuality must exist with it, not having that priority in existence 
whereby it would cease to exist once the effect comes into being,” and that 
this [latter priority] is possible in nonessential or nonproximate causes, 
The regress of the causes that are not essential or not proximate does 
not prevent their proceeding ad infinitum; on the contrary, it necessitates 
[their doing so]. 

(9) Since this has been scttled, then, if something by virtue of its 
essence is a cause for the existence of something else that is permanent, 
then it is its permanent cause as Jong as its essence exists. If (the cause] 
exists permanently, then its effect exists permanently. Such a thing among 
causes would then have the higher claim to causality because it prevents 
the absolute nonexistence of the thing. It is the one that gives complete 
existence to the thing. This, then, is the meaning that, for the philoso- 
phers, is termed “creation.” It is the giving of existence to a thing after 
absolute nonexistence. For it belongs to the effect in itself to be nonex- 
istent and [then] to be, by its cause, existing. That which belongs in the 
thing intrinsically is more prior in essence for the mind ([though] not in 
time) than that which belongs to it from another. Hence, every effect con- 
stitutes an existence after nonexistence, in terms of essential posteriority. 

(10) [Now,] if the term “originated” is applied to each thing that has 
existence after nonexistence, even if there is no temporal posteriority; 
then every effect would be originated. If [however] it is not [so] applied, 
but a condition for a thing to be originated is that there should be a time 
and a period [in which the cause existed] that preceded it—[the cause] 
ceasing to exist because [the effect] came after it, so that [the effect’s] 
posteriority would not be a posteriority existing with the priority but would 
differ from it in existence, because it is temporal—then not every effect is 





ele ye ol gl vey 


ihe AN eT Ally] Wile 2 LI lo GSS ah cly Les Je 


ser Sl abl Y, wel, Ae Je oe SEY All See 95 SLI Lal 
Shel ode pllad SG LALN y| abALLI abl 5 SS Oil eos oly gl Ub dole 
og lao, PAB Regen SL ye OVI JF es 
won dal (AN ON open Uy Ue 2 ati lal P29 Qh od Ls 
LL gy cSalell 2gam po ly GSS ba agegl ddan Yaw 5 SS 5h 
Wad cas Veal pal gH ASU F Jhlly aad pb IIS Nhe > you 
Aco hy All pe Sl 
let od a lid LAY ye tO BB cle os Sy (4) 
pile disler 5S ogo pila GE GW 50 yo ye ald cals Le Lala a Law SE Lathe 
SON 9 et pall lan eae ALI Jol Jbl 5 Le Sho GSS cog 
pepe SS ae Mela) ae 2 al a pl el ayo lh da 
Sltle 56 OKs po GK gl kB Jalal gb lan al a 6 
Sb PY OL saith we pl and 9 etl oS ally uth 6% 
DG Rtey yey am «Latd> JSyle BGS oye oe GK ceil 
FH pb Sly Cpe am & par LS de Sih ol bl gb (95) 
Sey day I Fl ot oF «te ol Sly fCaoee Sylar SOK gl are 
Sl ee OSG Y tty ae GS casey oak fled [VV] Al 5 5y, 
Jt Vow Siler SOK Ab W cosedh ob Wag OS cage ye 








belly AN! 


\o 








10 


20 


30 


204 Book Six, Chapter Tivo 


originated. Indeed, the effect whose existence is preceded by time, motion, 
and change necessarily precedes its existence, as you have known. But we 
are not disputing about names. 

(11) Moreover, the originated in the sense [of the thing] that does 
not require time must be such that either its existence is after absolute 
nonexistence or its existence is after nonexistence which is not absolute, 
being after a specific opposing privation in existing matter, as you have 
known. If its existence were after absolute nonexistence, then its pro- 
ceeding from the cause in this manner would be “creation,” and it would 
represent the highest mode of the giving of existence, because nonexis- 
tence would have been utterly prevented, existence being fully empowered 
over it. If nonexistence is firmly established in a manner whereby it pre- 
cedes existence, then its formation would be impossible except out of 
matter. In this case, the empowerment of bringing into existence—I 
mean, the existence of one thing from another—would be weak, of short 
duration, and intermittent. 

(12) There is the person [however] who would not make everything 
that has this description a created thing but would say: If we imagine? that 
something has come into existence from a first cause through the media- 
tion of an intermediary efficient cause, even if it does not come to be 
from matter, and its nonexistence had no domination, but its existence 
is from the first true cause after another existence to which it is led, then 
its coming into existence is not from absolute nonexistence but from an 
existence, even if not [a] material [one]. Among people, others render 
creation [attributable] to all formal existence in whatever manner it 
comes about. As for the material, even if matter does not precede it, [such 
persons] give its relation to the cause the speciffe name of “generation.” 

(13) We do not argue about these names at all so long as the meanings 
are realized distinctly. Thus, we find, some have permanent existence 
from a cause, without matter, some with matter; some through an inter- 
mediary, some without an intermediary. It is good [however] to call 
everything not coming into existence from a previous matter not “gener- 
ated,” but “created,” and to make the best thing called “created” that 
which comes to be from its first cause without an intermediary, regardless 
of whether [this first cause] is material, efficient, or something else. 








lett yo obey veh 


Gpay Cade WS sy Bom he Vargey je Glsy oosery ogee ill J gl 
elalll 3 5b Y 
220999 9S STL] JAY Syl ogy Y gill pal oid (V) 
PE Jie pas doe Jy flan 5b oy ay o29e9 GSK gh cle «pu 
Ala 56 ayghe SE lee « pad> sy orgy IEG -AB,6 Le le da yey isl 
dl ee 28 OS poall M cages eller) ebeal Jadl Sy Lelal ypanall all 
OF WR AS 5K oe Lge] LSS pas <s caprgl ate i, 
Vie Nad loan sto etl ayy sel cle glee GS sb 
Cad amg Nah Sse fe eee Case Lhe See Ve ltl yey (11) 
aoa OS Vy ok oe Sap) oly cde eu dle Lay Buh ile 3p very 
unde NGL ST oy aw Lead BM) att OF 99 IF Sy cgllal 
Dror ce ob yey Wale SS bly ealy ey lilen « pacdy Go dunt 
Ard ce IU SS oly cgalll Ul, {WS AS S52 ey cloud 
. «SC earl All 
8 ile hall Jat SN am TH oN eda MY gosy (1) 
a pony calonly [poms cdi lnoay cdsl dh Lj dle oe dey Al en 
Oly Nee Ib GS pb dle ie 3 ase LS geen 3 yuo vtlenly 
Web | ao (Bde yg tlaaly SU Cee acer 
[VA] .203 el 








peak ogee a 


\o 


Nn 


10 


13 


20 


25 


30 


205 Book Six, Chapter Three 


(14) We will return, then, to what we were at. We say: as for the 
agent, that it so happens to it accidentally to be an agent, there must be 
some matter wherein it acts. For every originated thing, as you have 
known, requires matter. [This agent] sometimes acts all at once, or it 
may act by [setting things] in motion and would thus be a principle of 
motion. When the natural philosophers spoke of the agent as a principle 
of motion, they meant the four kinds of motion. They became tolerant in 
this subject and made generation and corruption a motion. The agent 
may be an agent in itself or through a power. That which [exists] in itself 
is like heat, which, if it existed separately [and as an] acting [thing], then 
what proceeded from it would proceed simply because it is heat. As for 
[that which is an] agent through power, this is exemplified by fire, which 
acts through its heat. We have enumerated elsewhere the types of powers. 


Chapter [Three] 


On the compatibility between 
the efficient causes and their effects 


(1) We say: It is not the case that whenever the agent bestows exis- 
tence, it bestows an existence like itself. Sometimes it may bestow an 
existence like itself, and sometimes it may bestow an existence not like 
itself—as, for example, fire [that] blackens or as heat [that] warms. 
According to common belief, the agent that enacts an existence like itself 
is worthier and stronger than another in [terms of] the nature it bestows. 
This common belief, however, is neither evident nor true in every respect, 
unless what it bestows is existence itself, and reality. For then the giver 
is more worthy of what it bestows than the recipient of what is bestowed. 

(2) Let us start from the beginning and say: Either causes must be 
causes for the effects with respect to the very existence [of those effects], or 
[they must be] causes for the effects with respect to some other existence. 
An example of the first is the fire’s act of warming; of the second, motion’s 
act of warming, rarefication due to heat, and many other similar things. 








rledtl jy OLY in 


OE GS ol a von sill Jolt Ll sd ad Se Nery (14) 
habs Jub ebiole Jl claw, cule WS edale SGV lg a sale oy a w 
ANN c Joli jpardall JB bly aL lace GR Selpacly La Uy, 
aby Sip sludly 5 Sl Ward ell Iba d boliy a VoLia Ipc 
ig y CIS Sal Di Py cally calle sy VK wy Nebaly Joldl oS 
DM Ld cigh Jel Ul, Lda WY jee Le pe pores JSS « Jail 82 > 
gall Seal pl oy 3 Lone ody Golo 


[Ut Jueall] 
J-2>(z:) 


PY ery Aol fal oy Lake 


Sr Nageey 1 Le ca ficaal Iageey bbl LS Joti gad dl Jd (9) 
SM Jey Ped BA ge 955 IT as SY clang abl Leyy aud 
OF of lene hell Bly ial gpl gb aed fo logy jab 
Pert ka ph edcts LOS STM cay Soy Gee Vo ooh opt le oly 
Sal oy oa Us yl sal 9K Saad RL, 
29 ee GOV lel Me 5 KS ji Ld LEY Isl: Stal ye daly (1) 
Seay ad JMS 5 opey SN el ale 9S 5 ae Per 
IN] lay od SLB hdl Boge lyst sth 


\o 





10 


15 


20 


30 


40 


206 Book Six, Chapter Three 


(3) Let us discuss causes and effects that accord with the first per- 
spective and bring forth the divisions that, at first glance, are believed to 
be its divisions. We say: 

(4) It may be believed, regarding the first perspective, that the effect, in 
many of its instances, is more deficient in existence in terms of that mean- 
ing than the cause, if that meaning is receptive of excess and deficiency 
(as is the case of water warmed by fire). [On the other hand,]} it may 
appear at first sight that [the effect] is also like [the cause], whether it is 
receptive of it or not—as with fire. For, on [first] appearance, one believes 
of it that it changes another thing into fire like itself, as outwardly mani- 
fested. [The effect] would thus be equal to it in terms of the fiery form, 
because such a form is not receptive of the greater and the lesser. And it 
would be equal to it in terms of the necessary accident, [consisting] of the 
sensed warmth, since the proceeding of that act is from the form equal to 
its form and also from it, matter being equal with respect to disposition. 

(5) As for the effect’s having more of the meaning that comes about 
from the cause, this is the thing perceived to be not at all possible and 
not found in the things that are thought to be causes and effects. [This 
is] because it is not possible for this [supposed] excess to have come into 
being by itself. Nor is it possible for its coming into being to be due to a 
greater disposition in matter, such that this would necessitate a thing’s 
becoming actualized by itself. For disposition is not a cause for the bring- 
ing about [of anything] into existence. If the cause of [this excess] is ren- 
dered as both [the effect’s original] cause and the influence produced by 
[such a cause], then that excess would be the effect of two things, not 
one thing. Both added together would be more numerous and excessive 
than the effect which is [the hypothesized] excess. 

(6) If we concede these opinions until we find out their [true] state of 
affairs, it becomes permissible for us to say: If the meaning in the effect 
and in the cause is equal in strength and weakness, then essential prior- 
ity would inescapably belong to the cause inasmuch as it is a cause, with 
respect to this meaning. The essential priority which it has with respect to 
that meaning is [itself] a meaning that does not exist for the second, being 
part of the state of that [original] meaning. This meaning would then be 
equivalent to the first, if it is taken according to its existence and the states 
that belong to it with respect to its existence, which is prior to the second.! 
Absolute equality thus ceases, because equality remains in the definition; 
both are equal by way of having that definition, neither of them being 
either the cause or the effect. But, inasmuch as one of them is a cause 
and the other an effect, it is clear that considering the existence of that 








elect je oly en 


Vea oyrdy SMlan gh ols SM Lally Jal le Kay (1) 
: Jed cardi ipl alidl 9 fe 08 

ary atl ce 958 Ise GS al Mae gl (3 las od (4) 
PF Pmt WSL UN fe Gat, at Jo gall ols QO gl c gall US 5 ala 
aie \ple jbl fe «See sal J ‘ lalate etl lb 35% aby Ul 
be PW Nglem 0SS plll 8 UU Wade Uns 2 Ugh alll 9 3 
i uall > pI ell 9 Uyleny «BV, UNI LE Yay nall ol GW cal 
Sally « Lal Ae a pyre iglidl dyprall Ge fall LUD pp aro G53] Ler pechl 
Cosy nee 

EVAN sy gill op Aa yp yo Sill gall J ag Iba g SU, (0) 
GK soem Vaslgl ai GY oY bey We pla LAY bang Vy a 
asl 8 3S > cial shasta ty) Cyae GS ol ie Vy - lbs Ye 
Mem Je OB shea Le ed sla GB ally Jul I) etl eye als 
Saoly ladder Y yl dae 5 SS solgfl Eo Le Aldl je ay gill My dal 
BapT 48 all Jka je aly JST GLK ye geome Leng 

GS BLA) Syd Gt ple Ye gis gh yb aglall de Labs gb (1) 
atl Ale oo Le cll 9S ab easly Stl} LgLice dll Jlall ball 
Sey gee gall AB 3 4 call « GI pally. all WS Sabu Y gil 
Dol IS] Jgd byl sh Ua 99. SW oye ge ne gall PVE] als 


Sas 51 Said LAW ye] pat eases Aye Gye SU algely oageey Cee 





bo eM ye ean’ 


\o 


a 


10 


20 


25 


207 Book Six, Chapter Three 


definition for one of them has the greater claim, since it belonged to it first 
[and did] not derive from the second, the second deriving [the definition] 
only from [the first]. From this it becomes obvious that, if this meaning 
is existence itself, then it is not possible at all for [cause and effect] to be 
equal in it, since one of them can be equal to [the other] only with respect 
to definition but would excel [the other] with respect to the deserving of 
existence. However, the deserving of existence is of the very same genus 
as the deserving of definition, since this meaning has taken [unto itself] 
existence itself. It is thus evident that [the effect] cannot be equal to it if 
the meaning is identical with existence itself. Hence, that which bestows 
a thing’s existence inasmuch as it is existence has the greater claim to 
existence than the thing. 

(7) There is here, however, another explication by another kind of 
verifying inquiry which we must not ignore. This [explication] is that 
causes and effects, at first reflection when thinking, divide into two parts. 

(8) [The first] part [is one] where the natures in the effect and its 
[own] specificity and essential quiddity necessitate that, in its existence, it 
is an effect of a nature or natures. The causes would thus necessarily be 
different from its specificity, since they are causes for it with respect to 
its species, not [to] its individual [instance]. If this is the case, then the 
two species? are not one [and the same], since what is being sought after 
is the cause of that species. Rather, the effects would be necessitated by 
some other species, and the causes would necessitate a species other than 
their own. These [latter] would be essential causes of the thing absolutely 
caused with respect to the species of the effect. 

(9) [The second] part [is one] where the effect is not the effect of the 
cause, nor is the cause the cause of the effect in [terms of the effect’s] 
species, but in [terms of] its individual [existence]. Let us take this 
according to what thought outwardly dictates by way of division—what 





i 
t 
I 
i 





urls ghee aL IB Lp be ge ye Laay cod ob as alglul GY calyLul 
DEN gl old Soe SU, ae Larson! Le dpe ye Leb Vyas, dle Lave 
pls YO) Sols SOV VY a gOS] yl Lae Lis aye, 
Ke gS slzthas Vgc gl Sel opel ai Sal eal Ida gl bay 
Slick GB Vy agers Geral Lely abe fasay Ll Lol agles gi 
G2 - 2S ed all Ia 5515 3) cae wd Glace ye gh a5 gl 
PED sll apes Aas opel all all ST Blaha gh Seal 
LF gtll ye dh Spl oes 

Bl Sh sy cals V Sh com Get ye pos oT ra lye Sy (¥) 
pend J] SAN ace adh Jyh as Slagle 

er 3S 5 CaF ASI Caley 5 A Sell Lb GS md (A) 
A Me S| callow Y eagle lll 95 lle slab oayey 3 
la ale J gall S| clots Seg SS Sel GO bly made pass 3 
WS bE Nes om Silly lees ob BS Ge A ON gall OS spy 
[VVV]. Wen Shalios J Lal A515 Jabal + 2 We P5545] 

PAE A Stall Me daly All Isler pa Syed 9K toe ads (4) 
SA rea ley dll yo Slate b lb le ba cll, ect 





CRERIOE TY TERY ce 


\o 


Q 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


208 Book Six, Chapter Three 


is found outwardly as existing examples of it—and by way of expansion 
[on this], until we show the true state that must obtain for it through our 
examination of the cause that gives the form of each thing among bodies 
possessing form. 

(10) An example of the first [part] is the soul’s being a cause for vol- 
untary motion; an example of the second is this fire’s being the cause of 
that fire. The difference between the two things is known, For this fire is 
not the cause of that fire in that it is the cause of the specificity of fire, but 
in that it is the cause of some fire. If considered in terms of specificity, it 
would be the cause of specificity accidentally. The case is similar with [the 
causal relation] of father to son, not inasmuch as this is a father and tha: 
a son, but with respect to the existence of humanity. 

(11) This [second] part is imagined in two ways: one in which cause 
and effect share in the disposition of matter, as in the case of fire and 
fire; the other [in which] neither shares in it, as with the light of the sun 
which, in its substance, is the cause of the light here or on the moon. Since 
[in the latter case] the disposition of the two [instances of] matter is not 
equal and the two [instances] of matter are not of the same species, then 
it behooves the two individuals—I mean, this light which is in the sun 
and this light originating from it—should not, in this, be equal. Because of 
this, the two [instances] of light are almost not of the same species as far 
as those are concerned who lay it down as a condition for equality in the 
specificity of qualities that the one should not be more deficient and the 
other more excessive, as you have learned in its proper place from its 
description. However, [the two instances of light] would be one species 
for those who perceive the difference in deficiency and excess to be a 
difference in terms of accidentals and individual instantiations. 

(12) As for the first part—namely, that the two things share [some- 
thing in common] with respect to the disposition of matter—this also 
divides into two parts. [This is] because this disposition is either a dispo- 
sition that is complete in the recipient of the action or a disposition that 3s 
deficient. Complete disposition consists in the absence in the nature of the 
thing of an impediment in opposition to that which is potentially in it, as in 
the case of the disposition in the heated water to cool because it itself has 


eee 


| 
| 





rlecdl yp ol gl oman 


sce PLB eS aS JL ee 5 I SL cell Joe ey at 
plac 5p 590 23 Fy) eal 
JM e GS GOI Sty LSM Sood de etl y SIN Sta (\+) 
Vl pe SUI de ed hie gb pee pyle Gully WN IC abe 
45 gil ec is Sige yw elt. Lybale \gl le polis le 
Asay see yh Gy lp bie oY gl Malis {ol 
Syt sally tll 96 SI Lease yey ke pss pel Lay (0) 
GOI pent «A Spee 43 KY gl sly Lily LIS Flt slactaal 3 
Ys byl gd fall sland a Sly aD gl bya esl Joli opaye 3 
rill Uae gol ls 3 Shed ttl gla Y gl gh ool, £3 oe boll 
G9 Fd! ena GSS Y Gl US KS ace Soll «yall Vay untll 9d gill 
AM pei Lael SY soil icy ols 8 bot pas vol 
dled oy 5 we lal, leg OS, Me Sy hey Salo Le Nec ay5l 
lems 2 ylydl I. LAY, yaasly 
28 NN shoal 3 Kye SLI OS SI sty JN aac Ly (1) 
GS sl LE Juda 9 baled 9% gh Ul slau bs GY ques be Lal 
Polar Gyles tlelh Sa SY Gi pl slay. Ledh lala unl 
Ws donc’ 555 aud 03 GY dp jPeebt LU dart 4.3 5yill [Yvy] 


10 


20 


25 


30 


209 Book Six, Chapter Three 


a natural power—as we have learned in the Physics—that either impedes 
or does not impede the external power in the act of cooling. As for the 
deficient disposition, it is like the disposition of water to become warm 
because there is in it a power that impedes the heating that occurs to it 
from the outside, and that exists with the heating (remaining in it), and 
that does not cease. 

(13) The first part [in turn] divides into three parts. For either [(a)] 
there is in [the thing] with its disposition’ a helping power that remains 
and assists, as in the case of water when it cools from its [state of] 
warmth; or [(b)] there is in the [thing with the disposition] a powe - 
opposing the state of affairs, except that it ceases to exist with the exis- 
tence of the state of affairs, as in the case of hair that becomes gray after 
being black; or else [(c)] in [the thing] with the disposition there is nci- 
ther one of the two—neither an opposition nor an aid—but the absence 
of [such] a state, where only the disposition belongs to it, as in the case of 
that which has no taste in receiving taste and that which has no odor in 
receiving odor. Thus, if we are asked to which of the five divisions does 
the water’s propensity to become fire belong, it would pose no difficulty 
for us [to maintain] that it belongs to the part where there is sharing [in 
common of] a complete disposition of matter, having in matter, how- 
ever, that which opposes it. 

(14) Someone may say: “You have left out considering one part— 
namely, [the one that maintains] that there is no participation in mat- 
ter to begin with, since [the effect in this division would be one] that has 
no matter.” 

(15) The answer to this is that, in this case, there can be no agreement 
in species at all. For it has become evident that the things that agree in 
that [each] belongs to [its own] species and that are basically devoid of 
matter [are such] that the existence [of each] would come about as 
[only] one particular individual.* And it is impossible for the meaning of 
any one of them to be predicated of many. 

(16) Now that we have indicated each one of their parts (whose sum is 
five), we will now deliver the rule governing each one of their parts. We say: 

(17) As for the division in this category in which there is no participa- 
tion in the disposition of matter (neither proximate nor remote), it does 
not necessarily follow in [this case] that that which the agent produces 
by way of effects that are receptive of increase and decrease should be 





less» olay ve 


shed Ly f4,b5 Yl pI gael sal Gls ladal o slals 
Of AD Sore Cal Fel Gyles 35 ad GV Goal LU lately abl 
SAS Vy DAL dll ves ed 
glee 88 andl 9 9% SI Liab a0 Lah te IM aly (\r) 
Wises Cull SoS ol bly Bo ye oy Ia} Wb WS oyady 
POS al lly skye ge OLE IS] atl gL A 299 ee jlai Yl) 
Lib shally pas Sy cee Vy wel cyl ye vel Eni 
slacenl 3e Wa SB FasL SS Paadd I caey cpaldl Jy 9 alll Jie Jb 
Led aad ol be Kd etd LM dy al 1b powell 
| 12 ball ba SU, salut eb olcul 
Aes SSEY ol ay cooly pad LGB KI sa gl dy (04) 
2 WOSY 3] dbel oll 9 SLL, 
Ab Cl egl 3 Sel OS Gi KV ale gl Ine ge IL’ (10) 
bly kis leas GS hel dal oe Eig a aah LAN gl gi 
GS Be lee selsl wwe Sli gl jee Vy 
FSi ays Ub ae Yok PLB oe le lls 03 38 (19) 
38S «es ed pd 
Ayal Y dali sled 345 GLE Y atl OUI oy eal L(V) 
Obata sabi AuiSI UY sy Jed dao GK gh a Coe ld chara yy 


\o 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


210 Book Six, Chapter Three 


equal to itself. [This is] because it is possible that that by which the two 
differ in [terms of] the substance of matter renders the two different in 
the disposition to receive the thing, and hence they do not receive it 
equally. Nor does it necessarily follow that the two are not equal in [this]. 
Rather, it is possible that the state of affairs in this is similar to the state 
of affairs in which the surface of the ethereal sphere follows the surface of 
the lunar sphere in motion that is by way of accident. This is when it is 
possible that there is no impediment in this for receiving the influence in 
measure equal to what the agent engenders as influence. In such a case. 
this would be the bringing into being [of something] like itself. 

(18) As for the division in this category where there is a complete dis- 
position in whatever manner it happens to be, the matter is obvious that 
the recipient of the action can completely resemble the agent. This is 
exemplified by fire that changes water into fire, [by] salt that changes 
honey into salt, and the like. It seems possible, in unverified outward 
appearance, for the recipient of the action to have [an effect] greater 
than the agent, as is the case with water that the air freezes, where the 
air’s coldness is not equal to that of the frozen water. If, however, you 
ascertain [this, you will find] that the agent was not the cold in the air 
alone, but also the formal cooling power in the substance of the water 
(which we have indicated in the Physics), since the coldness of the air 
aided and did not impede it. 

(19) As for the division in this category in which the disposition of the 
recipient of action is deficient, it is not at all possible that the recipient of 
the action in [this division] should resemble the agent that is complete in 
power and be equal to it. For it is not at all possible that the thing realized 
by a power within that thing that has no contrary and the thing realized by 
another power where there is an opposing, impeding [thing] should be 
equal, unless the impeding [thing] ceases to exist. For this reason, it is 
not possible that there is something other than fire that is heated by fire 
whose heat is like the heat of fire, or that there is something other than 
water that is cooled by water whose coolness is greater than the coolness 
of that water. [This is] because the disposition of fire to become hot and 
of water to become cold is a state that, in its substance, is not contrary, 
and [because] the effective power is included in its substance, being no 
stranger to it. As for that which is acted upon by the two things, it has an 











less oy» obey vy. 


PF Bra IL aye ys BOL Kgl Sea xed Wyle Prve] 
BEAD LAY Sl cy Lal aly tnpall OLA lb pS Jy hae ed 
2 ill ell chat Ni a plow pls JULI fb a 3 WG Sg joe 
Wyler La 5p fle De 2 OKY gl Ke te alyy aya SSL 
seh fs Dla] ado gll he fa 3 say Joli oy U 

pe VB gS GS pE socal dl tl GU 12 5 penll Ly (VA) 
UG Ul J shh fa lid SLE Gs Jolt at Gl jyou 3 frat gi Ua 
Jel he atl 8 aap ol bre aby a ABT Ly celle fell ow lly 
MS oy ladl OU op OS Yy elygl caeoy call el gel s plat 3 
Brily dp celal Gb Gaul opt) gmoney felill SS ob odie laf abl YY ed 
ls lesle Ib] -— lat bate We codtl - FU age Ay) pall do pl 
Flypl on (Bale 

eb Lait Ad feel shoal 9S sill OL Ide ye mel Ly (4) 
“gl oH sl SK VAD cargluny dal eB Jed Jacl a2 259) ra Ss 
(GUE shan hang ssligb ye folly Yalan V+ tl 58 ye poll 
Ot Peete Ue ob et GSO Ke Vly lal lan of CT guy ce 
OKs Ul ge apy Ue gt gl lubed oe fhe 9 Sy Ls 
Se op + Wy jpentld UI stand GY [VE] {WU lb dogy op ST atagy 
Grey Ub ae ge pb apogee balls dell syd, capdge (pd alan pb 


\o 


—T 


10 


20 


25 


30 


211 Book Six, Chapter Three 


opposing impediment. The agent that first performs that act in it is 
extraneous to its substance, acting on [the thing] by contacting it, or 
[through] the mediation of something—f[as in,] for example, the warmth 
sensed in the fire that warms and the coldness sensed in the water that 
cools. Hence, [the recipient of the act] cannot be equal to [the agent]. 

(20) If someone says, “Fire melts substances, rendering them hotter 
than itself; for we put our hands in fire, passing them through it quickly, 
and they do not burn to the same extent that they burn when the very 
same act is performed in molten metal; from this one knows for a cer- 
tainty that molten metals are hotter than fire—and yet they have only 
become hot by the fire,” we answer and say: 

(21) This is not because molten matter is hotter but is due to three 
meanings (of which some are more apparent than others): one in the 
molten matter, one in the fire, and the third in that which touches, all 
assisting and close to each other. As for the one pertaining to the molten 
metal, this is because it is thick and has a certain clinging quality, sticki- 
ness, and slowness in separation. Thus, if it is touched, it moves along 
with that which touches {it] and cannot separate [from it] except in a 
time that has an amount unto itself when compared with the time of the 
separation from fire from that which touches [the fire], even though the 
sense does not grasp this difference [in times]; but intellect and mind 
necessitate it. It belongs to the natural agent to produce in the recipient 
of the action, during a longer period, an act which is firmer and more 
exact; and that the weak [agent] should, in a longer period, enact that 
which the stronger does not enact in a short period. 

(22) As for what pertains to fire, this is because the fire which is sensed 
consists of parts of the real fire together with particles of earth rising 
upward and moving. The combination of the two is by way of proximity, 
not by way of continuity. Rather, these in themselves are separate, inter- 
penetrated by air by way of continual renewal. [The air] breaks down the 
purity of the heat within it because it is colder than [the fire] and because 
in that quick time [the air] does not undergo action through which it 
becomes pure fire. In addition, [sensible fire] is fast-moving in itself, one 





elads| ea oly v\\ 


Cenbek A dad ora SF CE SLO JVI Jelly shan ace lad Lye 
A pkey dogs lly Retell LW Pda Bl RIT lL, 
sAaglan SI SE ucld 3 pl 

Je TY cle shad ad a Lt is 23 SW ols $B JB gb (1+) 
can AU Ne Job J OB pall 3 \Bl el GH Aone Ig Lagiy Ll) lal 
BIB lll ye EB IS Gay oe teal OB pall Led Ul ye lead 
Joy oF 

Le Nye AIDE Gleb SI, Sel eal gh ee pd tld gf (10) 
Wl AEN, SD Sy yall ob Lesed sgl JOT gs 
thay deyily be eat ab ae SU esl Carer nent gi 
MBF 38 65 5U5 PM Gali I Se ply el oe ab al BB Lal 
Si SSM) alls Loe Vd GS ly cll nl lee hy Gl Lal 
SU heb Sabla 3 aed! 3 ingh acl Jel ght py ney ply Jal 
bya Bed Syill alan belived teal is gly «Sel, 

aL UW yy ebjel os Lda LN 39 LI deal Ll, (ry) 
dem HEY gyal J te ola, Siete iamain 2M oy thls 
PSD sae om Jo ES ell Sy BL Yul Bs dla 
Wath HED Ja oad My ce agh M cope Bile oat L 
> a KRY jen 2 SL de BUS my [ ¥V0] Laer Ib ay pes 


\o 








10 


20 


30 


212 Book Six, Chapter Three 


part of it hardly remaining contiguous with a part of the hand for a time 
in which it would tangibly affect it; but [it] is [instead] renewed. Hence, 
as long as unsensed numerous influences combine—this in a period [of 
time] that has measure—this will not lead to a tangible amount. 

(23) As for the molten metal, its substance is coalescent, united, stable, 
and subsisting in continuity. This being the case, then what the hand’s 
surface meets in the molten metal is one surface coinciding totally [with 
the hand’s surface], whereas what it meets in the sensible fire consists of 
small surfaces intermixed with what is cold relative to them. Hence, due 
to this, the influence becomes different, unless it remains for a period ir 
which the instances of touch succeed one another, [the influence] thereby 
increases, and each surface performs an act on what it touches; there. 
after, the act takes full control, as is the case in natural transformations. 
As for the fire detained in such things as the blacksmiths’ bellows, it has 
greater influences on what it touches and acts in a shorter time than 
molten metal and other things because of its concentration and purity. 

(24) As for the situation regarding the hand, [it is as it is] because the 
hand is able to pass through air, fire, and subtle bodies by the quickest 
motion, whereas it is unable to cut through dense molten metal by the 
quickest motion, because the resistance to pushing and penetrating in the 
diffused is small, [but] in the dense [the resistance] is great. It is almost 
due to the difference in this meaning that this [latter] is termed dense and 
that [former is termed] subtle. Thus, if the molten metal were not stickier 
and more clinging to what touches it, and also not more coalescent and 
unified, and, moreover, [since] cutting through it takes a longer period 
of time because of its resistance, it being [at the same time] stable, adher- 
ing, not escaping touch, this would suffice it fer the possibility of its having 
greater influence than that of the subtle, according to the comparative 
relations of times, since it has an influence in a period of time similar [to 
that] in which the diffused encounters some influence. If the time [for the 
subtle to exercise influence] is doubled, it may equal [the influence of the 
dense element] at some doubled [time]; and, if the doubling is increased, 
it may exceed it. The measure of its doubled time, however, may not be 
something apprehended by the senses, for the reasons you know. 








rleddl oly v\y 


ois acd Lb secs Ln genone Ist AD Phy Gley ol go ep Lut (gr 
“3 Bde 9 lbs pore 0 Igoe VES duos pe 

OB lly SLAY Sb eal soc atone page Gb Del Ly (¥¥) 
Add bey AIS Lilla Lely bebo Jul y al glans Be be gS MS 
My HEAD coy ll Lil aU leer glen eget Lil ge 
ed dale Ld law IF aly SO GLAU YS ILS bx a oT Yt 
PRA WU, as YELL byl abe ye be Judi Ls ot 
ide Goetly «Lay hy OT yall je dole Ld LS plac! Gib sland gl, Sl Je 
Wilpey yelee 

play sUily ell dad Je yo al gS coll 3 SIU, (ve) 
ies Soph GSI, aes Joi oly Sop cb dill 
WS pa DA GK gl Ky 3S ASTI oy «Jib ilall BSI, Gul 
Wats Ty ofl ad yeah 9 gi pall Lan 8 LC ay Lede la, 
G5y cdaglal Jbline pile 56! «Istht, NeLconl atl Lal padlg cA 


s 
* 


228 ye DSN SE So. ol she 9 wb ol UL ye Gls eb LY tt 
IB «Le Ft Gala ine ghey She ob ST Nb gS] deasN 5 Ce Call 
OFS SeeH 3 og Bl, SLAM jaw Bb agler gi SI gush Ge yo 


\o 





nn 


10 


20 


30 


213 Book Six, Chapter Three 


(25) This subject deserves to be expanded on at a greater length 
than what we have done. It belongs, however, more properly to the art of 
physics. It is, however, necessary to mention here an amount sufficient to 
resolve the perplexity and make its facet plain. Then, if a prober wishes 
to probe this to the full, he could probe it in the statements discussed 
exhaustively in the Physics, particularly in what he may find by way of our 
[treatment thereof]. From the assemblage of these detailed explanations, 
the place where we believe that it is possible for the patient and agent to 
be equal, the place where it is believed that it is possible [for the patient] 
to be in excess of [the agent], and the place where it is possible only for [th: 
patient] to be lesser than [the agent] have become manifest. Through 
out this, it has become evident that, even if this is the case, the existence 
of the meaning ([considered] with respect to existence itself) [is one] in 
which agent and patient are not equal if the agent does not enact the 
meaning, inasmuch as it is the existence of the meaning [except] in an 
accidental way, as we have shown.® 

(26) Moreover, in the case of the agent and the principle whose recipi- 
ent of action does not participate with it in either species or matter— 
participating in it only in some manner in the idea of existence, where it 
is not possible to consider within it the state of the [unique] sense wherein 
existence belongs [to the agent] (because the two do not participate in it) 
and where there thus remains the state of considering existence itself 
(everything else by way of equality and excess having been applicable to the 
active principle)—if one then returns to considering the state of existence, 
the active principle would not be equal to [the patient]. [This is] because 
[the active principle] exists by itself, whereas the patient’s existence with 
respect to the reception of that action is acquired from [the former]. 

(27) Further, existence inasmuch as it is existence does not vary in 
terms of strength and weakness and is not receptive of what is less and 
what is more deficient. It only varies in terms of a number of [modes]®— 
namely, priority and posteriority, absence of need and need, and necessity 
and possibility. As for priority and posteriority, existence, as you have 
known, belongs first to the cause, secondly to the effect. As for absence of 
need and need, you have known that in existence the cause does not need 
the effect but exists either by itself or by some other cause. This meaning 1s 
close to the first, even though it differs from it in the way it is considered. 





eleds| o oly v\Y 


asl [YW] 4S colle, Me ST lay Lay gl acl Ia 3 py (10) 
Shee Vary sey Meat ay loud be jab Lys $55 gl om Lily adel do ral 
Lepaty Rell le dtleX NSW poled alls padi jh yada LS 
Nad i gil eel Dead oda thee ip fb AB Kye oy ose gee 
AE a3, SI jem la she gil Cosy Ad Lately Jel splits SI hyo 
22 MSE gly al 3 WE Od aby ase pa IY jn Sill ao ly 
Ug all MeL Sh IB Jaklly Jeti ab sgl Y ogee Sh lb yom ye al 
sky LS yd gall ayy ys 
Ly <aolll 3 Ys Fell fal Elta alice na} gill Ladly Joli S (49) 
IN Sil gall Je AS on 3] SG poly opel ew B boy HU 
GSS fle BIG, cae aged el lad Ad adj h Eat Lad Lgl 
celal Lb gS aed Kelle le, Ia} Jota Lt fe sashly dag ltl jo 
vate SMe Jad NI IS Lom ye atl apmyy Ait oayery ON fal glue pb 
JN fay «incall EI BG ogeey go Loge! (vv) 
Belly AN, tly cpa: aay Kline GY Ly aS, 
Wal code WS cage gb ett Zt BU Ky opel 
Ghee Bi Vall gl ede ob Gey YI Ul, 250 Jule, 


Ale hy aM ye asd gual Vay (yo! they gh aSldy La gee bos bed sell 


\o 











al 


10 


20 


25 


30 


214 Book Six, Chapter Three 


As for necessity and possibility, we know that, if there is a cause which is 
a cause of everything that is an effect, then its existence is necessary in 
relation to the whole in terms of all the effects, and absolutely. If, [on the 
other hand], there is a cause of some effect, then its existence is neces- 
sary in relation to that effect, while that effect in itself, in whatever man- 
ner it occurs, is [something whose] existence is [only] possible. 

(28) The summary of this [is as follows]: The effect in itself is such 
that existence is not necessary for it; otherwise, it would be necessary 
without its cause, if supposed to be necessary in itself and inasmuch as 
existence is not prevented from [being for] it. But, since it came to exis 
by a cause, its essence in itself—without the condition of there being 
a cause for it or there not being a cause for it—is possible of existence. 
It is inescapably the case that it is rendered necessary only by the cause. 

(29) Moreover, as it has been shown, the cause cannot be necessi- 
tated by [the effect] but is either necessary in itself or necessary from 
another thing [so that] if necessity comes to it through [this thing], then 
the necessity of another would properly ensue from it. Thus, the effect 
considered in itself would be possible. As for the cause, considered in 
itself it would be either necessary or possible. If it is necessary, then its 
existence has the greater claim [to reality] than the existence of the effect. 
And if [it is] possible [but] is not rendered necessary by the effect, the 
effect being rendered necessary by it and after the [prior] necessity of 
[the cause], then, if the essence of the cause becomes necessary, this is 
not through the effect, whereas the effect’s essence does not become nec- 
essary except with respect to [the cause]. Thus, there would belong to 
the essence of the cause a consideration in terms of which it becomes 
necessary [and] which does not pertain to the essence of the effect, but 
in terms of which [the cause] itself becomes necessary, the effect being 
still not noticed. The essence of the effect is only possible and must only 
be regarded with respect to the cause. Thus, the cause will have an exclu- 
sive claim to necessity, the effect having nothing more than possibility with 
regard to this exclusive claim. If necessity belongs to the effect, it would 
have belonged to the cause first; otherwise, the cause would then still be 
possible—its existence not having become necessary—when the existence 
of the effect has become necessary. The [effect] would not have become 
necessary through the essence of the cause; and this is impossible. 





elect jy oly Y\¢ 


Sitle pile o6 GLa abe Ub GRY, Gosh Ll, [rw] eM 
Sly BEY sey Vs Fy A rll sedate dle yb 
5S AS Jali by Spells J rtah seglioly oe cl Jblie go 
Aandi dog J SE op 

Vy «29g doom Vetaee wld OS ya shall gl ge lhe Gast, (14) 
gory Uy Sogery al eV tooey SIN Lely G2} Lake Oyo Cod 
wom Lily cope gl AS al dle G SY gl a tle GS bet oy wildy asl cabal 
AIL Jee Y 

Lyall, Glam dn pension ade WS ila ab (V4) 
9 OSGI ee Seda Gye gla par BB oe ot y Lely 
ASE Lily Lely Le ld Leet abal Ul. Weald Lek J dell g3 fat 
cgi oe ly SE IS oly «Kb ogy y Golo d Lely GE 
SLB SK pl Rely BIS gle Ib] All 9S cagery any a Com Jskally 
J ME AS ld Sh SS Ue LBL VE ety ald pes V gladly chal 
ld cry Doyobe po Sylelly Lely ea GK bdo WV ce, 
bas! abel 9S Ay Ras Lao gl Vee Vy aE GSS YJ ball 
OS BL OS, oles WS xe Ld SKYY] ddd OGY, ope 
Dy ergy Bagg oe ol ASL oy Maal C5 Vy yl dal 55S yey lel 
» Slows Vay Mall ld Ge Y coy 9S «Sell 


\o 














wa 


10 


20 


25 


30 


215 Book Six, Chapter Four 


(30) Thus, there belongs to the cause a necessity with respect to 
itself and inasmuch as it is not related to the effect—the effect still 
remaining within the dictate of its possibility, since the cause does not 


_become necessary by it but either in itself or in relation to something else, 


[but] not [in relation] to [the effect]. Inasmuch as the cause is not, as 
yet, related to the effect, the effect’s existence is not necessary, its exis- 
tence only becoming necessary inasmuch as the cause is related to it. For 
these three reasons, then, the cause is more worthy of existence than the 
effect. The cause is thus more true than the effect. And because [it is the 
case that,]} when absolute existence has rendered the existence of some - 
thing, [the latter] becomes true, it is clear that the principle that bestow. 
the reality in which things participate has the greater claim to truth, 
Hence, if it is true that there is here a first principle—namely, the one 
that gives reality to others—it becomes true that [this principle] is the 
Truth in Himself, and it becomes true that knowledge of Him is knowl- 
edge of truth absolutely. If knowledge of Him takes place, then this would 
be absolute, true knowledge in the manner in which it is said of knowledge 
that it is true—namely, in relation to the object known. 


Chapter [Four] 


Concerning the other causes —the elemental, 


the formal, and the final 


(1) This [then] is what we say about the efficient principle. Let us 
now explicate [what one has to] say about the other principles. As regards 
the element, it is that wherein is the potentiality of a thing’s existence. 
We say: A thing may have this state in conjunction with another thing in 
[several] ways: 

(2) Sometimes it is as the tablet is to writing—namely, in that it is 
disposed to receive something that may occur to it without this involving 
change in it or the disappearance of a state belonging to it because of [the 
writing]. Sometimes it is as the piece of wax is to [its] carved image, and 
the boy to the man—namely, in that it is disposed to receive something 
that occurs to it without there being a change in its state except for 
motion in place, in quantity, or some other [similar] thing. Sometimes it 
is as the piece of wood is to the bed, for [the carpenter] diminishes! some 





call J eal ol [YVAN] Sam yey ail LEG yay Ale 9S (1) 
MBLEY Nailin ace A YA IO athe le all am Jelly 
C0229 am ped SalI cay Jlall Cf olen 6 Wall tom yey cad] ope 
BI ADT GUUS al pad ca] aL ae tll oe 5p dyrey om Ld 
toh ory Jee 15) lel oge3l Gy call Cf GANAS oJ) al of rgh 
OI ee BB ABLY yl Yo AL aida oa Ll gi gd Laie gle 
pls 3242 lll I cee cailiy GEN al eae ARAL op Janll go Yl Lace Lys 
co hal Sle GaN goes Ulan bl pall GE cas pall Jom Lily £ lier bl 
shell SI Lal Coll yay 


Cella] 
Jas(s) 


ASMA, Ay pally Apacall GSN Jal 


Mb. si gol bal Sets «ela Li bas big (1) 
rm ce MLL clea SS + til gh ged co tll agen 3b Ab call gd e paul 
Segre el 
DN eye dell sale dil gay AIS Medd SEKI (1) 
arly all J haat Uy So ayby LVN] ace ad gS yl Jlgy Vy ad pt 
Wer stalled i nil nb eS apa eit ed ae al gay cell 
Mats ABS yyall MAES Sank, bs pe yl «SS gl sgh GS 


\o 





Nn 


10 


20 


25 


30 


216 Book Six, Chapter Four 


of [the wood’s] substance through chiselling. Sometimes it is as the black 
thing to the white, for it changes and loses its quality without losing its 
substance. Sometimes it is as water is to air, for the air only comes to be 
from [water] in that [the latter] is corrupted. Sometimes it is like sperm is 
to the animal, for it needs to divest itself from a number of forms belong- 
ing to it so as to become disposed to receive the animal form. The same 
applies to unripe grapes in relation to wine. Sometimes it is as prime 
matter is to form, for it is disposed to receive it, to become rendered sub- 
sistent by it in act. Sometimes it is as myrobalan to the confection, for it 
is not from it alone that the confection comes to be, but from it and from 
another. Prior to this, it would have been one of its parts in potency. 
Sometimes it is as wood and stone are to the house. This is similar to the 
{former example], except that in the case of [the former] the confection 
comes about through some mode of transformation, whereas in this 
[case] there is only composition. To this genre also belongs [the relation] 
of units to number. Some people render the premises [of a syllogism 
related] in this way to the conclusion, but this is a mistake. Rather, the 
premises are similar [to the above relation] with respect to the form of 
the syllogism. As for the conclusion, it is not a form in the premises but 
something that follows necessarily from them, as though the premises 
enact it in the soul? 

(3) It is, hence, in these ways that we find the things that carry 
potentiality. For they either bear potentiality singly or with the partici- 
pation of others. 

(4) If they [bear] it singly, [then this takes place in one of two alterna- 
tives. One is where] that which comes about from them will need only to 
become actual for [being] this [thing] alone.> This is [the thing] which, 
properly speaking, ought to be called subject with respect to that which is 
in it. A thing of this sort must have self-subsistence in actuality. For, if it 
did not have subsistence, it would be impossible for it to be prepared for 
the reception of what occurs in it. On the contrary, it must be subsistent 
in actuality. For, if it becomes subsistent only through that which comes 
to inhere in it, then something through which it has become subsistent 
must [already] have come to inhere in it before the second came to inhere 
[in it]. Either the second thing would then be among the things that do 
not render it subsistent but are something added to it, or else its arrival 
would annul that which previously rendered it subsistent. But then [the 
thing] would have been transformed when we have supposed it not to have 
been transformed. This, then, is one alternative. [The second alternative] 





lett yo oly yl V4 


Alyy Jorn Ab {asl opeSd Le GSanby ore ye Ld coll 
led OSS UAB SHlygl Gl oll LS YK ayy voyager Ld Bb ge CaS” 
8 aye oF Hea gl clon sb fGbdl al SEK, ants gh ae 
WS oKiky - pe pradl Sy ltl iy po Spd wd go OL 
teal So Kayhly Jah Rage gl iralne Yb Sy nall J Jol aola 
Md JS VSD one yey AE hb eG yreall GK rey Ae ud Sib SG yell I] 
YN LEN Sogbably ASU LSE Kinky adh aed je lege 
C19 eS BA ped Nay Hea ye pas Ggeralll ae 5 $ UL YA GI 
jy BE alls, odd MS baal ab Jeow oby oval) LY Lal bl ie 
poh Ce op ccobadll 9 ayy Clb dal Ly. Lil SC BIS Leal 
[VAs]. ail Od Yad Obadll ge Ips 
iydll Ale 9S gh Ll WB fy ALL LAV ad oN ae be (1) 
Lyd Sta gl ley 

Jed cB IY We SS Lo etal LB Noles EIB (4) 
cong FAS ee ttl poy geen SI ELL Gil ge lay bb i 
Jarl Cpe Sl jon pd LB Gl gL Alb S18 atl aude be Ha SS gl 
GE oid dloy LEB pray Li] GO GS {all LAB GK gl Cow fp cad poll 
Bhan Je aegis UC pad GO OSG Gl Lily Spin a LE Ale L 5 alo 29d 03 
«Joe pd slo b aby SlaLnl 3 SOAS ak, GL bon 20999 GK gl al 


\0 


ay 


20 


25 


30 


217 Book Six, Chapter Four 


is that [the bearer] needs an additional thing. [The need would] either be 
only for a motion, whether locomotion, qualitative motion, quantitative 
motion (positional or substantial), or [due to] the loss of something else 
from its substance by way of quantity, quality, or the like.* 

(5) As for [the thing that bears potentiality], by participating with 
another, it necessarily has combination and composition. The composition 
will consist either of combination alone or, in addition to this, there would 
be qualitative transformation. Everything that has change in it attains 
the end either through one alteration or through numerous alterations. 
It has been the custom to call the [thing] from which generation takes 
place through composition, and which exists in the thing, stoicheion, being 
that to which the thing is finally reduced. If corporeal, then this is the 
smallest thing the divider arrives at in [terms of] the divisions of the 
different forms that exist in [a corporeal thing]. It has been defined in 
that a thing’s composition is [constituted] from it and from another 
[besides it]; it is in [the composite thing] essentially and is not divisible 
in terms of form. 

(6) Those who hold the view that things are composed only of genera 
and differentiae have rendered [the latter] the first stoicheions, particu- 
larly the one and haecceity. For they have rendered them the principles 
most worthy to be principles because they [represent the highest form] of 
universality and of being genera.> Had they been just, they would have 
known that self-subsistence belongs to individuals and that [the things] 
that are close to them are worthier® to be substances and self-subsistent 
things, and also worthier of existence. 

(7) Let us return to the question of the element. We say: It is cus- 
tomary in some contexts to say that a thing [derives] from the element 
and not customary [to say this] in other contexts. For it is said, “From 
wood there came to be a door,” but not “From the human there came to be 
a writer.” [It is also customary] in certain contexts to relate the generated 
thing to the subject [and], in other contexts, not to {so] relate to [it]. Thus, 
at times it is said, “This is a wooden door,” but not “This is a human 
writer.” In the case of the first [example], if they find that the subject does 
not move toward [the generated thing] at all and does not change in its 





Platt oe Lg vyy 


AK bel i So NOM gl Ube 545 Mle gl Ul, pod lige 


Pee FNM dyage lhady ESS pe SS ily 
Abo LOSS y 
UB Sy plato Ab dle Y 3K ot Kile GS ul ul, (0) 
bbe ASI Bla als & AS 3l Lely bed pool ye SF Kgl 
gk tld o> v5, . 55 Olss al cooly ss All ge gl LB yd a 
al Joes gall gay « Leddaul (ND sty Shh a 5S OS oil oe 
Lola] Seen 3 peli a ges Lyteel og lee gh Ll 
Wy MIN Ab ay £6 SG ab yay ace gill ly am ody A550 50 gl pl 
[YAN] 8) gral, en 
ldenY Yer Jpailly red y Wl Leh gl od, oe (1) 
AS vas WA tad tll By baler ab tay well Lepaty «i 
SSS dal eh Ue ol yo Lith lg Lad nal gy shoacony 
all ge Bh dal Wily etl) bt yal 
‘AN OLD Ok poly Biolall om 9 Jyed pall yl I aay (V) 
Ah eet oo 6a) DA nly > pa aly poly od paul jo 
Vols cole ppesll GEN cases 5 ST GLAM ye SK sdk Y, 
- gh SF las gh: Sta Vy «pete Ob law gh cab « Se mele bay 
OB AN SSD kal CI all Ae ol py yay 15 call Ub 





lie  olAL ’ 


\o 





Qi 


10 


15 


25 


30 


218 Book Six, Chapter Four 


receptivity of something, they would not then say that it came to be from 
it; but they would always say that it came to be from privation, as they 
would say about what is other than the writer. If it changes, particularly 
when they do not find a name for its privation, they say that it came to be 
from what is other than the subject. As for relating it to the subject, it is 
used for the most part if the subject [is such that] something other than 
it is suitable for the form. As for the form, it is not related to it and it is not 
said that [the thing] has come to be from it, only the name being derived 
from it. The subject may be common to all things or to several, as in the 
case of juice to vinegar, wine, unfermented wine, syrup, and the like. 

(8) Every element, inasmuch as it is an element, has only receptivity. 
As for the coming to be of the form, this comes to it from another. In the 
case of an element or a receptacle where the principle of motion toward 
the effect exists in it, this, it is believed [by some], moves by itself toward it. 
This, however, is not the case. For it has become clear to us in other places 
that one and the same thing cannot be both agent and recipient of the 
same thing without its essence becoming divisible. If the element, how- 
ever, has the principle of its motion within itself, then it is moved by the 
nature [within it], and what comes about through it would be natural. If 
the principle of motion in it is external and it does not possess [the ability] 
to move from within itself to that perfection, then that which would 
come to be from it is [either] artificial or is that which takes its place. This, 
in summary, is what we have to say about the element. 

(9) As regards the form, we say: “Form” is said of every meaning in 
actuality which is suitable for performing action, so that, in this sense, 
the separate substances are forms. “Form” is [sometimes] said of every 
disposition and act that may inhere in a recipient, whether unitary or 
through composition, so that movements and accidents [in this sense] 
are forms. [Sometimes] “form” is said of that by which matter is ren- 
dered subsistent in act, in which case neither intellectual substances nor 
accidents would be forms. “Form” is [also] said of that through which 
matter is perfected, even if it is not rendered subsistent by it in act, as 
in the case of health and what is naturally moved by it and toward it. 
“Form” is particularly said of what occurs in materials through art by 
way of figures and the like. “Form” is [also] said of a thing’s species, 





rlecsl je oly Y\A 


EF Od eH WS cpacll 5e GTA! Lola gd ge Ui) cae GOEL gpa Ye 
IEF OS aS sd Lal aie pall gto VS Legacy pil lly 51K) 
char 8 ppo sll 913] SV jing Ub erogll MN amdl bly ppl 
cel Nee ats Uc ee GO Vy « Ml] ney IB ay geal Lily iy gull ab 
phy EU peal fo oplind Bote 9K aby Sb eK op ally 
3 by My Maly 

Dyer Lily Lib Jy Lc pak gree ye ab pare IS (A) 
Bree IW MSL Le Maal sf poll ye Gh Ly cab ye lb by gull 
eel asin B US gpd 8b WIS pay Aas Ad 3) oe al ob [YAY] anes 
6515 Vp GL ab ge sory opt Deby WEB sol, SK GT am Vl 
44 SL Sy dedal yp Sake GO ail BAS > be GOL! pall 
SIs Bed ghd Kay we yb Shi Le go. Leb 
spatial BEL Jar Up cole Wyle JI Lelie a SK Gh cant 

F> Jala Sl che Jaa eae by pe J, oF 2d By pall UL (4) 
SB IK aby Le Si, pe dle gall be bye Bld pl dt 9S 
© pst Way pe Slay ye Lal sil, OL OS So OSU I Glas, 
4 SSS Wi, po lity Lye Gal eV, Aidl pal LI she 9 5S 5b pal sll 
SEey «lal Nell We pace Lay “Ponaall] fe «Jail Up Ragin $G ol gly soll 
Eo! by re Sling. Layby SELEY py delay olgll ob tase dels 8) ye 





pcbice G otabd ews\| £3) pall * 


\o 











er 


10 


20 


25 


219 Book Six, Chapter Four 


genus, differentia, and all of this. Moreover, the universality of the uni- 
versal is form for the parts also. Form may also be incomplete, as with 
motion, and complete, as with squareness and circularity. 

(10) You have known that one and the same thing may, in different 
respects, be form, purpose, and efficient principle. This is also the case in 
art. For art is the form of the artifact in the soul. For building is in itself 
the movement toward the form of the house. This is the principle from 
which the realization of the form in the matter of the house proceeds. 
Similarly, health is the form of healing, and knowledge of the treatment 
is the form of the act of healing. The imperfect agent requires move- 
ment and instruments so that what is in him may proceed as something 
realized in matter. The perfect [agent is such that] the form in it is fol- 
lowed by the existence of the form in (the latter’s] matter. [Moreover,] it 
looks as though the forms of natural things [existing] with the causes 
prior to nature are of [one] kind, [and those existing] with nature by way 
of compulsory servitude are of [another] kind. You will know this shortly. 

(11) As for purpose, it is that for the sake of which a thing is—this 
you have known previously. The purpose in some things may exist only 
in the agent himself, [such] as rejoicing in victory. In other things, the 
purpose may be in something other than the agent, this being sometimes 
in the subject (as with the objectives of movements that proceed from 
deliberation or by nature), sometimes in a third thing (as with [the person] 
who does something to satisfy a certain person, where the satisfaction 
of that certain person would be a purpose extraneous to the agent and 
recipient, even though joy in that satisfaction may also be another end). 
Among ends, there is the imitation of something else. The object of the 
imitation, inasmuch as it is something desired, is an end, imitation itself 


being also an end. 





elads| Ba oly v\4 


iy pally « Vall eh 5, poo MATOS, hs gots tail auidy «tl 
| gly Tt 3S by SAT VS os 

09. WED ley hey 5 po GSK sell tll gl cade by (16) 
PNG. pill Spall po etclaal gb Laliclall by ale. 
Birrell Spam 06 201 gill lal 2 by oll po SIS Bay po aa 
SEUaly LeVine eel dayary ee Nb poe dona WIS catia 
[VAT] Fall 3 eae Aa gd be pen So OV, So ello at 
2A GSS al tay Vole J iy pall ayery We Slb 3 TM iypall lb pO 
sel Gee Ye Aaclall ose y chy delat AZ) all we Lay pe Lata 
cae Le ala ran 

GSS oy the Lb ale oy ce ta Kae U pala Uly (99) 
Uae PALI OS 23, AMD rT LD Jol ads od LEY ae 3 al 
seat MOTB OWE So pyogll b5,b lbs «Jello eb 3 Lah 
Wey GK be poyl Lt Join SEI et dinky deb ghang, oe 
SARE Lal oh ably cal 6 oly «lilly Joldl ge dole ALE oy 
Ally AE AM opto ge a ey MM CST ety AE OUI! Sy 
MAS Vas 


\o 





nn 


10 


20 


530 


220 Book Six, Chapter Five 


Chapter [Five] 


On establishing purpose and resolving skeptical doubts 
uttered in refuting it; the difference between purpose and necessity; 
making known the manner in which purpose is prior to 
the rest of the causes and the manner in which it is posterior 


(1) We say: It has become clear from what we have previously said 
that every effect has [an originating| principle and that every temporal 
event has matter and has form. Thus far, however, it has not become clear 
that every imparting of motion has some purpose. For there is here that 
which is “trivial”! and that which is coincidental. There is also here such 
[a thing} as the movement of the heavenly sphere, for outwardly it seems 
to have no purpose. Moreover, generation and corruption have no pur- 
pose in superficial opinion. 

(2) Someone may say, “It is possible that for every end there is an 
end, in the same way that there is a beginning for every beginning,” so 
that in reality there is no end and perfection. For end in reality is that in 
terms of which one finds rest. We may encounter things that are ends 
and which [in turn] have ends ad infinitum. For there are things that are 
thought to be ends but which are infinite, akin to conclusions that come 
successively from syllogisms and that are infinite. Someone may [also] 
say, “Let us set aside [the notion] that purpose exists for every act [and 
ask], ‘Why has it been made a prior cause when in reality it is the effect 
of all [the other] causes?’” It would also be appropriate for us, after 
resolving this difficulty, to discuss [the question of ] whether purpose and 
the good are one thing or [are] different—also the difference between 
liberality and goodness. We say: 

(3) As for the first doubt, relating to coincidence and the trivial 
[action], we will [now] resolve it, saying: Regarding coincidence and its 
being an end, we have finished [discussing] it in the Physics.? As for clari- 
fying the matter of trivial [activity], you must know that every voluntary 





reall oe oly! ty 


[El paid] 
Jp23 (0) 
Wel Gel ISS by dlloll y 
Sl Ae Maal y Sry pall wy All yw yale 
4 SUS (sill Aa gy Soll glee he Xl y poe 0 


Fi Mice Ab lar Sh Sail yp Ge Ugh abl 248 (4) 

2 be bee SIBLE ABS SSI one xs oly Bye ly le ab Sale 

‘AN pb BYE Gb AIS I ge Lely tél pL py ots 
Sal pale 8 LY REY oLialy gS, [vac] 

Mal SOS SAE A IS. ol jn 8 ssa gl pd! (¥) \: 

3F 03) cas) Soy LAL ALU GV « ply UE BELL 5 SK 9 LI 

UE Yl le eLtl ye yb. tell ne Melo Yy oll yo oLal 

al gl Aa : Jo gl fla ALE y lala je Gals US kes Vy 

Sl ah ey SUE Jal isle LY ay ha le cla Jo Sarpy 

L Lal, Se pl et, + Ct ably All Jo lay 20 oe Jo oy Ab KS \o 

‘9d Say Sly o bt oy Gai 

SUEY Je Us Jadiy dnd oly GUY opel JS olan UI (v) 

beens Shed tell pl gly Lily Ib lard barf aid LAL al, 

Bll ge Cad Ld. el Way eta sae aa lar Yo daly] Ke Gl 





ys as 





er 


20 


30 


22] Book Six, Chapter Five 


motion has a proximate [originating] principle, a remote principle, and 
a principle that is more remote. The proximate principle is the motive 
power in the organ’s muscle. The principle next to it is the resolution [to 
act]* on the part of the appetitive faculty; the one more remote than this 
is imagining or cogitating. If some form is inscribed in the imagination or 
rational thought and the appetitive faculty is moved to the resolution to 
act, the motive power in the organs will serve it. Thus, the form inscribed 
in the imagination or thought may be the very purpose with which the 
motion terminates. It may [however] be something else, except that it is 
attained only through the movement toward that with which the move. 
ment terminates or the movement endures. 

(4) An example of the first is that one may become bored with stay- 
ing in some place and imagine in himself the form of another place. He 
longs to dwell in it, moves to it, his movement toward it terminating 
[there]. Hence, the object of his desire would have been the very same 
thing as that to which the powers moving the muscle finally [lead]. 

(5) An example of the second is that a man may imagine in himself 
the form of his meeting a friend of his and would thus long for [this]. He 
would then move to the place wherein he reckons he may chance encoun- 
tering him. His motion ends at that place. That very place where the 
movement ended would not be identical with the first object of desire 
to which he yearned, [it being] another intention; but the object of 
desire—namely, the meeting of the friend—is a consequent of it and 
realized after it. 

(6) You now know, then, these two divisions. A minimum reflection 
has shown you that, in every situation, the end to which motion leads— 
inasmuch as it is the end of a motion—is a primary, real end for the active 
motive power in the organs. The motive power in the organs has no other 
end, but sometimes the power preceding it may have another purpose. 
Hence, it is not always necessarily the case that that thing, whether 
imaginative or cogitative, should be the primary end for the appetitive 
faculty; nor is it necessary that it should not be [a primary end]. Rather, it 





eleds| Ba ole yY\ 


gaily 43 523 isl je Plan Y 0 4h oil ly « pall thee 3 Sd 
hipe Ae SH 8 NSU YABB. SAI Lot poli y 
Led eLasYl oN IS 81 yall rs ple HAS tl al Sac 
BSB Ml et NAW yaad oo Sat yl LS Sa Mey gall CI 
Sh all gs WSL Yall poss Val Y cots 2 Ls Ge ky, 
BBN ale pyai sl 

tod Poy Loy Bell 56 yd Ley Glad gh JAI (4) 
OS AIL Sie Selb capes Ap cad li JI GLID. pT aby ing 
[VA2 ] Ahan S31 cell he all gil Lai yt 

BLL A pial SWE po ded 9 fo GLAM Gl: itl ley (0) 
oY, GSU NS JS 65 cab holes ya ill GL YS acs 
GAN SUE oT gan J alles GING All a So athe bt 
Gprvall + yey core juaouy candy 

AF AMAL GI Jt Sal aS po Sy ccqenlll pho cde WB (4) 
Mell spb Rade QIAE oo Bp te oem ye Sp Shi 
Slab aU elas 3b MS Bagi uy lath oN 
soll Js) ake MV 9S gi Lila Coy pal Lye Yd Nagi gi 
leas oS Ly b S59 SY gl Coe Lila Lal Yy SS hoi aL ss 245 


) 


\o 


15 


20 


25 


30 


222 Book Six, Chapter Five 


may or may not be, as has been made clear in the two examples. In the case 
of the first of the two, the end for both was one and the same; in the case of 
the second, it was different. 

(7) The motive power in the organs is necessarily a principle of 
motion; the appetitive power is also a primary principle of that motion. 
For it is not at all possible that there should be a psychic motion that does 
not proceed from desire. ['This is] because the thing toward which power 
is not [at first] impelled and then is psychologically impelled must neces- 
sarily have come to be after not having been, through psychological 
desire. Hence, the proximate principle of every psychological movement 
is a Motive power in the muscle of the organ, and the principle that comes 
after it is desire—desire, as you have learned in the Psychology, being nec- 
essarily consequent on some [act of] imagination or cogitation,® so that 
the most remote principle would be either imagination or cogitation. 

(8) Hence, there are here principles for psychological motion, some 
of which by necessity are necessary in their individual instances, while 
others not by necessity are not necessary in their individual instances. 
Those that by necessity are necessary are the motive powers in the organs 
and the appetitive power; those not by necessity are imagination and 
cogitation. For it is not inescapably necessary that there should be either 
imagination without cogitation or cogitation without imagination. For 
every principle of motion there is necessarily an end. The principle which 
must [exist] in voluntary motion must have an end, whereas the prin- 
ciple which is not necessary may have a motion devoid of its end. If it so 
happens that the most proximate principle—namely, the motive power— 
should correspond with the two succeeding principles (I mean the appeti- 
tive with the imaginative or the appetitive with the cogitative), then the 
termination of the motion would be the end of all the principles, this 
necessarily being other than a trivial [end]. 

(9) If it so happens that [these] should differ—I mean, that that 
which is the essential end for the motive power is not the essential end for 
the appetitive—then it would follow necessarily that the appetitive power 
will have another end beyond the end in the motive power that is in the 
organ. This is because we have made it clear that voluntary motion is not 





elads| S olgyl vey 


Ly Sircly Ligd tal 256G Lge JN Ll ON 3 all gs 6 LS KI 
Ais IS 

Lal ABI belly alee VS > Lae Lal o US bl adly (v) 
(ANN C94 VOLES > 5K) Kee. Shia ylle 
low Y glad Sot 9S ULE DSI Mead Paydl l eas Y gall 
Jae BB 8 OM Uh ULE Se F598. Ki baw Sue 05 
CE = a WS phe Ble WS — Sty Syd a ill Lnguey « Lael 
AS shoe ae Ld 3K ee Y hyo 

[YAN] «i yypo Wel Rely ler ASLAetl OW Goultgsle bya gil (A) 
Las SA oll pe thay Lally ving lel Lely pe uy 
SK gl Mle Yom a 6b. Sly SI go hall py AS yt gly 
AY ga LA le VRE Se be Sys Y, 9) SY, os 
Ae SL Do wb oy cee SAL, «ge oy VA a LLL i ae 
SIA Steady — SB al yay — GW Ll gles gi gal gb - 
AUN ASB cI — ASA po At gl LS ae Att sol — ae 
low Yee 5 Ab OS WS galt 

NES Ala SIA A wo LO SY GI gel ate gl gil gl (4) 
PMA de 65) 3g AHh OS lisp Cony AS ptt agi 
S22 GS Vas Li gl tao hos WY dsy | ah 1 a 


\o 


aa 


10 


15) 


20 


25 


30 


223 Book Six, Chapter Five 


without desire, and everything that is a desire is a desire for something. 
If [this desire] is not for [that which] is at the termination of the motion, 
then it is necessarily for something other than it. If [the latter] is that 
for the sake of which the motion is wanted, then it must exist after the 
termination of the motion. 

(10) Every end with which motion terminates, or which is attained 
after the termination of motion, where both the imaginative and cogita- 
tive desire have agreed, is clearly a voluntary end and is not at all triviality. 
[On the other hand,] every end with which motion terminates and which 
is the very desired imagined end, but where the desire is not in accordance 
with cogitation, is the one termed triviality. 

(11) Moreover, [in the case of] every end which is not the termina- 
tion of motion and whose principle is an imaginative—not cogitative— 
desire, it follows either that the imagination alone is the principle of the 
motion of desire; [or that the principle] is [the act of] imagining together 
with a nature or temperament (as in the case of breathing, or the motion 
of one who is ill); or that it is imagination together with a moral disposi- 
tion and a psychological positive disposition that motivates that act, [but] 
without deliberation. 

(12) If imagining alone is the principle for the desire, then the act is 
termed “haphazard” and is not termed “trivial.”® If it is an imagining in 
conjunction with a nature, like breathing, the act is termed “a necessary” 
or “natural intent.” If it is an imagining together with a moral disposition 
and a psychological positive disposition, then that act is termed “habit,” 
because moral disposition is established through the [repeated] use of 
acts. Hence, what comes about after moral disposition is necessarily habit. 

(13) If the end [that] belongs to the motive-power [and] which is the 
termination of the motion exists, [and if] the other end that succeeds it 
[and] toward which the desire that is the ultimate desire moves does not 
exist, then this act is termed “vain.” This is exemplified [by the person] 
who arrives at the place where he reckons he will chance to meet the 
friend but does not meet him there. His act is termed “vain” in relation 
to the appetitive power but not the motive power, and in relation to the 
first end but not the second. 

(14) Since these premises have been established, we say: 





elets| S olgyl vr 


Yok AN ASSL GK by at byt PLS 
$e Wel we Gl Coed BL ae lye ttl ls gh bly Lee 

Sst Sy DIAG se rat gh USGL Ug es aE IS OV) 
ihe Bs KN com cody LA Yl ge «gle Valls Be Xily Lt 
aoe BAN SY, ASN B27 AW ew Gs 9S, SAI Wh es 

eal ath lo ah as 

1 JEW 5S 1b JS Gytt hay SL lal pc dale SG (9) 
Pcie Mabe LeMay] SUS LL meg Lt Soll 
“gy Sodh NS JAS Io RL lay Ge ae LT gl cal — 

pro ply « Ble Jail ats ae Spt LL easy LOT GEG 

whale BV agp Lad Jail 3 ge ewe 
wi UL gd SM cake Jal tb fa SL ley GLE Bs Sl 
lee Viale 9S gb ow 9K Led SLA Jaca 

ial 25 ly imy SHAY oy Sl aa HAW Ib, (\¥) 
Mel, Jail US gaoncd Dott BE say Syl PE Lagoeag] Leow 3g 
Wel dled 3 Sn adslonaly poral sland 535 31h GU Ber oS 
AOU Sys SM ALA I oLhy B15 Bl yy Byes BI La 

: J std Olea decoy Wily (16) 





pbs coclypey. pay! 


\o 


























20 


30 


224 Book Six, Chapter Five 


(15) The statement of one who says that triviality is an act with no 
purpose at all is a false assertion. Again, the statement of one [saying] 
that triviality is utterly devoid of an end that is either a good or thought 
to be a good is [also] a false statement. As for the first [statement, it is 
false because] the act is purposeless only if it did not have a purpose in 
relation to that which is the principle of its motion, not in relation to what 
is not the principle of its motion and to whatever happens to be. [As for] 
what had been given as an example in the doubt [raised about this point— 
namely, fiddling with the beard—the proximate principle of its motioa 
is the power in the muscle, [the thing] preceding it being an imaginath e 
desire without cogitation. Its principle is not [any] cogitation at a’. 
Hence, there is no cogitative end in it. There has occurred in it [however] 
the end belonging to the imaginative desire and the motive power. It is 
thus evident that this act, in terms of its motive principle, terminates in 
a purposeful end; and that only in terms of that which is not its motive 
principle does it not move toward an end. 

(16) Nor must it be thought that this does not proceed from a desire 
of the imagination. For [with] every psychological act that comes to be 
after not having been, there is necessarily some desire and psychological 
quest—this together with some imagining. Such an imagining, however, 
may either be unstable, quick to cease, or else stable but not noticed. For 
not every one who imagines something is aware in addition [of his act of 
imagination] and judges that he has imagined. This is because imagining 
is other than the awareness of one’s having imagined. This is obvious. If 
every imagining were to be followed by the awareness of the imagining, 
then this matter would recede ad infinitum. 

(17) As for the second [statement,’ it is false] because the issuance 
of this desire necessarily has some cause: either habit, boredom with one 
state of affairs and a wish to transfer to another state of affairs, or an 
insistence on the part of the motive and sensitive powers that an act of 
motion or [an act] of sensation is renewed for it. Habit is pleasurable; 
moving away from what is boring is pleasurable; and the endeavor to do 
a new act is pleasurable—I mean, with respect to the animal and imagi- 
native powers. Pleasure, in reality, is the sensitive, imaginative, and animal 
good; [but] in terms of the human good [it] is [mistakenly] believed to be 








lath je oL¥y v¥4 


SIIB, TUS yo Ale Fy Jd Saall ol Soe y SS (10) 


WI EIS go led ylae gl ot CUA pb je Jed Call gl Lal 


YAS dae oe Sd rbdb Aled St BLAU 4 9% LY Jal gb JN 
call Aa ay So ley «gil eh dl ly AS > Lae ad boll 
Gold [VAN] AS silly call 4d Magill poy all So Ld all 
‘Wadham by AGE Ad lb CS uly. Soy Ls 
heer cB hae Ganoy fail lao Sl ed AA aydlly LS Sth 
AB das ad Lb re He I Aya VLalally caglé 

Ged Jo FOB As B54 3oY jae ie gl la glow y (19) 
che LoS ae Udy «lat ley cade Y Spt Dep Sol be we 
tig Sy GE STi cgaledl ae call pe Ly Lot obs oly 
PSI eliy £J55 abl Ky all pate LE LS ye pl ve 
Al Jol sand ans LS SOS sly. pall Ung Ss bal pt 
sighgll pb yl 

wre bly cole UY bide Syl be SLY ode Gti Ul, (vv) 
ON He Bly SBI esd jo Gem Lily egal Xe Bl JU sl ly a Ge 
SE erty dil Isla 56 JEM, cadadldobdly rLody he Jo lp sae 
Ah EN pill, ALS, GL aglow sol CSS veal al 
OBB. SLIM Sh ow It dial ng aby dl Lea, 


\o 





10 


20 


30 


3S 


225 Book Six, Chapter Five 


the good. Thus, if [the originating] principle is an animal imaginative 
[act], then its good would necessarily be an animal imaginative good, 
Therefore, this act is not devoid of good in terms of [the above], even 
though it is not a real good according to reason. Beyond this, there are 
particular causes that are not precisely ascertained® for making specific 
[the realization of] one state of motion rather than another state. 

(18) As for the doubt that follows this,? it is resolved by our knowing 
the difference between the essential end and the necessary, which is one 
of the ends that are accidental. The difference between them is that the 
essential end is that which is sought after for its own sake, whereas tke 
necessary is one of three things: [it is] either [(a)] something whose exis- 
tence is indispensable for the existence of the end, in that it is in some 
respect a cause of the end—as, for example, [that] the hardness of iron 
[that is needed for] cutting, [which] is accomplished by it; [or (b)] some- 
thing whose existence is indispensable for the existence of the end, not 
in that it is a cause for the end but in that it is something that is a nec- 
essary concomitant of the cause—for example, it is necessary that there 
exist a blackish body so that cutting is achieved by it, [where] the blackish 
body is indispensable not because of its being blackish, but because it is 
a necessary concomitant of the iron which is indispensable [for cutting]; 
or [(c)] something whose existence is indispensable as a necessary con- 
comitant of the final cause itself—for instance, the final cause of mar- 
riage, for example, is procreation, [and] procreation is followed by the love 
of the child and is a concomitant of it, because marriage was for its sake. 

(19) All these, then, are ends in terms of the accident that is neces- 
sary, not the accident that is by coincidence. You have already known in 
another place the accidental ends that are coincidental.!° 

(20) Know that the existence of the principles of evil belong to the 
second part of these divisions. Thus, for example, it is necessary within 
divine providence (which is munificence) that every possible existent 
should be given the good existence [proper to it]; and, [since] the exis- 
tence of composites derives from the elements (it being impossible for the 
composites not to be formed from the elements); and [since] the elements 
belonging to the composites cannot be other than earth, water, fire, and 
air; and [since] it is impossible for fire to exist in the manner that leads 
to the good end for which it is intended unless it burns and disintegrates 





oles Ba oll vy0 


Jp 1s 38] pa Ug USS Lo ee Vane 3S Lye ahs La 
Jee Hay Jill aoe ol he 1S SS aly omen op Ue 
be Vie OU y Lag de ei 

is CDG Ala oy Gil ya Gly GAS ad gol Las LI, (a) 
ial Lo OL AL GI Lage Sy op bla sel yo gill gpg 
099 AY UL EYAN] raphy sol gpa ly clglid Cll 
Vl Uy fa dal oa co abl phe fe caer All de cl fe abal ung 
So ill 63 pial ge J cds the al Je Vall seg Zo oogey op os 
YS pom Sued lily ca lal Oy o> $5 me Sl yw Val 
Ey een ae Maly Saco a Y odd rol LY gS PERN 
Mom dace adel oad Ie cag lb SLL abl gh oe Fe a 
Ae gf Call GY cathy 

UL cake By. SEV YD cory pall call OLE Wd (8) 
— i yl 

8 2 SOU el jo gt checdall bt pole yey label (1 

SF Seoi - ofl el - SAI Ob Coe gM Uo a if 
ICIS «pelea + AS yall Sill ope dl GS pb ad gong 25> 3l 
Jl Wl ANIM Y polull gS - SI SEY SS poled y WIS gS 
We ao nail SIA Magli ALi ke 5S gl GY GS By celgdly 


\o 





10 


20 


25 


30 


226 Book Six, Chapter Five 


[things], it follows necessarily from this that [fire] is such that it would 
harm good people and corrupt many composites. 

(21) It seems, however, that we have digressed from our [original] aim. 

Let us, then, return to it and answer the doubt that was raised. We say: 

(22) As regards the individual members of the infinite generated 
beings, they are not essential ends in nature. But essential ends obtain, 
for example, when there exists the substance which is man, horse, or 
palm,'! and where this existence is an existence that is continuous and 
constant. This is impossible in [the case of] the single individual to whick 
one points, because every generated being is necessarily corruptible—I 
mean, the generated beings of corporeal hyle. Since this is impossibl-: 
with the individual, it is retained in the species. Hence, the primary aim 
is the permanence of the human nature, for example, or some other 
[nature]; or [of] a nonspecified individual that is diffused [in the species, 
this] being the final cause for the action of the universal nature.!? This 
[individual] is one. But for this [nonspecified] one ever to continue to come 
to be, there should exist individuals succeeding individuals ad infinitum. 
Thus, the numerical infinity of successive individuals would constitute a 
purpose according to the meaning of necessity in the first division [above, 
and] not in that it is an end in itself. For, if it were possible for man to 
remain permanently, as [do] the sun and the moon, then there would be 
no need for generation and multiplying through procreation. 

(23) However, even though we have admitted that the purpose is the 
infinity of individuals, the meaning of “the infinity of individuals” Is 
other than the meaning of “every individual.” What proceeds infinitely is 
one individual after [another] individual, not one infinity after [another] 
infinity. Therefore, the end in reality exits-here—namely, the existence 
of the individual diffused [in the species], or the infinity of individuals. 
Moreover, the individual which leads to another individual, [and] to a 
third, [and] to a fourth, is not in its individual self!’ an end for the uni- 
versal nature, but for the particular nature. Since this [leading of the one 
individual to another] is an end for the particular nature, then thereafter 
there is no other objective and end for that particular nature for which 
[the former] is its end. By “particular nature,” I mean the power whose 





ele ec 
ole sa 


. 


[pS eats itlall pi tome IK Gl iy po alld CP Byte Boe WS | 
ASL 5 
ised ay ChEll ie Coely call ae lead se bas us US (19) 
PDN] Ne tab all al bs ol Ul Cry) 
sl ipeals! SLAY! 5 5a ed nay gh oe 2 GIStI Oba Sy hall 
solgl amt ob Le ba gS . Lu Ul tageny ope aa aS aly cabs 
Feel Dal or SEE g5ly sledge aah GSE cl La 
Mee ASLO dadadl ote PRIN 2 ab. CP Al aml 8 Uy 


29 AS Rall Jalal aa gay cee bee ast clays gl 


Me yell an ALAS SLY LBL pee 5 oY aol a SS. vols 
Y. cS pal je corp yell gall be | Los oad LAY als VS ay 
peily rath J IS sla SLIM da ol SCUy aA Sande Ego 8 al le 
Jed SH, Ad lgel 
A als Vy, ctl als Ye all gl lala oly al le (1) 
MEY oe VY ate ad NG aly Uy att Beeb 
A SALE Y gh pte asad ogey ay charge liga ALL Aba gab 
SADA nom 9 ed ely SLE SL AT pate I soy ill atl 
Ey LS)b Lane aye bas A dala ale 2 56 dai ab 4S 
eK aalasdiaty col, pyayy WAL 2 SN Add tl Gls 








we ee 


\o 














10 


15 


20 


30 


227 Book Six, Chapter Five 


governance is specifically confined to one individual; and, by “universal 
nature,” I mean the power that emanates from the substances of the 
celestial entities as one thing, it being the one that governs the totality 
of what is in the world.* You will know all this hereafter. 

(24) As for the motion which proceeds infinitely, it is one in continuity, 
as you have known from the Physics. Also, the aim of this motion is not 
motion itself inasmuch as it is this motion. Rather, the aim here is the 
perpetuity which we will be describing afterwards. This perpetuity is one 
meaning, except that it is existentially connected with things that are, 
let us admit, numerically infinite. 

(25) Regarding the discourse about premises and conclusions, it 
should be known that what is intended by our statement that the final 
cause is finite and comes to a stop is that it is the final cause according to 
one agent and one act that is finite; and that it is not possible that either 
a natural or a voluntary agent should perform an act, intending by this 
same [act] one end after another without halting at a limit. As for the 
one principle, if one act after another proceeds from it and it becomes 
with every act an agent other than [what] it is for the other [act] (even 
though [this principle] is not another in essence and subject), it is possible 
for its ends to multiply and to have, according to every [new instance] of 
its being an agent, another end. And, if one allows considering its being 
an agent [for one end] after being an agent [for another end to proceed] 
ad infinitum, then its ends would be infinite. 

(26) [To continue,] the conclusion is a final, completing cause for the 
syllogism that is designed for some limited thing that is being sought after. 
Every composing of a syllogism is an act that begins anew. With respect 
to every syllogism, the soul would have a continual act that begins anew 
[and] that renders [the act]'® deserving to be called one that has a [new] 
resumed agent. For each time that it is an agent there is one definite, 
specific end which cannot proceed ad infinitum, since for every syllogism 


there is necessarily one conclusion. 





+ leds] prowl vy 


Slygleell pale ye [Ratti] 5B A dll oly ely jad atl 
NB sy Yoda bi ily 5 SIN 9 LAK Spall ay voy + gS 
Goce IS Sai iraly Yb alg FN ala SLi ul, (v4) 
Bp eie ple Sh aid go ISL ae} Seal gb Lal, colada 
27-31 Smeal MY soy sae ply Udy «oy Aid Sl py as Gayl 0 
ANG sot eae Gl lad elt 
idl 3} Wyte 31M Gly gl ond cdegclly lesall tase ul, (v0) 
Vy «PbS ool, jedy oly Jeb mom SU Asta aba gl ay pale Ala 
Nb pM ae BE oa poe Med Jabs CLS gl ack Job Sol je 
Soe rey fed oe bas pre ODL et Lil, aly neh. 
Geely SIL Sid ly FM all oe GO gill Jolll 2 hel lb 
Seely SHTA eb an SS mend Ky Sb KS ol pyeed cae 
ANG ph SUE OE Alp FMD KS ae Neb ASA oa Gl 
Fo spdee clan Je GK sill PLA EAL the atin! (v3) 
Slane ay ae WHS Se lly Me LSI 
Jae Y ecm dayne le LES Oly y oly Ky len Joba J 
IVAN] le Yisly den oly ld I 3 Ml ne aa 9S gl 





Azildl . ia, \al * 





on 


10 


20 


30 


998 Book Six, Chapter Five 


(27) As for the doubt that follows this one,'® it is resolved once it is 
known that the teleological end is posited as a thing and is [also] posited 
as an existent. There is a difference between a thing and an existent (even 
though a thing can only be an existent) that is similar to the difference 
between something and its necessary concomitant. You have already known 
and ascertained this.!7 Resume, then, reflecting on this as regards the 
human. For there belongs to the human a reality which is his definition 
and quiddity without the condition of [its having] particular or general 
existence (whether in outer reality or the soul), nothing of this being 
either in potency or in act. 

(28) [Now,] every cause inasmuch as it is that [particular] cause hes 
a reality and a “thingness.” Thus, the final cause in its “thingness” is a 
cause for the rest of the causes to exist in actuality as causes while, in its 
existence, the final cause is caused by the existence of the other causes 
as causes in actuality.!8 It is as though the “thingness” with respect to 
the final cause is the cause of the cause of its existence, and its existence 
is the effect of the effect of its “thingness.” Its “thingness,” however, 1s not 
a cause unless it is realized as a concept in the soul or whatever plays a 
[similar] role. There is no cause for the final cause in terms of its “thing- 
ness” except another cause that is other than the one that moves [some- 
thing] toward it or that is moved toward it. 

(29) Know that a thing is caused in its “thingness” and is caused in 
its existence. That which is caused in its “thingness” is like “twoness.” For, 
within the definition of its being “twoness,” it is caused by unity. That 
which is caused in its existence is clear and obvious. Similarly, there may 
belong to the thing a realized state of affairs existing in its “thingness,” 
for example, as being numerical belongs to “+woness.” The state of affairs, 
however, may be additional for a reason additional to its “thingness,” as 
in the case of squareness in wood or stone. Natural bodies are the cause 
of the “thingness” of many forms and accidents—I mean, those that are 
only renewed by them—and the cause of the existence of some without 
their “thingness,” as it is supposed that the state of affairs governing 
mathematics is of this sort. 

(30) It has thus become easy for you to understand that the final 
cause in terms of “thingness” is prior to the efficient and receptive causes; 
and, similarly, that it is prior to form inasmuch as form is a formal cause 








etl » ol¥yl YYA 


Pytiy CE epi RB Gl play Gl: Joab ach gill LAs LL, (1) 
5p BS clog ye WKY + tlh gO oly «oe ally “coll op Bids Sosy 
Hk QL iI glad ye abet ilLiold aks Lhe cade ody aes ’ly pill 
idly etd Bgl LEW Bole gl ols apn byt ob ye Gaby me oe 
Jad gh alld yo et 

Pw Md ALB, tide Yall OIE oem yy bale § (14) 
Lagey PEL dally Mle all dog ye ll fle 9 SS GY LAY 
cLaayony le Ale ASL al ye ALAS GS. al We Mall flor oye) de 
Birra bad) bale gS VLE STA Ue dle bogey 5G 
Wall nF gyerl he Vato ASL dll the Vy. Lalene Cgyem Le gl tl 
Waal Was a 

waagery gb jbes 3 Kay KES Bo Wyle OSG t ec stll gl abel, (14) 
PSsally tom gh Dae Gel YS om 9 YR MW CLS Igeld 
Fed Dopey pole pl AW GS 8 US da wih are, 
usta Peck he atl pW lath pL gS ody [180] it ay al 
YA eh eles snl ye SAL He Reb Lolly dl std 
MS hab 9 SL gl fa, ELS ys paw oe ley ly YY oes 

AN lel al 3 AB ASU dal pa Sha Joe a (xe) 
Asta Lal DUIS, «pl aye gro Ae by pall Lye pe By pall JS LISS 


\o 


























10 


20 


30 


229 Book Six, Chapter Five 


leading to it. Likewise, the final cause in its existence in the soul is prior to 
the other causes. As for its being in the soul of the agent, [this is the case] 
because it exists [there] first, [and] then—[along] with [the agent|— 
agency, the demand for a recipient, and the quality of the form are 
[thereafter] conceived. As for its being in the soul of something other 
than the agent, there is no necessary dependence in terms of the order of 
one [cause] on another. Thus, in considering “thingness” and considering 
existence in the mind, there is no cause that is prior to the teleological, 
Rather, it is a cause for the coming to be of the other causes as causes, 
But the existence of the other causes as causes in actuality is a cause for its 
existence. The teleological cause is not a cause in that it exists, but in that 
it is a thing. Thus, from the point of view that it is a cause, it is the cause 
of causes; from the other point of view, it is the effect of the [other] causes. 

(31) This [is the case] if the final cause belongs to [the realm of] 
generated being.'? If it is not within (the realm of] generated being, 
but its existence is higher than [the realm of] generated being—as will 
become clear to your in its proper place—then nothing belonging to the 
other causes will be a cause of it, and [nothing] in the One who is real- 
ization and existence. The final cause [in the realm of generated being] 
would not be caused by the other causes, not because it is a final cause, 
but because it has being.”° If it were without being, it would [still] not be 
caused at all.?! If, on the other hand, you consider its being a final cause, 
you will find that it is a cause of the rest of the causes to be causes—for 
example, to be an efficient cause, a receptive cause, and a final cause— 
[but] not [a cause] for their having being and existence in themselves. 
Therefore, what belongs essentially to the final cause inasmuch as it is 
a final cause is that it is the cause of the rest of the causes. But it will 
happen to it accidentally, inasmuch as its meaning occurs in [the realm] 
of generated being, that it is caused with respect to generated being.” 

(32) It has thus [now] become clear to you how a thing [can be] both 
cause and effect in that it is agent and end. This is one of the principles 
of the natural philosophers. 

(33) As regards the investigation that follows this,?> it becomes clear 
from what we say that the end that occurs in the act of the agent divides 
into two parts: [(a)] an end that is a form or an accident in a patient, 





ress ye OLY ¥¥4 


arch yl arg WS fetal i BUN. gs) Jl 1s ell 3 Liagey 
Weta! ald Jeli Fail BU, ay yall LAS « jldl ley Alot awe 
caer Stall Dope Sl ely LA jel 530 csr eM le Cs 
PM Sal ayy Ky Cole lh gL Board Ale 8 Jy ASU y pal tle 
gl dedi aes Vil fe dle All dal uty Logg ale colle Jaa 
Jal Hise go eSW ALL, «Jia alee cle go WALLS eo 

cd Al A STS] Uy cg SUI ASL abl IB | ee (9) 
PA IEW oy Been bk OSI 5 Jel ley Sy 5S 
ALI Ald $31 GS. ope gly Jpabl go gill ols Yy Wile ce s5I Jha 
ed I yy gS ol WS, ai de AY Y Jal flu ages cad 
Jal fll dle eel asl de YS el Ly th wee ITU 
IS 5 BY cay po ley ALB they Leb ile 9% gi LL ole 95S gh 
Sh eAsle ale oo Atal dla OlatL gill gS \peaitl bag yay [VAL] 256 
IK II SSID Wl, 9K be shige op YW eyay fell pL ale 4% 
OS ae ye Vike 

by Jeb al Je Myleny te 22 9S GS al ob ys od (vv) 
«Opera egal ye any 

BS pet WAG] aa Lg GAS Nie ae al Leal Ly (0) 


AME y «Jad JB Jared Love gli no SALE: (tnd end Jolal ba 


\o 





QO 


10 


20 


25 


30 


2350 Book Six, Chapter Five 


receptive of the action; [and (b)] an end that is not at all a form or an 
accident in a patient, receptive [of the action], and is thus inescapably in 
the agent. [This is the case] because, if it is in neither the agent nor the 
patient, and [if] it is impossible for what comes to exist in itself as a sub- 
stance to originate either from matter or in matter, then [the end] would 
have no existence at all. 

(34) An example of the first is the form of humanity in human 
matter. For [this form] is an end for the power enacting formation in 
the human matter, and [it is] toward it that its action and its moving 
[another] are directed. 

(35) An example of the second is the quest for shelter. For [th.s 
quest] is an end for the person endeavoring to build a house, [and it] is 
the principle of motion for its coming to be, and [it] is not at all a form 
in the house. 

(36) It seems as though the end of the proximate, contiguous principle 
for moving matter is a form in matter, and that [whatever thing] whose 
end is not a form in matter is, in being so, not a proximate cause of 
motion. If it so happens that [both] that whose end is a form in the matter 
being dealt with and that whose end is a meaning that is not a form in 
that matter are one [and the same] thing, then [this] unity would be 
accidental. An example of this would be for a human being to build a house 
in order to have shelter therein. For, in respect to his seeking shelter, he 
calls for [its] construction and is a first cause for [its] building. And with 
respect to his being a builder, he is the effect of his being a seeker of a 
shelter. Hence, the end for his quest for a shelter is other than the end for 
his act of building. If this is the case, then within the one human seeking 
a shelter and building [it], there would also Be his end inasmuch as he is a 
seeker, being other than his end inasmuch as he is a builder. 

(37) Now that this has been established, we say: As for the first divi- 
sion,”* the end has a relation to many things that precede it in realization 
in actuality and existence. [This is] because it has a relation to the agent, 
a relation to the recipient when [the latter] is in potency, a relation to 
the recipient when [the latter] is a recipient in actuality, and a relation 
to motion. Thus, with respect to the agent it is a [teleological] end, and 
with respect to motion it is termination but not a [teleological] end. [This 
is] because the thing does not cease to exist with [the realization of] the 
end for the sake of which the thing is and toward which the thing leads. 
Rather, the thing fulfills itself by it, whereas motion ceases with its 
termination. [The end] with respect to the recipient through which [the 





elads| Sa oly ‘han 


PSL le Y Jeli 9 35 il 6 Jae Loe Yy byy0 SY 
7 Vode Nae ants est OK ere ply cael By Jolt 3 
al 299 WGK W idle BY, dole 

delat a ALS Yb AsLaM soll BLM ayo IAI JS (40) 
WyFs Yad aes Wily Ghidlaols 3 ype’ 

KSB Me ga silo eda ab GL Sty (Yo) 
Sed Pipe EN yp uly 

BUN 98) yo lll hod Zortll Gaal Jol Ake gS gla, (19) 
PF IPMS po Le Syoll LF hae pad ll Dipped La Kgl 
Cask Bie ya gar ile Lyall alll $5) p08 boSgl 
Ab Fad Cor se LAM LVN] SKGl fe Saydlh GS ay gc bael 
Use rls se ledge yy chal Jolie, Ll lpi SII liye pal 
KIA ly gh w VAL eK watt g Sa Ke wl 
Ob PEE nb Kae pe Ale SU Sal soi ghQLI 3 Lal 

PES yl Nib BIS dl BU Jes the yi 8 ay (1) 
Lots] Qltl Seats cJettl NA YY Sosy ul Jnebl 9 Qs 
Mle ob SA Maady i Jal Loag] hdl SL, aga 
Neg SEN Ne SM atl oN cdg dy Ng SLI ey AE et 
NA ee Sas ay «SU We JS ye pth ngs po lng Yet 





do oe ty gay doc gay sty 


\o 





15 


20 


25 


30 


231 Book Six, Chapter Five 


thing] is fulfilled, when [the recipient] is in potency, is a good that rectifies 
[the thing], because evil is the nonexistence of its perfection. The good that 
is the opposite of [this evil] is existence and realization in actuality. With 
respect to the recipient when [the latter] is in act, [the end] is a form. 

(38) As for the end according to the second division,”? it is evident 
that it is not a form for the matter being acted upon, nor is it the termi- 
nation of movement. It has become evident that it would be either a form 
or an accident in the agent and that the agent has inevitably changed it 
from that which is in potency to that which is in act. That which is in 
potency is for the sake of nonexistence with which evil associates, wherca ; 
that which is in act is the good that is opposite it. Hence, the end woul 
be a good in relation to the agent’s essence, not the recipient’s essence. Ii, 
then, it is attributed to the agent inasmuch as it is a principle of motion 
and enactor, it would be an end. And if it is attributed to him inasmuch 
as he moves from potency to act and is perfects, it would be a good, if 
that change from potency to act pertained to a meaning beneficial in 
existence or [for] the permanence of existence, and if the movement was 
either natural or [a] voluntary, rational [movement]. But, if [the end is] 
imaginary, it does not follow necessarily that it would be a true good, but 
it could be [only] an opined good. Therefore, considered in one way, 
every end is an end; and, considered in another, [every end] is a good 
[that is] either [only] believed [to be good] or [that is a good] in reality. 
This, then, is the state of affairs with the good and the final cause. 

(39) As for the state of liberality and the [beneficial] good, it should 
be known that a single thing has a relation to the recipient that is per- 
fected by [the thing], and a relation to the agent from which it proceeds. 
If its relation to the agent from which it proceeds is such that it does not 
necessitate that the agent is affected by it or by something that attaches 
to it, then its relation to the agent would be liberality [and its relation] to 
the patient [a beneficial] good. The primary subject of the expression 
“liberality,” or its equivalent in [various] languages, is the giver’s bestowal 
of a benefit on another from which [the former] derives no compensation 
in return; and [further] that, if he derives from it compensation in return, 
then he is said to be a trader, a receiver of recompense, and, in general, 
a [business] transactor. 

(40) Because gratitude, praise, a good name, and the rest of the states 
deemed good are not considered [as] recompense by the masses but [as] 
either substances or accidents that they place in subjects, it is believed that 
the person bestowing on another a benefit from which he gains gratitude 





rest yo oly ra 


WS poll 2 2 GY cao, no yay gaye, JSAM ll ol ella gay 
Bye adh sry JIB OM ltl Jal Syably opel go ali, ct ly 
cibdell 351) 5) yer Coe Mi eg BO al Bala Uy (rs) 
ViBey Jelil 8 oe shiny e 3S Vlok oy Say pi 0, 
poll JY ya ay cil Sadho Mask oll y Jotul le Ee ble 
Pal etal - alle, gall 31 ge adh cally «ai la coil 
Bool eat gh Ree oe Selah Sees 1B Epil ols GY fetal ols J 
SALVA] Basal ge ba ele ge Ledge ye al) cel aly HE Ca Joly 
22ND Ob eS hel Sill ey dl OS GOS i IS, 
vb hes SEY, ie sl lL LIS cope gl eli gl 
Nb Pie SO KS Ue Ls 68 plain ey Sghoe 
ALS ably I Sle ye ge hae Lily pyle. Lal pe ol Loe, cle 
JSD Syd el Laghdaghind Diyadidle vi, (v4) 
AS jones Gil Jeldl J] auld GO lily ase pares all Joli cal lds ca 
by hae: Jet) Sled gan ty say hate Jolly Sigh cory Vetaoy 
Vaated) wallssbloWl a 3M Yop ye \peliep ss ey a blalaily 1.2 ad 
- debe alll, ale gl ale a J Vo Mgr eles NBL aly May Ngee ay 
Jet) 2 dai Vinrocall SoM flay coally elttly SUG, (6+) 


tf All SI ay lego 3 Vian Bel Uy ple Ll fe cualyeill y 


\o 








a 


10 


20 


30 


40 


232 Book Six, Chapter live 


is also munificent [and] neither a trader nor a recipient of recompense, 
In reality [however] he is a recipient of compensation, because he both 
bestows benefit and receives benefit, regardless of whether the benefit he 
receives is monetary—being either of the same genre [as the benefit 
bestowed] or not of the same genre; or whether [the recompense] is grati- 
tude, praise in which he exults; or whether he benefited by becoming a 
virtuous and lauded person by having performed what is most worthy 
and proper ([a thing] which, had he not performed it, he would not have 
attained [from it] the good status in [terms of] his virtue). 

(41) The masses, however, do not count these meanings among con - 
pensations. They thus do not refrain from calling “munificent” whoeve - 
does a good to another in terms of these goods, believed or true, through 
which he acquires praise. Had they understood [the real] meaning of 
this, they would have not called him munificent. For, if a good deed is 
done to one of them for the sake of recompense, even if it is for something 
other than money, and [the recipient] becomes aware of this, he would 
belittle or disavow the gift and would refuse [to regard as] munificent the 
person who had done him the good, since the act [of the latter] was for 
an [ulterior] cause. 

(42) Thus, if the meaning of munificence is ascertained and realized, 
it becomes the bestowal upon another of a perfection in his substance or 
states without there being recompense for it in any manner whatsoever. 
Hence, every agent who enacts a deed for a purpose that leads to some- 
thing like recompense is not munificent; and every giver of a form or 
accident to the recipient and [who] had another objective [that would 
be] attained through the benefit he has bestowed is not munificent. 

(43) Indeed, we [further] say: A purpose ‘and [something] needed in 
what is intended befalls only [someone]”6 whose essence is deficient. This 
is because the purpose is cither in terms of himself in his essence, or in 
terms of the interests of his essence, or in terms of some other thing in his 
essence, or in terms of the interests [of this other thing], [or in terms of 
some other thing].?” It is known that, if it is in terms of his essence or some 
other matter relating to his interest—in general, in terms of something 
that, in some manner, reverts to himself—then his essence is deficient 
in its existence or in its perfections. If it is in terms of some other thing; 
then [it is either one of two alternatives]: 

(44) [The first alternative] is that the procession of that meaning 
from him onto another is such that its [proceeding] from him or its not 
[proceeding] from him are on a par, so that, even if the good (which is a 
good in terms of another) were not to proceed from him, his state would 





leddl oly vy 


tage Ll yay LoylerY, Lal cooly alon Lal pa 1 es Gp baile 
eee ey Uy bese s Wlic yp alPulv asl stan 
Erle yl be Jo gh clap tot jbo gl slid gh carci old gl AS 
Ahab DIU Jor Sept anal 3 il 

Peat OF ang 8 ele LB lll ode gga YD yyabl SF (69) 
8 My a) fame sl cab lB plall OLD ade pe ete oe ll Guo 
ad] goer! il pgs sds 3] alee egal all lag! Lpled by FYAV] «alge 
SASS Sl aly WS lel Gal ca lad UF Lb 8G) ved 
vied hed 53) lol ye a] 

SelB slope GS pallisbl gS ad) ow pany Gee 5b (<1) 
Go PAIS Jub, Job IG ape Sl yey eee Abb Kol ey 
rb pers slilb aly Lays gl5y yo ji ache Sy «ahem peed Wage at 
- alyee ucld ol dll coil 

OA BUSI + stl Y] abs Yo yall C8 ally yall gh rsd fe (41) 
34513 CBee Gn gh call bad ne SK ST Lf yall cM cll, 
See HT ee SO GLA aglnty eben 2 gh cal BST et Ce 
FSIS Shaye yh on tals cab en 9 Se gt Canoe shal lee 
5a WB ST eg ee SOG WLS Up gl Laagey bdadE ID ob 

SS ae OS toe ond Jae gall lb pyre GK gl Ll (44) 


Be CIS ob ae Fg Sill LI IB ase yovagl Jall go capes ace 


\o 





10 


20 


253 Book Six, Chapter Five 


in every respect be the same had that thing proceeded from him. That 
[act] would not render him better in goodness and virtue and [would not] 
procure for him more praise or some other special objectives in himself; 
nor would its opposite [inaction] render him less in goodness and virtue 
and not procure for him praise or some other traditionally recognized and 
useful objectives. [Thus,] even if he did not enact this [benefit], he would 
not have refrained from doing what is most worthy of him and what is best. 
There would be no motive for him [to do] this, and there would be no 
giver of preponderance for that beneficial good (rather than its counter- 
part)?* to proceed from him to another. [As for] the likes of this [beneficia’ 
good], if it is not something that proceeds from a nature or a will that is 
not by way of a response to a motive but [rather] is in a different manner 
(that will be shortly known), then it does not proceed for something or 
another due to one of the causes. 

(45) [This brings us to the second alternative—namely, that,]?® on 
the contrary, it is necessary that it is worthier of the agent which intends 
it in the above mentioned manner that he [should] emanate the beneficial 
good on another because [this act] is the most worthy of him [and] its 
opposite not the most worthy of him. This, in the last analysis, reduces to 
a purpose connected with his essence, returns to his essence, and reverts 
to his essence. At this point, the existence of that purpose and its non- 
existence would not be on the same level in relation to his essence [and to] 
the perfections of his essence and its interests. Rather, its [proceeding] 
from his essence would be the same as the objectives proper to his essence. 
This, then, reverts to his essence attaining by this a special perfection 
and allotment. 

(46) In a similar way, the question, “Why?” will continue to repeat 
itself until it reaches the point of reverting to the essence. The example 
of this is, if it is said to the doer, “Why did you do this?” and he answers, 
“So that so-and-so would attain a beneficial objective,” and if it is then 
said to him, “Why did you want it that so-and-so should attain [such an] 
objective?” and he answers, “Because doing good to others is good,” 
[and] the question does not stop. Rather, it would be said, “And why do 
you seek that which is good?” If, then, the answer is given that this is 
because of a good that comes to him or an evil that is warded off him, 
the question comes to an end. For the attainment of what is good for 
everything, and the removal of evil from it, is what is sought after for its 


own sake, absolutely. 





lett ye OLY vv" 


dels poly a pols Sb lls ce jue J dK ye Sy 
Lape gl iad 
PAPUA Jed J Say dabltly gl SIEM yp Lye glance all 
pbl ad we jae SV ey Vy Wd M4 Gels VG SS cay jury GNI 
ih ges pce oe yman Ct Sel 3l the Shey [YMA] *. [Able] Glos 
Myre G98 cade Bye Tay eb pls le Joo he a 
«Jal y dle oe orl ye 

vob Wo Kol Sul wal voll Jolal IS GK gl con dh (4) 
saree A Fl eng 8 IM bay cm Syl A fond le Ls 
0999 Ya Goyal Dd ay QSL day caild yl ee ny lb le apa aly 
FHI FAS IK pc lblany a5lb SVLS lS La oly Whe 
Lols any WS ally Sts sd Gh Jf opad ally 8s ALAM 

lat co Gal anal A Ss ty Y pl Sly gle WISy (49) 
Sty gh eal aly a} Sled: Loe (ob Je Jib SWS eed Jol 13 tala. 
po be My 2B Spell ad Gum ghey M idl Slog pe 


SEN by a fel 5 ode Yy cats J dell LEN 


dpa yl. Sell ly cae on yb gl all oye oy peewee 1315 S jeu 
illas alt Gogledd ga ace tll Mons & ret Sd 








Allee iy Les’ 


\o 





10 


15 


20 


30 


234 Book Six, Chapter Five 


(47) As for pity, compassion, and tenderness toward another, [as well 
as] joy in what is good for another, depression for one’s shortcomings [in 
helping others], and the like, these are objectives [that are] proper to the 
agent and motives for which the doer is [sometimes] blamed or through 
which the level of his perfection is lowered. 

(48) Liberality, then, is the bestowal of perfection on one who, in all 
respects, is in no need of a benefit. Thus, this meaning would be a good 
in relation to the recipient and, in relation to the agent, liberality. Every 
bestowal of perfection would be a good in relation to the recipient, regard- 
less of whether or not it 1s accompanied by recompense; but [it] would 
not be liberality in relation to the agent unless there is no recompense. 
This, then, is the explanation of the reality of the [beneficial] good and 
of liberality. 

(49) We have discussed the causes and their states. It [now] remains 
for us to complete what we have to say about them. We thus say: 

(50) Although they are thought to combine in many of the things 
found in the sciences, these four causes, in the case of the things that do 
not move and in mathematical matters, they are thought to be without 
an agent—that is, a principle of motion. They are also thought not to 
have an end, because end is thought to belong to motion. Nor also [are 
they thought] to have matter, but that it is only their forms that are 
investigated. For this reason, there have been those who belittle [immo- 
bile things and mathematics], saying, “They do not point to a teleologi- 
cal cause.” 

(51) Hence, theoretical reflection on these belongs to this [meta- 
physical] science, not in [the sense] that one science treats them as [it 
treats] contraries—for they are not contraries—but because one science, 
in the manner in which this science is one, explains their state of affairs. 
This is because, even if we admit*® that these causes do not combine in all 
sciences so as to become among the common things occurring in the sub- 
jects of the various sciences, they [nonetheless] are also found in separate 
and different sciences. Even if they were [all] in one science, it would not 
be within the power*! of the practitioner of that one science—as, for 
example, the natural philosopher, in whose art all these principles are 
present—to explain them;*? [this is] because they are the principles 
of natural science, and [the natural philosopher] discusses [only] what 


occurs to them. 





Celle all mew cy tly pall le Haig JIydtatsi Lily ( €V) 
MWS Ayan Lars Yeleuplyays Jools yal ol pall ey mally 

gal Ab GSS WSL je ONL eB pallial) o bb (44) 
BL Kb SILL SS clay Jota WI rlaly Las pal JI Lay 
SFY lage Jeti J LBL GY, eye Vl loge Belper clase lll 
ably Sia ll ple ee VOR 

£2 Jail (eb JSS Gl say Wllyely Stal Jo LSS 23, (44) 

a ce ESB eS Mel le Gl Soy GN Jl ds gl (0°) 
OF gles VOL ALy aecs EV] SLUR] yA GD cpaball 3 tage 
Yy Sait Yl ola tal VE 4S gl gla Lal Y, oS > Le ite is 
MBL SS aad ye by el US Ley geo Ge hoes Lp aol Wy Lal 
Anlidle be Jai Y 

cab mili LST NGL Lealy Like GY alll ig Gd ee (09) 
Vel, Laylety aely olil Liew gill anh bundy bbe VS, «ables 
PRIN EW yl 5 OS WS psell 2 cA Y atl ode g) Lake ly 
Lal iS’, Aalloee 43 iia a sled ro 23 Lal pe aloes» shall ole pia y 
Celie BSN eld ell alll obs ole 8 Kel voly dle B 
NE eye, a ay erdal ball cgolen WAY Sees cl « YS gall ade 





abl 


) 


\o 





10 


20 


30 


40 


235 Book Six, Chapter Five 


(52) The state of affairs, however, is other than this. For not every 
agent is a principle of motion, as has been said. Thus, mathematical things 
in their natures are necessitated in their existence through other things. 
Their natures do not separate from matter. And, even if they are stripped 
from matter in the estimative faculty, there would necessarily adhere to 
them, in the faculty of estimation, [characteristics] by way of division and 
configuration that are due to matter. It is almost the case that quantities 
are [instances] of matter close to [being] quantitative figures, [and] unities 
are also [instances of matter close] to [being] number, [and] number is 
[instances of matter close to] being the properties of number. Thesc, 
then, have an efficient principle and a receptive principle; and, wher : 
these two exist, there is a perfection. Perfection is the symmetry, the 
delimitation, and the order through which [mathematical entities] have 
the special properties that they have. They exist for the sake of being as they 
are in terms of symmetry, order, and delimitation. If one does not allow 
that this is perfection—that is, the end of motion—this is not preventive 
of its being good or of its being a cause because of [the very fact] that it 
is good. There also [in the realm of natural science] it was only a cause 
because it is a good; and then it so happened to that good to be a per- 
fection for a motion, since the path to it is through motion. 

(53) If it were not the case that the properties and concomitants 
which belong to these are ends to which the ways in which they are set 
lead, then the seeker would not seck [these properties and their conse- 
quences] in the materials [needed] for these ends. For the artisan moves 
matter so that it becomes circular, where the end is not circularity itself 
but, rather, is one of the properties and concomitants [of matter]; and, 
hence, the circle is sought for them. : 

(54) These causes have also come to share with other [causes]. The 
one engaged in this [metaphysical] science must, hence, also examine 
them. He must not merely examine what they have in common, but [he] 
must examine what specifically belongs to each science as such, yet being 
a principle for that science and an accident to what is in common. For 
this [metaphysical] science may consider the accidents that specify the 
particulars if these belong to their essence at first and have not as yet led 
[them] to become essential accidents for the subjects of the particular 
sciences. If these were isolated sciences, then the best of them would be 
teleology, and that would constitute wisdom, But now [that these sciences 
are not isolated sciences], this also constitutes the best part of this [meta- 
physical] science. I mean [by this best part] the science that examines 


the final causes of things. 





etsl oy» Oley v¥o 


AB BL Je So bee Job Fb I AM all ye (ov) 
Fer Oy Gall BLY [ploy «Lays Lea y Com Li] YL (3 LL 
Fo a WSL SE yoy Ll 5 wag yep ad wal ba! 
svally «soal) Lal Shoe sgly dyladll IRIN AS Ve yall 5% gl, 
Prpledly ple gS US my a rey heb Lae YY ae g edge ousll old 
NIN 2 Uy eld SSL YOK be GIA onecdly Stell 
SUE AGS ol ea Gb anedll JE, C5 yy ale a le de oS 
HY tle ST Lal dlery ps a tle 9 Sy | 5K gl eg So AL 
[Y s+]. Spread] putt gh 3] ab LE gS gl Solel gl oS 

SEU Als gl gold SUE ood I gett celabi gig) (or) 
Yy cpr GSS Gl soll you ial gL Soba ACD ot gLt gle, le 
«Up Bflall Ms «Myo gy else ye Hed bed SLAY ow Slal 9 SG 

sla a ole po Joy gl cond Ste Lal filo eye ab (06) 
pl SE Tae AS Le be at Ld a Jp Ladd A a 
CIT la] obeyed devesall U2 hyall 9 jay 8 al Ne Ob ALE aye, 
ABDI pall ole bg 515 Label 56 ol Uf) aw gall ot YI ia 
OM, ASHI pol 9% 96 All gle Yuadl 5h aoyer Lyle oda CTY, 
ASU ASL fll > GU alll ool alll ae ebyed ail Lal alls 


\o 




















20 





BOOK SEVEN 
Consisting of three chapters 





Chapter [One] 


On the appendages of unity by way of haecceity and 
its divisions; the appendages of multiplicity by way of otherness, 
difference, and the well-known kinds of opposition 


(1) It seems as though we have given full discussion, in terms of this 
purpose of ours, to [those] matters pertaining to haecceity inasmuch as 
it is haecceity or the things that append to it. Moreover, the one and the 
existent may be equivalent in being predicates of things, so that every- 
thing that is said to be an existent from one consideration is, from a cer- 
tain consideration, correctly said to be one. [Now,] everything has one 
existence. For this reason, it is perhaps thought that what is understood 
by both is one [and the same]. But this is not the case. Rather, the two 
are one in subject—that is, whatever is described by the one is described 
by the other. If it were the case that what is understood by one is in all 
respects the same as what is understood by the existent, then the multiple 
inasmuch as it is multiple would not exist, as it is not one—[this] even 
though the one also occurs to it accidentally, so that it is said of multi- 
plicity that it is one multiplicity, though not inasmuch as it is multiplicity. 


— 236 - 








Sony LSA Lal 


J2d a yd, 


[ Je¥l Joi] 
che? (1) 
feral oy BS Folds LIL, dagdl ye RES Gly 
dy yall li Strely Gol, 


aA Ble bs os pS LS BS SRL] (1) 
Shy wD oprglly sell od Slag e oo tm ye Rigg es CI 
aa Jue gl ees Weel D9 4s} Sle L Syl LAY de Jabs 
dels age axl gl ge Ley ablly oly ayery ad gt ykieh wel, 
O8 dy Ay Gey iy ee Ssh epg soy Ler cli ply 
ee Spl y SGU oe legit Sy dl gl oy pagal 
Sy brly 55 WG Sb Ned Lad seth a Gaye gS Sly «ely el IS” 
IS pom yy 


~v¥ 


oO 


10 


20 


30 


237 Book Seven, Chapter One 


(2) It behooves us, then, that we should discuss matters that specifi- 
cally pertain to unity and its opposites—which is multiplicity—such as 
haecceity, homogeneity, agreement, equality, similarity, and their oppo- 
sites. Indeed, the discourse about the side opposing [unity] is greater. For 
unity is similar [in its various aspects], whereas what is contrary to it is 
varied, changeable, and ramified. Thus, that which is haecceity [in the 
case of multiplicity] consists in the realization for multiplicity of an aspect 
of unity in another respect. This [latter] includes that which is accidental 
and is analogous to the accidentally one. For, just as [in the former case] it 
is said, “There is one,” here it is said, “[There is] that which is the same.”! 
That which is the same in quality is [the] similar, that which is the same 
in quantity is [the] equal, that which is the same in relation is called the 
corresponding. As for the thing which is [the same] in essence, it is present 
in the things that render the essence subsistent. Thus, what is the same in 
genus is called homogeneous; what is the same in species is called similar, 
and also that which is called similar in properties is called resembling. 
The opposites of these are known through the knowledge of these. 

(3) The opposite of the identical absolutely is “the other.” Of “the 
other,” there is “the other” in genus and that which is “the other” in 
species—which is the same as “the other” in differentia—and “the other” 
by accident. It is possible for “the other” to be accidentally one thing while 
being “an other” in itself in two respects. As for “the something else,” 
this is a special term in idiomatic usage for the numerically different. “The 
other” is distinct from “the different” in that “the different” differs in terms 
of something, whereas “the other” may be other in itself. “The different” 
is more specific than “the other”—and likewise “the something else.” 

(4) If, among the things that are “other” in terms of the highest genus, 
there are some that indwell in matter, their very otherness in terms of the 
highest genus does not necessitate that they should not be together in one 
matter. As for the things that are “other” that differ in terms of the 
species below the proximate genera ([that, in turn, are] below the highest 
[genera]), it is not possible for them at all to be together in one subject. 

(5) All things that do not combine in one subject and in one respect and 
at one time are called opposites. Your have known in the Logic their num- 
ber and properties. Among them, possession and privation are subsumed 





eleds| y oll me 


5S gl Gob liny He Nh ods Noll 3 Lal GS ol eed (1) 
SE SLL IS fe Wprh bing MpLtly slyly AI gly A skeally Sl fi 
ara gl ye tag cate ile pile lly by HpLite egl gh  STY 
[To] UN AB Be gy apd bulls eb ST ey yp tary any SU 
At 9 ASSIS 9h ge Oley ye ge Lge te ely ths Sle LSS. 
Udy ante SMe LEY 8 gp ye gS bey c glu 3@ Sl FP POS Ly 
cpilee JB pe So gOS clillegd MA bg Ka cil gil 
Flee dM ol Di Bye FL Lely SU Best 3 oe wad ly 
Log, Ryall ye by yas ode Cd liny 

Poe Ary cdl DS dee Sally 5 DULY le ye dll ley (17) 
CH elk A Sol semey eyh ob ceny call ll ae aay cpl 
Alea aed 9 gels mal SUL, gery ye ened pb pty Lely 
NL yh 8 ally ty Be ELI gh ILL Syke pally. sadly 
PM BIS pill Ge yal lel, 

Lali aisd «ah gll Jou Le IU} de Lb syle LAM, (6) 
PV SS Molle Uy aro, Sale bacon Yleey Wel hl 
ely pay Dect SEI ford MeV yo Maal pba Cd 

aly Sh) BREN Re Holy pee BAZ Y SLAW (0) 
Wes pally cily . Lele, larae gle a cule By OWE au Yb 


\o 








QO 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


238 Book Seven, Chapter One 


in one respect under “contradiction,” whereas contraries in [one] respect 
are subsumed under privation and possession. The mode in which priva- 
tion is included under the negative proposition is other than the mode of 
inclusion of the contrary under privation. 

(6) But you must know that privation is spoken of in different ways. 
It is thus said of that whose prerogative? is that it [duly] belong to some 
existent but [which] does not belong to [some particular existent] because 
it is not the prerogative [of the latter]* that [the former] should belong 
to it, even though [the] prerogative of [the former] is to exist for some 
thing [or another]. An example of this is sight. For its state of affairs [is 
such] that it [duly] belongs to some thing. But it is not a prerogative o. 
the wall that sight should belong to it. 

(7) [“Privation”] is said of that whose state of affairs [is such that] it 
belongs to the genus of a thing but not to the thing; and [it is said] of that 
which does not have a genus, either proximate or remote. And it is said 
of that whose state of affairs [is such that] it belongs to the species of the 
thing but whose state of affairs [is also] not [such as] to belong to its indi- 
vidual instance—as, for example, being female. It is [also] said of that 
whose prerogative is to belong to a thing but [which] does not belong to 
[the thing] absolutely, or does not belong to it at its proper time, or 
because [either] its time has not arrived yet (such as balding), or its time 
has passed (as with being toothless). The first mode corresponds to the 
negative statement very closely, but the other modes differ from it. 

(8) “Privation” is said of all [instances of | loss through compulsion. 
And privation is said of that which is lost but not completely. For the one- 
eyed person is not called blind, nor is he also absolutely one who has 
sight. This, however, is [partial privation] relative to the remote subject— 
that is, the human, not the eye. 

(9) Moreover, negation is predicated of privation, but [this] is not 
reversed. As for privation, it is not predicated of the contrary; for bitter- 
ness is not the privation of sweetness but is another thing in conjunction 
with the privation of sweetness. For privation alone may be in matter and 
it may be accompanying an entity that necessitates in matter the priva- 
tion of another entity, or [an entity] that exists only with privation. 








rlacdl yo olgyl Y¥A 


Wed days Lilly pall ot aay Joos LEY wi dey fous 
pdt Aall Ua aey pb ALI CS paul 

aK glals y U SLed tapey Je Ste pall gl ale gl Com i, (4) 
PY sry NELE 5 OT gly GK GT ALB ye jad AN cad july Le oh 
SNL Se aed BLL SS Le eh SG hls ye Sb. pal [0] CL 
4 pat SK 

SLs 5 Vy ot py etl wed Ki ghacls YU dley () 
disller ILI lle, Jol Gyally {a 5016 lb ob ab, GNI 23 toe by 
Wed eV ogo 9l Ly cdayat 

vale YE ob 08 9S pre Slyy lob SS pas Sty (A) 
Aral OK Le SS. gles pas Lal go Vy gel al JY 65 gb 
gl Y GLY gel nat ey gl 

GE Jar IB pal Lily «Sa Wy Lt ae aoe pasdl gl (4) 
pol SND 5D pas aa el end ep cap pas 51h a A call 
GA! oN poe doll 3d Cog Ol Lobe 6K wy Ul BOK wae, 


\o 











AS 


10 


20 


25 


30 


35 


239 Book Seven, Chapter One 


(10) These, then, are the contraries. The reason for their opposition is 
not the difference of the genera—this we have shown. Rather, the reason 
for this is that their essences in themselves and their differentiae in them- 
selves prevent each other from combining [with each other] and corrupt- 
ing one another. And, since none of the high genera are contraries [of one 
another], it follows necessarily that the real contraries fall under genus 
and that [this should] be one genus. Hence, it necessarily follows that con- 
traries differ in terms of differentiae and that contraries are among [the 
things that are] “other” in terms of form—as, for example, blackness 
and whiteness under color, and sweetness and bitterness under taste. 

(11) As for good and evil, they are not, in reality, high genera. Gooc 
does not denote a univocal meaning, nor does evil. Nonetheless, evil in 
some respect denotes in each thing the privation of the perfection belong- 
ing to it; [as for] the good, [it denotes the] existence [of such a perfec- 
tion]. There is, hence, between them the opposition of privation and 
existence. As for rest and pain and their like, they share in a genus other 
than that of good and evil; they share in the sensible, the imaginable, 
and the like. They are, hence, not species of good and evil. 

(12) It looks as if the upholders of exoteric views among those engaged 
in theoretical reflection set their attention on things that are contrary 
and that have proximate genera that include them, where [one] class of 
[these contraries] agrees with the sensitive faculty or with the intellect and 
[another] class disagrees; and [another] class among them agrees with 
affirmation, another with differentia; and [another] class [is] contrary to 
either one of the two that happens to be. [The upholders of exoteric 
views then] picked up from these [classes of contraries] the meaning that 
agrees and the meaning that disagrees, making the one a genus for one 
class, the other [a genus] for another class. 

(13) But what is necessary is not like this. Rather, the signification 
of agreement and disagreement is the signification of concomitants. 
[This is] because they do not belong to things in themselves, but only 
through relation. 

(14) Moreover, if the things that agree and disagree are rendered as 
though they were two natures, then things are found for them that are 
appropriately rendered according to various considerations as if they were 
genera belonging to them. For, in one respect, they are included in the 





PAV WA) Sa old v4 


bey oy corbin yes bli tl ty IBY ga aay (15) 
Gen Se CS Wana voy pail sm 8 Uglyd Gh els Cb Cath as 
5S Sl cond isles All LAN a5 ued By [PANY wants 
WG Kgs Lely Lee GK ily ue cd aaily eal sch 
CF lly shyall Prd pall 9 pall dem ye tac gy cJpualll BLES 
BN od yi sptdly yl 
gee He do BI Webel aby Lo ay dul, (vy) 
GH SUSI pas lo Lamy +5 FA doe AI alls aay SAY, big 
alls Stal, My deipt Ul, edly pall dee Lge veoyey le by ol 
ba UD le dl BAUS WL tty bl ee ob GIL Yb 
- pilly 5 bel gl only ls 
bala oe SLAY QM lyons atl 5 alla Bi 5S olay (91) 
Ailey Wl Riby Jal slut daily lye deby « \ed Jou a8 lel Wy 
sal Nee Leib OT LY WL. Kelby «fail gs Mly cola alge Ye 
61M SV, citde Lee Leased lod SLL coolly il 
cond WGY pjLsUl Vs AIL, ALI WY BS Cols gedy OV 
ADLZYY Jp \pentl  eL25 
te Let Wl ery ha lS sa 5] ABLE, Sill al ile 0) 
SSI Bae 23 Jes WY eLAVITULAN LL Coy Jat I 


\o 





10 


20 


30 


240 Book Seven, Chapter One 


aggregate of actions and affections; in another, in qualities; and, through 
other considerations, in relations. For, inasmuch as they proceed from 
things, they are actions; inasmuch as they come to exist in something from 
other things, they are affections; inasmuch as there are established from 
them, in their subjects, states that are stable, they are [included] among 
qualities; and, inasmuch as the agreeing agrees due to agreement, it 
belongs to the relative. 

(15) If the name [designating] agreement and disagreement is chan- 
nelled to one of these meanings itself, it becomes included in the genus 
proper to it. Jam not saying that one thing is included in different genera--— 
for this is one of the things we deem unlawful—but that every consideraticn 
is some other thing and is the thing included in another genus. Nor are 
these in reality genera, but they are like genera. [ This is] because they are 
things composed from a meaning, an act, an affection, a relation, or some 
other [similar] thing. It seems as though these are in themselves quali- 
ties, the other considerations being their necessary concomitants. More- 
over, with the exertion of all effort on your part to render agreement and 
disagreement among the things attributable to the high genera, [you 
must recognize that] to these natures belong [those] contraries that render 
two [diverse] natures [to be] true genera. [These latter contraries] are 
other than agreement and disagreement and are the ones included in 
[the genera]. You have learned this in its [proper] place. 

(16) As for the statement [affirming] the existence of the contraries 
in two contrary genera—for example, courage and rashness—this also 
is speaking very broadly. For courage in itself is a quality, and, in some 
other way of considering it, it is a virtue. Similarly, rashness in itself is a 
quality and, in some [other] way of considering it, a vice. Thus, virtue and 
vice are not among the genera of these qualities—just as the pleasant and 
the unpleasant are not two genera for odors and taste—but are concomi- 
tants thereof, according to [various] considerations attending them. 

(17) Thus, courage in itself is not contrary to either rashness or cow- 
ardice. The only two contraries that are included in the category of dis- 
position within quality are rashness and cowardice. As for courage, it 1s 
the contrary of “noncourage,” as we have said regarding equality and 





elect oy» oly YG 


gelobiel bla by cS yp LAS 3, Age op CVA, 
if hele pce oy cdbal os rLal y [rv] ipale scm y Yb 
a A Wale BiB ols les yl toe ey oMbatl oo Lal gel 
Shall BIL Bly Bill gl oe yy LES 

Joo Aen GlUl oe vel I By pee ADL, RL eal GEIB (0) 
Le Np Bal oe lel 8 fon vol Ct gigi edad wothl abt 
DY oY ST ue SEU ty ST et ge UE Sf cae 
ye 3) La) |) Set ol Jed sy com GH AS aye UA he ® fy uelel 
Ce es OLLe YI Sle GSS, CLAS lsd 3 KS gl ty -ubls 
ACI 5) ASL pL Gg Lacey LEME LL Ja Gh 5 a aye 
SPS AEM, MILI oda Lobel yb che Ul alci) és 
heey Ble cube ody. ks 

IP rrblly Aolowcll Lo polite yur 9 prall syny Sil lly (V9) 
Sy ad IS Le Lolly AES ab Pie bet abate IS Lal 
url yp Cad May thd ab, GS Le Lely aS ans 9 5 ll 
OLS Se Blas cig W ecm Lad oat wba celal 3 SUS 
Ngo obLsl oe YY 

Joel les Global Udy ght Vy ofl oles Y gl o dcletib (rv) 
WS LS Rela srl Jd delettl LI, GSS yo SAN GY 3 petal ody 


\o 





Oa 


15 


20 


30 


35 


24] Book Seven, Chapter One 


what is contrary to it.t Moreover, “noncourage” is akin to a genus for 
rashness and cowardice. Thus, if courage is contrary to rashness, it is not 
contrary to it because of its own nature but is contrary to it only because 
of an accident [in courage ]—namely, that it is praiseworthy, [is] a virtue, 
and is useful, whereas that [other (namely, rashness)] is blameworthy, 
[is] a vice, and is harmful. Contraries in reality are the [things] that agree 
in genus and in the one subject. Thus, there would be among them the one 
subject that receives both contraries without undergoing change with 
respect to what is other than the two; and among them there would be a 
subject that first changes in terms of what is other than the two, so that ore 
of the two would occur [to such a subject]. Thus, with a certain mixture 
something becomes sweet; when it becomes bitter, it requires another 
mixture. This, however, is not the state of affairs in the change of the 
hot into the cold. 

(18) Since the two contraries are in [the one] genus, then either it is 
the case that the privation of each of the two within the nature of the 
genus is rendered necessary only by the [privation of] the other (where 
there would be no intermediary between them), or this is not the case. 
[If this is not the case,] then the difference [between] that multiplicity 
{and] either of the other two is either one difference (not a difference in 
which some are less or more), or this difference is varied. If varied in this, 
then some would be closer in similarity to it (where the closer in similarity 
to it would have some of its form), while some would consist in being 
extremely different from it (where this would be [that which is] contrary). 
Contrariety would then constitute the extreme in difference between 
opposites that agree in genus and matter. And this is because he? is stat- 
ing the truth in saying that the extreme in difference [obtains] whether or 
not there is an intermediary. This is because, if there are two things, each 
at the extreme distance from the other, then the contrary is complete 
difference. For this reason, the contrary of a thing is one. 

(19) If, on the other hand, someone were to make the extremity of 
difference and distance to obtain between the one and two other things 
that differ [from each other], this would be impossible. [This is] because 
the difference between the two of them would be either in one meaning in 
one respect (in which case the things differing from the one in one respect 
[would] agree in their form of disagreement and thus would constitute 





elect yw ol gy v4) 


cole IB tly sogll pd Odo letnil od abl Ly [PA] glad 
so.gare oe ol ge \pd G2 yal aol as Led ec Agld Radel Y ala’ 5 ggll deat 
AP EAM AEB OVO Ley Wb sy pyre allay ctaily tad, 
IE bee gill Jy sol py gl GS L pad so pyc 3 git, 
ya lm Land 2 Vyl oc py gl OS |e pry clay WL 
MS ody Sl tye ictal pl by ce tllay gle b Lely gb. lune 
oll SUA Jib) 
aely S pre Kgl Ul Jo 8 wb! 2 gS glass gS Uy (04) 
OTR Uy lage deals YS bd Wah ped eb lage 
Aa oee pl Roly Adle Lage sol Wa STI le WEY 9g Kgl Ls Ea. alls 
lol pan 9 SGI fp WEL Gh. Whew al SST Ll ae 
CRIA DLE B pany ype yy badge Jol ody lte 
OY My aslll, edt baal oy Godt Ab LEI Ky ltd val 
FN SELEY Ki carey Leese GO tam yp OL ANE Jods gl Garey 
ely esl ae SB May pk Soke Lat SM Go atl ALE 3 Lye vey 
Os aA ey sola iy a, 8 ally OMI ALE Jol fer gf Ul (4) 
Maly oe BOK Gl bl ley Ls oy UE GY Slew is calle 


wee 


IIe PM iely yee ye eh OLILEL 9 $3 caaely ee [TOA] Gp 











10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


242 Book Seven, Chapter One 


one species, not many species); or [the difference between the two things 
and the one would be] in many respects (in which case these would con- 
stitute [many] aspects of contrariety, not one aspect). This, then, would 
not be by reason of the differentia which, once it attaches to the genus, 
produces the species without awaiting something ([and this] particularly 
in simple things). This you have known. Rather, this takes place by way 
of attachments and states that are necessary concomitants of the 
species. Our discussion is about one mode of contrariety. By “contrariety 
in essence” we do not mean substance and subject by his saying “in 
essence,” but by it we mean “that through which contrariety takes place, 
even if it were also quality.” It has become evident, then, that the coa- 
trary of one thing is one. 

(20) The mean in reality is that which, even though different, is [also] 
similar. Hence, in the change to the contrary, transfer to [the mean] 
must come first. For this reason, the black becomes grayish, or green, or 
red first, and then it becomes white. Means may occur for contraries 
through the negation of the two extremes. This may be due to the lack 
of a name when the mean is a mean. By this we intend the true mean— 
for example, that which is the not-hot and the not-cold, and if the luke- 
warm does not have a name.® The likes of this also belong to the genus. 
If it is placed outside the genus, as in his statement “neither light nor 
heavy,” then this is not in reality a mean but is only verbally a mean. As 
for positive disposition and privation, these would not have a mean in the 
subject, because they in themselves represent the affirmative and nega- 
tive statements [respectively], specified with a genus or a subject, and 
also with respect to [one] time and state. The relation of the positive dis- 
position and privation to that thing and state would be the relation of 
two contradictories to all of existence. And since there is no intermedi- 
ary between the two contradictories, likewise there is no intermediary 
between privation and positive disposition. 








Pav Don of oly vGY 


Mb SS cole § OKGI Ly AST EUTY Lot eg 9 Sy ccntd 
oth HNL aN edly lb GSW cleely Yo Y sLalll jp leyey 
BDA Cale By BLN Logaty crt El 1b yy pel US Jo 
aba gy Shall ie oly bal Ly pellet Sool selige yo 5K 
By clas cea oe ceeds adh INL aye es yd SLM cSt 
ool) vols oe gl gh ab. Lal LAS 
Ooo Sad arly HL aT a sill petal bul, (6) 
Ypl ow gl pty gl pay LNAI o pall gb. wail 3 psd Vga] JEM GS 
cea pod BS GF kee gob Gly ollau ss sacs V2 By saa ol 
FU Fp) ily 2,4DUy SESW Ss Lake Wasaga ty uy lasegie Leal 
GEM Hie VS hl oe Gel bly ued BK Lal tae fl 
WP GL cpotly SUN Uy. Leddy Lu gu os Lil tbl La SIN as 
Cree 3 pion Kanai Ligon ALlly Kgl es gl) Leo Presi 3 
nacelles JUL, + AUIS I pally SU Los 9 Jey ody 8 Lay 
[FY "]. MSN pat gy aay Y ANIS «cplal oy daly Sly aah 


\o 








iy 


10 


15 


20 


30 


243 Book Seven, Chapter Tivo 


Chapter [Two] 


On relating the doctrine of the ancient philosophers 
regarding the exemplars and principles of mathematics 
and the reason calling for this; revealing the 
origin of the ignorance that befell them, by reason 
of which they deviated [ from the truth] 


(1) The time has come for us to devote ourselves exclusively to 
opposing opinions that have been uttered about forms, mathematics, 
separated principles, and universals that are contrary to our principles 
which we have established. [We will engage in this] even though, in the 
correctness of what we have said and the rules we have provided, there 
is, for the discerning, a directing of attention toward the resolution of all 
their doubts and [toward] showing their falsehood and the contradictions 
of their doctrines. Nonetheless, we will help by undertaking this our- 
selves because of what we hope will ensue from this [endeavor] by way of 
benefits that we will mention in the course of combating them—[benefits] 
which we may have missed [mentioning] in what we had [previously] 
presented and explained. 

(2) We say: Every art has a genesis wherein it is raw and unripe, 
except that after a while it matures and after some more time, it develops 
and is perfected. For this reason, philosophy in the early period of the 
Greeks’ occupation with it was rhetorical. It then became mixed with error 
and dialectical argument. Of its divisions, it was the natural which first 
attracted the masses. They then began to give attention to the mathe- 
matical [division], then to the metaphysical. They were involved in transi- 
tions from one part [of philosophy] to another that were not sound. 

(3) When they first made the transition from what is apprehended by 
the senses to what is apprehended by the mind, they became confused. 
[One] group thought that the division necessitates the existence of two 
things in each thing—as, for example, two humans in the idea of humanity: 
a corruptible, sensible human; and an intellectually apprehended, sepa- 
rate, eternal, and changeless human. For each of the two they assigned an 
existence. They termed the separable existence “exemplary existence,” 
and for each of the natural things they made a separable form that is 








olecs| Sa ole vor 


[ oUl peill] 
jha2(W) 
Lab okey HUI 3 enV LSI ale oleidl 3 
eV EI; J od by sill Jo Jel gly cb yl yell al 


Boldly habs yall Gold LT Rabel aot ol ge os (1) 
Lilar|y LB bane 5S ol bby 3 8 Up WL OLS, 33 Ua 
bailing Laity aged mae Jo Ne panel as Llelec! 3) ll 
218 y Ab 3 sym gl ges U Leth ols GS yy get. 1S “pt 
vibe pig okiesd LS Lele Cah 8 9S call Lilaglie Je LOS 

C28 Vel pb Reb RIS SS ALG Y giclee ol sdgty (1) 
BEALL 8 BML CIT Uy SFT ye es IKSy oy Yd goon 
PS oe soph GLI IG dary Le Yale ob aad gy Stl 
Ne TN a CIs «A el aga Wel tc ga a 
Badan Fam | 

fail Sl pb lab Lt ts Stell ll eed Ge LANL Ly (4) 
Ae Shel LN gan SLIT SN] Sgt oy cons 
*Namy Lapin Doly SS Mglay 2 Y paul Lie Jydee glally ce punoe 
Bae Radel yl ye aely SS Iglery c LICL Iayony Lal age gll Vy 





10 


20 


25 


30 


35 


244 Book Seven, Chapter Tivo 


intellectually apprehended, being the [very] one that the mind receives, 
since the intelligible is something that does not undergo corruption, whereas 
every sensible of these [natural things] is corruptible. They [further] ren- 
dered the sciences and demonstrative proofs move in the direction of [the 
incorruptible intelligibles], these being the ones they treat. 

(4) It was known that Plato and his teacher, Socrates, went into excess 
in upholding this view, saying that there belongs to humanity one existing 
idea in which individuals participate and which continues to exist with 
their ceasing to exist. This [they held] is not the sensible, multiple, and 
corruptible meaning and is therefore the intelligible, separable meanir.g, 

(5) Another group did not perceive a separable existence for this for:n, 
but only for its principles. They rendered the mathematical entities that 
are separable in definition as deserving to be separable in existence. They 
made those natural forms that are not separable in definition not sepa- 
rable in essence. They [further] made the natural forms to be generated 
only through the connection of these mathematical forms with matter— 
as, for example, concavity. For it is a mathematical idea: once it connects 
with matter, it becomes “snub-nose-ness” and becomes a natural idea. It 
is then for concavity inasmuch as it is mathematical to separate [in exis- 
tence], even though inasmuch as it is natural it is not for it to separate.' 

(6) As for Plato, most of his inclination was [toward the view] that it 
is the forms that are separate. Regarding mathematical [entities], for him 
these were [intermediary] ideas between forms and natural things. For, 
even though they separate in definition, it is not permissible, according 
to him, that there should be a spatial dimension that does not subsist in 
matter. [This, he argued, is] because [the dimension] is either finite or 
infinite. If [it is] infinite and this is a consequence of its being simply a 
nature, then every dimension would be infinite. If this is a consequence 
of its being denuded from matter, then matter becomes the thing that 
furnishes restriction and form. Both ways are impossible. Indeed, the exis- 
tence of an infinite dimension is impossible. If it is finite, then its restric- 
tion within a limited bound and measured shape is due only to an affection 
occurring to it externally, not to its very nature. Form would be affected 
only by its matter. It would thus be [both] separate and not separate. This 
is impossible. Hence, [mathematical things] must be intermediary. 








lets » oly vee 


oputpnoe By 6 eis bel Jpaall G53) c Jal aL Lally geal 33, be 
SglES Lely ode gos goed aly lly pslll ery red gb ole 

Sb orig IN Gasp glee Lohan aadeny gy sbotdl Sy pall gS (0) 
Ble edly Wee ey PENG ALY boyy body pa LW 
Oya Syed gab Gd) go ell STU tl 

Habel yl lary «Goll J BB, lin dy palo lav axel by (8) 
al gf PL WIL Whos cope dh Bleu ies ob Gb ol 
Rene) gual lls les byF Le) abel gall glemy lath Oye Y ats) 
wba gee ghey cher glad joo soll yl 11d ged ies KD. pail Gola 
Orta dl gk tee 5 Kl gy Dylngl gel pp tam op pall gS 

we Wy boLabell Lib 25 Lill oo yall gl ale Sy ,boui Ul, (4) 
(8 de GK Nae Sym geld ab Ded; b Gly Yb foballly ype yp glee 
Clg [FVY] colle pF GO GB olde pe gl Lak GK gl LAY aol BY 
SU ape Mb ls gb an Fe cha ye i 
Seer clie 5 dow oyry je SSeee ye I ISG By gually pool sake soll I 
8 eye SRY YI pad pate Sty spare ue dolar Lal gh Gl, 
Byler by Bye 9S. MG Vay pall fess GIy ace pail Yigyls 
Aas sr 3S 3) Cond Jw Lany 


\o 


_ } 
| | 








wn 


10 


20 


25 


30 


245 Book Seven, Chapter Tivo 


(7) As for the others,” they rendered the principles of natural things 
mathematical objects, rendered them the things that are in truth the 
intelligibles, and rendered them in truth the separable entities [in exis- 
tence]. They stated that if they strip the corporeal states from matter, 
then only magnitudes, shapes, and numbers remain. This is because the 
passive qualities and [all] affections derive from the nine categories, [with] 
positive dispositions, power, and absence of power being matters that 
belong to things possessing affections, positive dispositions, and powers. 
As for relation, the things [in this category] that are connected with the 
likes of [the above] are also material. Hence, there remains “place,” which 
is quantitative; “time,” which is quantitative; and “situation,” which is 
quantitative. As for action and affection, these are material. There results 
from [all] this [the notion] that everything that is not quantitative is 
attached to matter. [But] the principle of what is attached to matter is 
[itself] not attached to matter. Hence, mathematical things become the 
principles and the things that are, in truth, the intelligibles, everything 
else not being an intelligible. For this reason, no one gives a definition 
of color, taste, and the like that is worthy of any attention. For {such a 
thing] is related to a [sensible] apprehending faculty. As such, the mind— 
according to them—does not apprehend it intellectually; it is only imag- 
ined by the imaginative faculty following sensation. 

(8) They said: “As for numbers, quantities, and their states, these 
are intellectually apprehended in themselves. Therefore, it is they that are 
separate.” Some people [however] made these principles but did not make 
them separate. These are the followers of Pythagoras. They composed 
everything from unity and duality. They made.unity within the bound of 
the good and what is restricted and made duality within the bound of evil 
and what is unrestricted. 

(9) [Another] group made the principles [as consisting of] the exces- 
sive, the deficient, and the equal. They made the equal take the place of 
hyle, since it is from [the equal] that the change into the two extremes 
is to take place. Another group made [the equal] take the place of form 
because [form] is the restricted and limited, whereas there is no limit to 
the excessive and the deficient. 

(10) Then they branched out regarding the matter of composing the 
whole from mathematical entities. Thus, some made number the princi- 
ple of quantity, composing the line from two units and the surface from 





eledsl Sa oly Y¢0 


Lagery Sold Lge! datall yl Gale Iper pglt axed uly (v) 
SIpaVI yazan U3 pl Ly Sy AbD L LL Lagden ALLL CY pal 
Sb eet SY A GV olay | sel, SCL, [ple] VY ga asl ye ala 
AMA IS yy15 SoU, sal SKU, ee CVLAM, AIL’ OLS 
PIM deb asl Lal peda dtl gle Lowlayl Ul, cal, oll, 
ard sale gQ Sat Mly Jal Ly. oS gay ecoaly Sty Sey oS 
We aed Le ajace fall GleMly fall gle 9b WS pad Lee Gl Lhe yy 
aE cd fly AGLY OV geal 60 GSS, ctgolll po LAL 9 Ko sally 
lin » Uc La Lae Sy aly gl doy daly ald Uy pene 
- ool LS SILI LS Ul Jill are Yl be 3g 

BM ya) ge YI Ayame Oe Whol, yolill, tas! Ul, Ite (4) 
tS Siy Sy gbld benel ory i jbis glare aly gale Legler py 
de PARE Uoory pably DI jm Bisel Isang AIL, og 
[TOT]. path by pl 

SE Goll Iglary cgsglnbly UAPsly stl Gol Ile oy (4) 
iy pad! (By geal IRs osha aydy «bball SW ace 3h Sha 
» ably Sly) > Vy da .04 

Nala all agian amd Sebel ISG ul pl patid (9+) 
bre lage oly SS ae penny lary aul ge clans coany ye BLISS 





ecb ‘aoe? Liesl celles! bait 





Qo 


10 


20 


25 


30 


246 Book Seven, Chapter Tivo 


four units. Some gave each of the two a separate bound. Most of them 
[maintained] that number is the principle, that unity is the primary 
principle, and that unity and haecceity are necessary concomitants or 
synonymous [in meaning]. They [further] ordered number and its for- 
mation from unity in three ways: one with respect to numerical number, 
the second with respect to mathematical number, and the third in terms 
of repetition. 

(11) As for the mode of numerical number, they made “oneness” at 
the beginning of the ordering, then “twoness,” then “threeness.” As for 
mathematical number, they made unity a principle, then the seconc, 
then the third, [and so on], ordering number in terms of the successioi 
of one unit after another. As for the third [mode], they made the forma- 
tion of number come about through the repetition of the same unity, not 
by the addition of another to it. : 

(12) One is astonished at a Pythagorean party that maintains that 
number is composed of unity and substance, since unity, they maintain, 
does not subsist by itself. For it is unity if something and the receptacle 
is a substance. It is then [they argue] that composition takes place, and 
thus multiplicity comes to be. 

(13) Among these, some make for every mathematical numerical 
rank a form corresponding to an existing form.? Thus, when abstraction 
takes place there will be a numerical rank; and when mixture with mat- 
ter takes place there will be the form of man, or of horse—this for the 
meaning we have previously indicated. [Another] group holds that there 
is a difference between these numerical forms and the exemplars—some 
of them rendering [the numerical forms as] intermediaries, as previ- 
ously explained. 

(14) Most of the Pythagoreans hold the view that mathematical num- 
ber is the principle but that it is not separate [in existence]. Some allow 
the composition of geometrical forms from units and, hence, disallow the 
halving of quantities. Others see no harm in [maintaining] that mathe- 
matical objects are composed of numbers that, after composition, may 
undergo infinite division. Some of them make numerical forms different 


from geometrical forms. 





less i» ole ven 


igdlyie oly IML oie gly Luly» sadlgl depasSly cise le 
rel BS oyey le duel je orLtily sul 1525 085 egal ol gaat 
NSM ery de LIED «eck saallaney he Sty « soael sad ary de 
ASI ALL SIS gl dine gl | lead coral saclay Ul (19) 
AF Be sa LEP A ESO Me Bao eed tale sastl Ly 
NebheglaaLob Y pow amy 91S sall L2H land 2 Lijahea wy; 
Be SN3Le ap gey ye AL sal gl ofA) 2 Cbalb yp Coully (V1) 
BSG CSG Kee, Par JFly ee bivey Eb. Lares psa Y 
By pal Marlen by ye aaall yo hades AS) JO frow ye gs pay (11) 
J Sha iyye blll LN sey 206 05) yell ee GS cdogey [116] 
Apdall jpall > oy SI oy pots ke Lb a) Ul Stl nl lb coe 
SB the be he olla ge lem ye 5s ey £185 SN os 
Oylen po Sy Lal P geletll ooall I Gay wustal Sly (14) 
F peg» poled asi Tes3] Sle oy deal pall S$ jem yp oes 
lpn I SA aw Wye sacl AS Shahi gS ch LL AY 
head anal tale Asal spall ome oy oy ANE 





Reekanichiead cra coce 


\o 




















oy 


10 


20 


30 


247 Book Seven, Chapter Tivo 


(15) If you give thought [to this matter], you will find the bases of 
the causes of error, in all the things wherein these people have gone 
astray, to be five [in number]. 

(16) One of them is their belief that, if a thing is abstracted such 
that the consideration of another thing is not connected with it, then it 
is separated from it in existence. It is as though, if attention is paid to the 
thing alone—T[a thing] that has an associate—in a manner that gives no 
attention to its associate,* [this] would render it not adjoining its associate 
In short, if it is considered without the condition of [its] conjunction 
with another, then it is believed that it is considered with the condition 
that there is no conjunction [with another], so that [according to this 
view] it was only suitable to be examined because it was not conjoined, 
but separate. For this reason it was believed that, since the mind attains 
the intelligibles existing in the world without attending to‘what is con- 
joined to them, the mind attains nothing but [what is] separate among 
them.’ This, however, is not the case. Rather, each thing has one consid- 
eration with respect to itself and another consideration with respect to 
its relatedness to something conjoining it. 

(17) If we apprehend the form of the human intellectually—for 
example, inasmuch as it is the form of the human alone—we would have 
apprehended intellectually an existent alone with respect to its essence. 
But, inasmuch as we have [so] apprehended it, it does not follow that it 
alone is separate [in existence]. For that which is mixed with another, 
inasmuch as it is itself, is inseparable from [the other]® by way of negation, 
not by way of equipollence, in terms of which separation in subsistence is 
understood.’ It is not difficult for us to direct attention through perception 
or some other state to one of the two things whose role is not to separate 
from its companion in subsistence—even though it separates from it in 
definition, meaning, and reality, since its reality is not entered in the 
reality of the other. For conjunction necessitates connectedness, not per- 
meation in meanings. 

(18) The second cause is their error concerning the one. For, when we 
say that humanity is one, we do not intend by this that it is one meaning 
which is the very one found in many and thus becomes many through rela- 
tion, as in the case of one father that happens to be [a father] of many; 
rather, it is akin to [many] fathers [in relation] to diverse sons.* We have 





elect Ge oll v<v 


Ad fol ane 5b Lal Gll Jel ore oS HST, (10) 
‘Aaas p gil Vie 

BS eb EN a ial Som yy ape BB) eth gl ogc Lusel (9) 
FE BUN yb nary coy eg Ca BL AT cae ope Il OS Iayoe 
all bt Yat} bs a) aud, Ad yyleee Slam aed and J! oli 
Jp dalle yb Vad fon gl che Ul fo oS, lil bby all ls al ob a 
Pat) es Wp, fall SEU plat Uo dageghh Vaal of 1g bd . 3 ylae 
So tS fy IS pacly Meer OB LUI Sly ad all GT Igy td 
Wl jbel gyle Bathe] om yy isl aly 

BB my SLY By po a em ye Me GLY By gee Le 13] Ul (\v) 
as) OK gl ee ab tlie o> Sy CANS Cam ys odery logos hee 
BE Vali le Oslin gb ge ete ye DIE SB [TV]. Byli 
sh aN ALM sued St ke pas dy «ply 38, Ul a gis el ual ge 
Le BB Sly Uda mle dl ght ye ol ge ye Lely dpe ye wl 
AF Kall LSM aide Wyse a Cie CIS] ihn ay 
gill (3 Metall Y Sta) 

ie GLY gl Ls 15! BB Saat gh pal Badal « SOW al (\A) 
EYE SS SB retin ay ely gar dl Mab cat acl 
Me D Sell Leal by bie Hla MYT ye boy SI) GK sly 


\o 





on 


20 


30 


248 Book Seven, Chapter Two 


discussed this fully in other places.° These people did not know that we 
say of many things that their meaning is one—meaning by this that, if we 
suppose any one of them to occur first to matter which is of the same 
state as it is for the other[s], there would ensue from it this one individual. 
Similarly, if any of them comes first to the intellect, becoming imprinted 
in it, then that one meaning would result from it. If [on the other hand] 
one comes first [to the mind], the other becomes inoperative: it would not 
enact anything.'® [This would be] like warmth. If it occurs to matter that 
has moisture in it, it would cause another meaning; or, if it occurs to a 
mind to which the idea [of] moisture and its intelligible has first come, :t 
would enact a different meaning. Had they understood the meaning of the 
one in this, it would have sufficed them. This [misunderstanding of what 
the one means] is what had led them astray. 

(19) The third is their ignorance that our statement, “Such and such 
[a thing when considered] inasmuch as it is such and such [a thing] is 
something other [than the thing in question], differing in definition from 
it,” is a contradictory statement. This is similar to [the case when] an erring 
person is asked, “Is the human, inasmuch as he is the human, one human 
or many?” [and] answers, “He is either one or many.” For the human inas- 
much as he is the human is only the human. Inasmuch as he is the human, 
he is nothing other than the human. Oneness and multiplicity are other 
than the human. We have also finished with explaining this. 

(20) The fourth [error] is their supposition that if we say that 
humanity exists always, permanently, this is the same as our saying 
[that] humanity is either one or many. This would only be the case if our 
saying “humanity” and [our saying] “humanity that is either one or 
many” are one and the same meaning. Similarly, they must not suppose 
that if they admit to themselves that humanity is permanent, then they 
are necessarily [committed to the view] that the one specific humanity is 
permanent so as to posit an eternal humanity. 

(21) The fifth [error] is their belief that if material things are caused, 
then their causes are necessarily any of the things that can separate. For it 
is not the case that, if material things are caused and mathematical things 
are separate, then it follows necessarily that the mathematical things are 
their causes. Rather, [their causes] may be other substances that are not 








rlecdl oy oly ¥SA 


Je poly carly babes LESLEY Joi U Mylnd Ae sl aly J 
Vader fare, ge S50 NLL setae aba okay 3 Yer vely ol gl 
Ian aie uae GEA lace ill joan Nes aoly GINS. nell patel 
Ab § MIAO TS Jawad SV fla rely gar IL GO Gly vel gl gal 
ising tase) gee All ge aloby gl el peo flagk, bial le 
spdel Ls AQT Lae Bae Sh ga Lynd al dy ST gee ela 

sob plat WIS gp Sem yy SSL Sb paler Sllly (18) 
Qhendl ge Lem oy QLOYl Jo fou 15] Lala Jil JOS cal J cad aL 
ches ge tom oy SLAY GB Syl oly ULI GSGh sot, ghil 
gb ASy iro dly glad Ct cglull go tam ot ely cheb glad) 
Ne pei gy al bib aby clei 

Pdgal bs gh dst Lats def ASLAM Gf | gle cally (1+) 
Dively Wily GLYN WS oh pe gS Uly 5S lel GLAl 
BY ALY ol pq [yale lal penne gl oe VMS ely aa 5” 
Fpl ASL) (ye, Fo AB, Nye del gl ASLecH gh ney ab 

We 3S gl coy tyler CISL AU A gh ag LLL, (19) 
Lael 25 lee Aol yy CIC] ad wb Gybs gh Ke yl 
od 55 ale ITU, halle Vobabell ble 9% gl Gay 8 ke 


\o 











Qa 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


249 Book Seven, Chapter Three 


among the nine categories.'! Nor have they ascertained the core of the 
truth that the definitions of geometrical [figures] among mathematical 
[objects] absolutely do not dispense with matter, even though they can 
do without some kind of matter.” 

(22) It seems that these are things for the ascertainment of which 
[certain] principles we have already discussed suffice. Let us, then, apply 
ourselves to [refuting] those who uphold [the doctrine] of mathemati- 


cal objects. 


Chapter [Three] 


On refuting the doctrine [of the separate existence] 
of mathematical [objects] and exemplars 


(1) We say: If among mathematical things there is a mathematical 
object separate from the sensible mathematical object at all, then in the 
sensible thing either there would be no mathematical object or there 
would be [a mathematical object]. If in the sensible thing there is no 
mathematical object, then it necessarily follows that there is no quadri- 
lateral, circular, or enumerable sensible thing. If none of [these things] is 
sensible, then what way is there to establish their existence [or], indeed, 
[even] to imagine them? For the principle of their being imagined is 
likewise [derived] from sensible existence—so [much so] that, if we sup- 
pose, through our estimative faculty, an individual who has apprehended 
none of [these] by the senses, we will judge that he does not imagine, nor, 
indeed, intellectually apprehend any of them. However, we have estab- 
lished the existence of many of them in what is sensible. 

(2) If [on the other hand] the nature of mathematical objects may also 
exist in sensible things, then there would be a consideration of that nature 
in itself. Its essence, then, either would correspond in definition and 
meaning with the separate [mathematical entity] or would differ from it. 
If it were different from it, then the intelligible mathematical objects 
would be things other than those we imagine and intellectually appre- 
hend. We would [then] require a new proof to establish the existence [of 
the former] and, after this, [to] engage in examining the state of their 
separateness. Thus, what they have done in rendering [mathematical 





itll jo oly oe 


FV OL oy olaaedl SI gio AS pind ly Ac MA 
-Shpll ye Lp Ge cat Sly «Liles ahyll ye Lrayae 
(ght aol. Wile Jyeol Yat UK glans Lalo, (11) 


[VV] clade 


[Ld | ost] ; 
Ja(e) 


Fly Lally Jail Jel 3 


VU pH elt Blin pales Lebel 9 9G) AL sid (9) 

ea i rH Sob aS el bs tl bo SY 

cleo Ue Hoth Sel Bly tps opaee Vy are Ys ay OY \: 

23231 gp WIS ULES le GB TYLSS Gf Lory Olt GY} Let GS 

CH Sin oe Val SS pe Ct om a Lely Lea oe ore 
ald lp eS oyey ET th fe 

AD Sb ole Al Bal ues BF olebll deb OT Gly (1) 

SB ad dale 1S sled) sally Sb aller Ul lls gS Loot Gly deal \o 

Chey Wiss YES A byl Deal SLAM 5 XS Payle] co 

Igas LF byl Se Ob atl os Gi fs Ol WUL 





bb cag 4d las’ 

















Q 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


250 Book Seven, Chapter Three 


objects] eternal so as to dispense with establishing their existence, and 
in preoccupying themselves with giving priority to the task of showing 
their separateness, represents an unreliable course of action. 

(3) If [the nature of the mathematical object in sensible things] cor- 
responds with and shares [the] definition of [the separate mathematical 
object], then either those [mathematical objects] in sensible things have 
come to be by reason of their nature alone—but, then, how would that 
which has its definition become separate?—or else this is something that 
occurs to them through some cause (they being exposed to this, their 
definitions not preventing this [from] occurring to them). Thus, it woud 
be the prerogative of these separate things to become material, and 
would be the prerogative of these material things to become separated. 
But this is contrary to what they hold and [to that] upon which they built 
the basis of their view. 

(4) Furthermore, this matter, which is conjoined with accidents, 
either will need the separated [entities] or will not. If it needs separated 
[entities], it would then only need the separated [things] other than 
itself for their natures, and hence the separated [things, in turn,] would 
also need other [separated things]. If it needed the separated [things] 
only because of what has accidentally occurred to it—so that, if it were not 
for that occurrence, it would not at all have needed the separated [things] 
and there would be no necessity at all for the existence of the separated 
[things]—then an accidental occurrence to the thing would necessitate 
the existence of something prior to it and which has no need of it. It will 
[also] render the separated things in need of [matter]? in order that they 
would necessarily have existence. P 

(5) If this is not the case, but the existence of the separated [things] 
necessitates the existence [of matter] with this accident, then why is it that 
the accident is necessitated in [what is] other than [the separated things 
and] not in themselves, when the nature [of the separated and of the 
not-separated thing] agree? If [matter and accident] do not need the 
separated [things], then the separated [things] would not be in any man- 
ner whatsoever their causes, nor first principles. It follows necessarily that 
these separated [things] would be deficient. For this [mathematical] thing 
connected with matter has attached to it, by way of powers and actions, 
[things] that do not exist for the separated [thing]. How different is a 
simple human form? from the form of a living, active human! 





elecll ye oly YO: 


Water ake 2 Jal poids SULA, BL ge LAM Gl LEY yy ade 
Ad| play Mas 

PAs gS gl Ls ee Wo od od Shee thle GL, (1) 
SEAS! Wy Serre dL Ft GS c Lasony nade yd lo Ui] coe ya 
dail nF Leagan y DNR ae Sy OL ye oes WY Gowe Lpl 
ipa ede GLb py hale pues Gh OB WU GLE 9K. bbls d doe 
[TVA] eel jel ale yey ogaee Lb GE ya lay .Gylé gl 

AY Iota itd GI Ll algal a sll dalll ode gb Lal, () 
ches tll ab OB jee Mos LB cobble Jett Ci gb. Al 
> Was VOB Yelt Geigy gel ol Lal ot tal 
8K 9S gl cen ghY, KH OB MI NelE YAK Le ylal ws Vy 
Jens fae by au pl yh aeey coe tll Syl erro nves 
99 Wee > Wl delee oli Lull 

se ages rp OB Ul ayy Gp WIS AIK J gb (0) 
HE GNy Hai daclaly «pal Sosy Lad 3 Byldl Sg clo yb 
BIBL yams geaey Walle 8, Ulg S 1B, LI deta 2 
SEV, pil je adn dala Ly W]e gb ast ob jlall aaa g Sl eshs 
[Jeb] FFL gu dl GUIS y dal S, Olid ey YL 








pb crea cob. Le pcbeoca ce cgylall Gta’ 


\o 











er 


10 


30 


251 Book Seven, Chapter Three 


(6) One is astonished by them, since they make the line abstracted in 
its subsistence from the surface, and the point from the line. What, then, 
combines the two in the natural body? Is it one nature in the two that neces. 
sitates this? Similarly, [something] must bring the two together, whether 
[this something] were a separated [thing] or another power—a soul, an 
intellect, or a Creator. Moreover, how is the line prior to the complete body 
in the way causes are prior when it is not its form? For the line is not the 
form of corporeality, nor does it enact [the body], nor is it its teleological] 
end. Rather, if at all, it is the body which is complete [and] perfect in its 
dimensions that is the teleological end of the line and [something] othe - 
than it. Nor is [the line} the [body’s] hyle. Rather, it is something that is 
consequent on it by way of [the body being] finite and its being cut. 

(7) Moreover, the one who upholds the doctrine of numbers must 
make the inequality between things through augmentation and diminu- 
tion of multiplicity. The difference between man and horse would consist 
in that one is “more [than the other],” the other “less.” [But] “the less” 
always exists in “the more.” Hence, one would exist in the other. From 
this, the entry of some opposites [subsumed] under others would neces- 
sarily follow, which is a false contradiction. 

(8) Among those [thinkers] some make the units equal so that that 
by which the more differs from the less would be a part of the less. But 
some among them make the units also unequal. If these differ in defini- 
tion, then they are not units except in an equivocal sense. If these do not 
differ in definition but are—after agreement in definition—greater and 
lesser, then either the increase of the greater of these is in terms of 
something in it in potency, as with measures (in which case unity would 
be a measure, not the principle of measure) [or] if the increase of the 
greater is in terms of something actually in it such as numbers, then 
unity would be plurality. 

(9) It follows necessarily for those upholding the doctrine of numeri- 
cal number, composing from it the forms of natural things, to do one of 
two things: They must either make for the separated existing number a 
finite termination—in which case its finitude would obtain at one limit 








etl oly Yo) 


ip Maly lanl yg Hl B layete abl jew SL age Cony (1) 
MISS SOUS Gog lage Baely Rel Sstdall ed 3 lane coitl Lad. bab 
BS Is Sah al Jae ol ail gelag layla’ yearn I con 
Ae A Vy hei po LN lb Sper gh cy ll pa (LD aed pai 
Yy sab y LAVA yo abel d JO Ol db os Vy gal b CE 0 Vy 
«platy lh Le Rye oy ato +t gt age gs 

35 soly oN oy coll pew slacV [YVA] lal ok Liaal (Vv) 
Lsls Yl, « BILAN, ST bal sl pally LIM gp Gul 5X5. Gla, 
CF CLL ae J Souls yl SV Lal oy SG. Soe 
dale ES gay «can 

5 PM Mg BIE Lg Koay Lo cle gl feom ye Mba ey (4) 
cab DL HE IE yl ob Lal Obed Jem oe age SI 
of dl 3 SLil ow YS SL GES YU gL, eal AA YY oley 
Vjake Bam J GSS ¢ yo wh Gd ete (ge atl aoby gS gl LB «ads, 
BS Gm $1 GSC Le VT Jail 4S ete sll aaly IK Gly Ghee Lee 

Vghans I lend yao lyer Sl gourall sadly ltl Snes 
OF A 2S AALS YS ALG opel SLU oll Llew IL] gtd vel 


\o 














Qo 


10 


20 


30 


252 Book Seven, Chapter Three 


rather than [any] other of the invented [limits] that remain unrealized*— 
or make it infinite, thereby rendering the forms of natural things infinite. 

(10) These [latter] make the first unity other than each of the two 
unities that are in duality. Then they make the first duality other than 
the duality in trinity and prior to it, and similarly with what comes after 
trinity. This is impossible. For between the first duality and the duality in 
the trinity there is no essential difference, but [a difference] only through 
something accidental—namely, the conjoining of a thing to it. But the 
conjoining of one thing to another cannot negate its essence. If it were to 
negate its essence, it would not be conjoined [to it] because what is con- 
joined is conjoined to the existent. As for that which corrupts, it is not 
something that is conjoined [to another]. And how can unity corrupt the 
two unities [in duality] except by corrupting one by one the two? And how 
would unity be a corruptor of unity? If it were to corrupt it, there would 
be no duality. Rather, duality by the conjunction of {an additional] unity to 
it does not become different in essence from the duality in its existence 
not conjoined to unity. For unity through conjoining does not change in 
state, but renders the whole greater and keeps the part as it is. 

(11) In brief, if the unities are similar and the composition 1s the 
same, the two natures would correspond, unless something accidental 
that changes and corrupts were to occur. It is impossible for the unities not 
to be similar. For number is formed from similar unities and nothing else. 

(12) Some people among these, however, say that there attaches to 
duality inasmuch as it is duality a unity other than the unity of trinity, and 
as such the unity of duality is other than the unity of trinity. From this it 
necessarily follows that “tenness” is not composed of two “fivenesses” as 
the two “fivenesses” are, because the ones of the ten are other than the 
ones of “fiveness.” Hence, “tenness” is not composed of two “fivenesses.” 


Moreover, it follows necessarily that the ones of “fiveness” if it is a part of 


ten are different from its ones if it is part of fifteen. But perhaps they are 





lel oll YoY 


Ipard okie pb oglen gl cal Spare Y cil CLAM je apt jy aya 

ASN lll yim dl yp aay Se I Nline Jl yslew Vay (1°) 
do, a US Ye paSl DUI 9 SASL FINI AILI Gaon 
WN PSSADO B ANAS, LVI Gy tale Jee Lay DU 
By 1b las gl jyon Yet rg Eling ad eb le gay ale bh 
iS 5 ig hengancs Wy. aera sles glib Wo lie SS od calls al 
GSS AS Tage oly Lely Lroldh VDP] give inate ro ghg 5 
Y abl ines Gyles ast fe UE SS bath Jy Sirol ane arog 
Hy a5 Yaregl gb Gre ales 2 bro y ASW OI oaks as 
ile de shi at, STS pt fp VE 

Stall oly OS, EL Sle OK bLaLLL (99) 
OB ASL Sle NN GSS Vl jee Vy nedy pie ed Gye gh Md cle 
wh VASE Shey Ge daoe, ovsll 

sb bay ASL atom Yok LEN Sl gs pge Ld gl le (1) 
Ileal OS gl CAPE ADI dey pF ASL ey 9S ISG ADU ne, 
shel jb aptall LT GY gteldl a 65 Le ke gle Vas, 
ST bud eT 3 gl Oy «elas 9 a Lad S55 3 Ld 
OS Ale gS. pte Ras oye CIK | Las LL bts oe 





QQ 


10 


15 


20 


30 


253 Book Seven, Chapter Three 


saying, “The ‘fiveness’ in the fifteen is other than the ‘fiveness’ in the 
simple ‘tenness’ because it is the ‘fiveness’ of a ‘tenness’ which is part of 
fifteen.” [If so,] it follows necessarily that, if “fiveness” is added to “ten- 
ness,” it would not become fifteen, unless its ones undergo change—and 
all this is impossible. 

(13) Moreover, if the “fiveness” of the ten is not equal to absolute 
“fiveness,” then it would not be “fiveness” except in an equivocal [use of 
the] term. It becomes urgent [then] to understand the meaning of “five- 
ness” in [the ten] beyond the equivocation in expression. If [on the other 
hand] it is equal, then the ones in all of them would be equal, the sanie 
with dualities and trinities. The form of trinity, then, would exist within 
“fourness.” But [according to these people] trinity is a form for a natural 
species; similarly, “fourness.” There would then exist in natural species 
the species of contrary things. Thus, for example, if a certain number is 
a form for man and another number, either greater or smaller, a form 
for horse, then, if [the latter form] is greater [in number], the species 
man would exist in the [species] horse, and, if lesser, the species horse 
would exist in the [species] man. It follows necessarily, then, that there 
will be [one] form of species preceding [several] species and [one] form 
of species succeeding [several] species if some have greater composition 
than others and if the composition of species from [other] species does 
not run an infinite course. [Finally], how can there be an existing number 
having an essential order in terms of unity and duality that goes to 
infinity in act? The impossibility of this has been shown.5 

(14) As for those who generate number through repetition with unity 
remaining constant for the one, the only meaning of repetition one under- 
stands in this is the bringing to be of something numerically other than 
the first. If repetition enacts number and each of the first and second 
does not have unity, then unity is not the principle for the composition of 
number. If the one inasmuch as it is one is unity and the second inasmuch 
as it is second is unity, then there are two unities. For unity is not repeated 
unless it would be there in one succession after another.® And this suc- 
cession would have to be either temporal or essential. If [it is] temporal 





rletll yo ol gy! Yor 
Role WY ae Na Led NL Le te ~ PAL 
Yat Yu} Gol Lay Loall 5 SS Gleb. te Aas ye tm phylic 

Slew ASS, bolel Lacs gl pte Laat 


dela 5S He Halle dala agli 5 ll ks SS Sad (01) 


ly bah 9 HLM oe LLL pi GELS ul AEL YY 
Ay OUI, Haylee Yara 9 LEW ya} 95 [PVN] dye OE 


5D 9> 90 42 by po lass 


er OSS. asl 3 
Mea RIE gol yy I pigi 43 82 go 9 Aa! 61 esl SSS MTL, pl, 
cil LL, an ST Ll allay lous OLN by 90 be one ya] 
wiles Tae Il ST aly yal ¢ lem Glial es Fae ST yh gb 
Alsi me piss Bey pisil reg elsil 50 OS gl Cre GLY! 3 loge. 
pele pe eh pall 5 pls 53 deh ed Sly lee US th E36 Lal 
Mele oe LU hood Sb Gas al oye ye 26 SS 
Nd8 Decal pi ody S baal 

asa pee eld 21 ire J OL a SIL s08ll gyal y gall bly (44) 
F uy pK abet, oust! gO GB . sash IM pT et sland Year as 
AM Sal . sae alt Lantos Unb barry ad tly SM Ge vel, 
Vine 3 OF bars Sip iroy ol ys Cm ly Grey J Poe 
SE GB asl glass 5S Gi MSM adage oes Bye he GSS Sh VW SS 


\o 








a 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


254 Book Seven, Chapter Three 


and [unity] is not annihilated in the intermediate [stage], then it would 
be as it was [before], not something that has been repeated. If it ceases 
to exist and is then brought into being, then what has been brought into 
being is another individuality. If [the succession] is essential, then this 
[consequence] is more evident. 

(15) Another [group of] people made postulated unity as hyle for 
number; another group made it as form because [unity] is predicated of 
everything. One is astonished by the Pythagoreans when they made the 
indivisible unities the principles of measures, knowing [full well] that 
measures regress in indivisibility ad infinitum. 

(16) One group has said, “If unity associates with matter, it becomes 
a point. On the same analogy, duality becomes a line, trinity a surface, 
and being, a quadrilateral—a body. “[But if this were the case], then 
there would either be matter common to all [of these] or else each one 
of them would have another matter. If they have one [common] matter, 
then matter at one time would become a point, then it would change into 
a body, and then change [again] into a point. This—in addition to being 
impossible—necessitates that the point’s being a principle for the body 
has no greater claim over the body’s being the principle for the point; 
rather, both may well be among things that succeed one another over one 
subject. If [on the other hand] their materials differ, then in the matter 
of duality there would be no unity—in which case there would be no 
duality in the matter of duality. It follows, then, that these things cannot 
exist at all with each other. 

(17) According to the ascertained doctrine, however, the point exists 
only in the line, which is in the surface, which is in the body, which is in 
matter. The point is not a principle except in the sense of being an 
extremity. In reality, however, it is body which is the principle in the 
sense that it is subject to having finitude obtain by it. 

(18) One is astonished at one who makes augmentation and diminu- 
tion a principle, making thereby the relative a principle. The relative is 
[something] that occurs accidentally to another among existents and is 


posterior to all things. 














olecs| Sa oll ¥0% 


ores dnt oy oS Yl LY] CIOS og bedl 3 pot ay ASL 
ph WS AT GL, el adt elb 

Be SE WY 5 yd Lage ody sual) Sg ne yl Ise ody (12) 
«pelea ole Byard sll Slam gl Nyler 3f oper seULill ye Conall . SI 
[PVy] dale pF Sect oa at lll gi Lyle, 

Ms fe aslo, abs Sle soll sb ld} amg gl: ‘psd Sy (99) 
al eles Sy .. Lae KN ly Lala RIN, Was ced AGU Ua cpl 
iolsil WOE OB. eclisl lee sol Ky SS | Se Yall g 
Sl ola ay el 1 Le is all lll a 
WK Lis Je Ala ee LS ol oe lal aeoal Lip abattl 9 SY 
bal Bae § WO cide aly CIEL) ely Pye le ASEM yyy 
eeR ST AVG SY olay ULLAL 9 5559 cane y LE 

P GM LAN Wise y Mae ole peel Cae le Uy (0) 
See W ce Atl ly lll Do Sl pb Ba gill cqleall J 
PNA yar dl gat clad go eed baat Li, lal 

hally Lae shall Jud «shattly sbi Ll Jam of comlly (0A) 


AK oe ley Olay jp opsd Bile yl ys 





peeve ce dW 


\o 














ery 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


255 Book Seven, Chapter Three 


(19) Moreover, how can they render multiplicity in existence? For 
the second unity that exists in multiplicity is related to the first, if it exists 
in itself. In what, then, does one unity differ from another? That whose 
existence is in itself necessary does not become multiple, and it differs 
from [another] thing only in substance, not numerically. If [multiplicity, 
as they conceive it,] comes about through the division of a unity, then 
unity is nothing else but measure. If it comes about through another 
cause, then unity has a cause existing in its nature and is not one of the 
things that [exist] by themselves and [not] one of the principles that 
exist and have no cause. 

(20) Then how is it that they placed unity and plurality among tke 
contraries and divided them into good and evil? Some of them inclined 
toward making number belong to the good because of what it includes 
by way of arrangement, composition, and order. Some inclined toward 
making unity belong to the good. But, if unity belongs to the good, how, 
then, is evil generated from the good? And how does the increase of good 
become evil? If [on the other hand] plurality is good and unity evil, then 
how does good result from the increase of evil? And how [can] the first 
and the principle be evil so that the better became the effect [and] the 
more deficient the cause? 

(21) Some of them placed [both] number and unity within the cate- 
gory of the good and made hyle evil. If hyle is caused, it would have a cause 
which will be attributed either to hyle or to form. If it is attributed to 
hyle, you will [immediately] know what is intended by [such a] statement.” 
If it is attributed to form, then how does the good engender evil? If it is 
not caused, then it is necessary in itself. It would then be either receptive 
of division or denuded [of divisibility]. If in itself it is receptive of divi- 
sion, then it is measure composed of units, according to their opinion, in 
which case it also belongs to the good. If in itself it is not divisible, then 
its essence is unitary, and the unitary inasmuch as it is unitary is good; 
for, according to them, the good has no meaning other than except its 
being unity and order [composed] of number—unity, for them, being 


more worthy of this. 








e\ecs| Sa old ¥00 


225 NAS Be NO GS ae JIB Wsere ol KGS! (4) 
ccarlng Siooyitny Gs Bld Ylang IK) IM ila 9 
faery plawh Orle gly oad Yadh WLS GLY, SGV aly ose 
Yanko diay y ale Wise gb SI ny Sele Gly lab Vive gh onus 
[OT] me Vy ss A ool ey Ble yell yp Ca, 
pad S Ally BD Ugandy shacil yi Spe fig aS ot (1+) 
Jhdke i peg platy Spy 5 ead ULI yy sal Jal lll ye 
AS9 Sb Fy NF ASS pire SEW BR. Ly irogl peng 
bail yy far GSS Ab edly Ls STIG SLE I slash jlo 
ie atl, [Ve] Jail bo ce 12 Lidl, Sel gOS Tt at 
Sadly Deed rll fry LIU setae y saul fo 5 ery (19) 
Gat Jb IE 5 po SN ol Ue aes dle Yi g X59 Jv 5 
SpASl El oly BSG 5 po I oes EI Gl, PKL wat, bb be Gis 
Ss Of Hope gl pda 95S oI UB. Yl Lely Ber S Sl 
by gy Lal i cpa Ue oT yy sie Gg Mgnt pL abs 
SS — ley ale — leg cle Ugh BIS damien SOIT 


“Ay ase Wyl iregly c oasll oy Lilly is, SEY par SH eas 





J acttie 


\o 




















Q 


10 


20 


256 Book Seven, Chapter Three 


(22) If they make unity’s being unity other than its being good, then 
all their principles are contradicted. And if they make the unitary good- 
ness, it would necessarily follow from this that hyle, because it is unitary, 
is goodness. Moreover, if the unitary includes goodness but [the latter] is 
[something] that attaches to it, being foreign to it, then let the thing to 
which [goodness] attaches be separated from it, and then this very same 
inquiry [continues to be] necessary for it. 

(23) [Moreover,] how are warmth, coldness, heaviness, and lightness 
generated from number so that there would be a number that necessi- 
tates that something move upward and a number that necessitates tha. 
something move downward? The falsity of this is [so obvious a thing: 
that there is no need to undertake showing [it]. 

(24) Some people among them made the things [that exist] to be 
generated from a number that corresponds with a quality and exists 
with it. As such, the principles would not be numbers [alone], but num- 
bers, qualities, and other things. And this, for them, is impossible. 

(25) Know, after all this, that mathematical things do not separate 
from goodness. This is because they are in themselves possessors of an 
abundant share of arrangement, order, and symmetry. Thus, each of 
them is in accordance with what it ought to have. And this is the good 
of all things. 

















leddl jy Oley Yor 


WS pb pel eats Lat YS pb any Kell gS yer gd (11) 
rly Ss — they WY - Ded GS SIL yg dyes Dhaogl Ler gl 
ce Opell syerld ae W AT Sy chet dR CSG 
Ai Loell (ue ang 

CRA DE IK So ddy Jd tay yy iho sae y SGT (Yr) 
sha pla 5b SJael Nett Apc gh Cony oaey Gb Ile tll Asad 
[TY]. Sb] USS 3e oe Le 

dong KAS lle, sas gy alg LAY) Iyer age Legs gl le (¥4) 
£Sp8l pay OLAS clalrel fy clolacl cud tgslll GSS s gee 
+ phe Slows laa, 

pel Cb GY Alby ay LI Sys Yobadet gl ake oy ely (¥0) 
SFG Aa le Se yn ot JS SUE, lltly CS ye ily Le wigs 


tot Fp Ving oa 











if 
| 
i 





er 


10 


20 





BOOK EIGHT 
On knowing the First Principle of all 
existence and on knowing His attributes; 


[consisting of ] seven chapters 





Chapter [One] 


On the finitude of the efficient and the receptive causes 


(1) Now that we have arrived at this stage in our book, it behooves us 
to conclude it with [the question] of the knowledge of the First Principle 
of all existence—whether He exists, whether He is one (having no com- 
panion in His rank, and no equal)—and to indicate His rank in existence, 
the ordering of the existents and their ranks below Him, and the state of 
return to Him, [in all this] seeking His help. 

(2) The first thing we ought to do in this is to show that the causes 
are in all respects finite, that in each of their classes there is a first prin- 
ciple, that the Principle of all of them is one, that He differs from all 
[other] existents, that He alone is the Necessary Existent, and that, in the 
case of every [other] existent, the beginning of its existence is from Him. 

(3) We say: As for [the fact] that the cause of a thing’s existence 
coexists with it, it is [something] that has been previously presented and 
ascertained for you.! 


— 257 - 











POPLWI PUPA 


Spt hee line Hi yaay AS ooh Spl Lill yee 3 


[sl ail] 
che? (1) 


ial, Afolal fall als 9 


rad yas ads gh gb lS «WLS yy al Ine bak od Sly [YY] (9) 
Wy Ay BA hk Y naly gh fry cope ye ye easly aS og gll Jail 
Se bey ell yy dyacloge Ml OSs ey copegll Gay le daly cal 
AL Ophtnene cA 2 gall 

Faken WS aye gl oy Jal gh de Jot gl a gp tebe Com be Sg (1) 
closed ead gladly cooly acne bie aly cpl Le rh oly 
sadgery Hal Aud ayy Sjly corey 2g] only 


Gy Bh ib han 80 ye GSS etl oe lide gh U sas (1) 


—~YoVv— 





10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


35 


258 Book Eight, Chapter One 


(4) We then say: If we suppose an effect and suppose for it a cause, 
and for its cause a cause, it is impossible that for every cause there would 
be a cause ad infinitum. [This is] because, [with regard to] the effect, its 
cause, and the cause of its cause, if all [three] are considered in relation 
to each other, the cause of the cause would be a first absolute cause to 
the two things, the two things having the relation of being an effect to it, 
even though they would differ in that one is an effect through an inter- 
mediary [and] the other an effect without an intermediary. This [being an 
absolute cause] would not be the case either with the last or the middle 
{effect] because the middle—which is the cause that is contiguous wih 
the effect—is a cause of one thing only, whereas the [second] effect is 
not a cause of anything. Each of the three has a special characteristic. 
The special characteristic of the extreme which is caused is that it is not 
the cause of anything. The special characteristic of the other extreme is 
that it is the cause of all that is other than itself. The special character- 
istic of the intermediary is that it is the cause of one extreme and the 
effect of another extreme. 

(5) The intermediary [will have this special characteristic] regardless 
of whether [it] is one or more than one and, if it is more than one, regard- 
less of whether it is finitely ordered or infinitely ordered. For, if it is 
ordered in terms of a finite plurality, then the sum of the number between 
the two extremes would be as one intermediary that shares the specific 
characteristic of the intermediacy with respect to the two extremes, and 
each of the two extremes will [still] have [its] special characteristic. 

(6) Similarly, if it is ordered as an infinite plurality and the extreme 
is not realized,” then the entire infinite extreme would share in the special 
characteristic of intermediacy. [This is] because whatever aggregate you 
take [from this infinite chain] would be a cause for the existence of the 
last effect and would [itself] be caused, since each of one [of its members] 
would be caused and the aggregate would be dependent in its existence 
on it. What is dependent on what is caused is [itself] caused, except that 
this aggregate is a condition for the existence of the last effect and a 
cause of it. And, the more you add, [enlarging] the encompassment [of the 
intermediaries], the judgment regarding the infinite would remain [the 
same]. Hence, it is impossible for an aggregate of causes to exist without 
including an uncaused cause and a first cause. For [otherwise] all of what 
is infinite would be an intermediary, yet without an extreme, and this is 
impossible. The statement of one who says that they—I mean, the causes 





\ 
| 
| 
| 
1 








oles Sa oll YOA 


StS ee ile Clay lle al day Myles oa lal Wide (4) 
lil 9 fle opel bilale ley dle, Jul GV ay pa dete 5K 
dee uN Sy « jupN Hille Syl Whe Adal dhe 258 am ll Mpa il 
pig dee se phe Jshee ey Lae Sol emael ghd WILE gly «Myla 
ihe — Jaleall Ral Abd go gill — Last GY Lea sly pe ISS 
Rae BION jo oly Sy 4 tt le pad Soll Lid oly + 2 [1A] 
ideal Noble, ce thik al Lull aisle oi 
Bd Jylary od ale al bu gll ole CIS cope 

Af tlped arly Gb GTO rely Ge gl Lely burg gS Hpuy (0) 
296 thee SAM IS Bij Glob ke 2 Ly Gy lL Li 
ORs Sl JI LD desi hole BIL aol, adel S ya al oe b 
Het yb lal y ely 

IS ar Te Syl aon ly ake EIST B55 US (9) 
se Jile WC oisl the Gl Y dhuigh ie oo Site alle 
Wp apes Ais ULI cJsbee Yes sely SSL Wher 2 «2 J ll 
Aley oN Jabal oyry 3 opt thabi ll gl YI cdyber Uylall ogee glcay 
OSS Oh 351 jm po BY lel pb J] SL pal (3 95 LG 
PE 5 ee OD yl ley Alga 52 Ae [Gd jasly dager ge le lan 
GK — Jal J Jal gol — Bla Sy Slew ay bb rk Mealy oS 


\0 





10 


20 


30 


259 Book Eight, Chapter One 


preceding causes—are infinite ([this] with his admitting the existence 
of two extremes such that there would be two extremes and, between 
them, infinite intermediaries) does not impede the purpose we are after: 
namely, to establish the [existence of the] first cause. 

(7) However, the statement of one who says that there are here two 
extremes and infinite intermediaries is a statement he utters with his 
tongue, without conviction. This is because, if [the intermediary] has an 
extreme, then it is finite in itself. For, if what is enumerated does not 
reach its extreme, then this is a meaning that pertains to the enumer- 
ated, not a meaning pertaining to the thing itself. For a thing to be finite 
consists in its having an extreme, and whatever there is between two 
extremes is necessarily limited by the two. 

(8) Thus, it has become evident from all these statements that there 
is here a first cause. For, [even] if that which is between the two extremes 
were not finite and the extreme exists, then that extreme would be a first 
for what is infinite and a cause that is not caused. 

(9) This explanation is suitable to be made an explanation for the 
finitude of all the classes of the kinds of causes, even though we have used 
it with respect to the efficient causes. Indeed, you have known that what- 
ever has an order is finite by nature. This is in the Physics,? even though it 
was similar to somewhat of an intrusion there. Let us, then, proceed to 
show the finitude of causes that are parts of the existence of a thing and 
[that are] temporally prior. These are the causes that are specifically 
designated as “elemental.” These constitute that [thing] from which 
a[nother] thing comes to be by being an essential part of the [first] thing. 

(10) In brief, understand by our saying “a thing from [another] 
thing” that something that belonged to a first thing entered the existence 
of a second. [This is] either the substance or essence belonging to the 
first thing (as, for example, the human in the boy, when it said that from 
him a man came to be), or a part of the substance and essence that 
belonged to the first thing (as, for example, the hyle in the water, when 
it is said that air comes to be from it). Do not take into consideration 
what is understood of somebody’s statement that such and such is from 
such and such if the latter is posterior to it, where the expression “from” 
indicates nothing of the essence of the first, but only posteriority. 








etl 5» oll Yo4 


und AM Liley ey Ob 9S Se cg al 2979 Aaa’ ae daly hy 
Ap all OU gay cad goo gil oe es 

«Shall Sy SB Ale iy Longs bb kya gl s bl IS Gi le (v) 
[VIS] eB SSB aad Golde yo Bb al gh LAV uly . stZEYI 555 
PANS eb NB oY gab 3 ae lb Sb oi I ge) 
Le nape aque 98 oda ow by Bbw gS ol ye Lal au 

ible ce LOB Ab. Bylale bya gl LyBN abe pear gets a (4) 
Saber pF We gy c aE YU Sol Sal abbas aa doggy calie ps 

BE oly «ll Sheol oleh pcr ale thy Je gl chan gl thay (4) 
che ab cold BOSS 5 Foyl cake oF Se Ls! Jal 3.8 WL 
OSS Al Jall ls Sly Be EB YS JIE GK ly colada od, 
Apaiall ral aos Nl fal cay gli b derdy + ctl ogey or el 
. tpt UB bj OK oh et ae OSL ny 

HBO 99 3 59 OKI dp gt Wye olay (05) 
Ih cena gb LLY oo cg «ll call ally pabt Le ceil + tll oS 
F dal So cM 6 All gi tly pak oy ojo gl Jay ace gal J 
IB] MIS SO Bl I oe pop ab Wy ogo ace GBA] 25 bf cel 
AED Red Je Je IO op Hot Ge ap BB Jai ly cane 6 


\o 





10 


15 


20 


30 


260 Book Eight, Chapter One 


(11) We say: A thing’s being in another—not in the sense of [being] 
after the [other] thing, but in the sense that in the second there is some- 
thing from the first included in its substance—is said in two ways: 

(12) One of the two is in the sense that the first is what it is in that it 
moves by nature toward perfecting [itself] through the second. An exam- 
ple of this is the boy who is a boy only because he is on the path toward 
manhood. If he becomes a man, he does not undergo corruption but 
becomes complete. [This is] because no substantial thing is removed from 
him—nor, moreover, an accidental thing, except what is connected with 
deficiency and by his being still in potency with respect to final perfectior. 

(13) The second [way] is that it is not in the nature of the first [thing] 
to move toward the second, even though the disposition to receive its 
form adheres to it necessarily—not, however, with respect to its quiddity 
but by way of that which carries its quiddity. And, if the second is from it, 
it is not from its substance that is in actuality, except in the sense of 
“after,” but is from part of its substance—namely, the second part con- 
nected with potentiality. An example of this is water that becomes air 
only by the casting off of its watery form from its hyle, the form of air 
becoming realized for it. 

(14) The first part, as it will not escape you, [is the one] where the 
substance belonging to the first [thing] will be the very [substance] that is 
realized for the second [thing]. [In the case of] the second part, it is not 
the very substance of the first [thing] that is realized for the second, but 
only a part of it, and the substance [in the first thing] undergoes corruption. 

(15) Since, in the first of the two divisions, there is some substance 
which is prior [but now] existing in that which is posterior,* it is either the 
very [substance that existed in the prior] or part of it. The second [thing] 
would be the sum of the substance of the first and a perfection added to 
it. And, since it has been previously known that the finite thing existing in 
actuality does not have actual parts—whether in terms of measure or 
meaning—that have orderings that are infinite, we will thereby dispense 








FAV BOA)| Sa oly v4. 


Bol eat Jeet on coas Ve stl p tll Sal dd O00) 
‘cy He Ile core BIEL IS ye el St 

NSM Nac ala dl yo bye WING Sol pas lewel (09) 
ey she WB ede MASA yb GAY pe ye Ul di tly 
te Aad See hee Suh GSS, ceil] 
2M MSGI gl nd NL be yl OK, cath ghey I 

oF oly «JO WA pa glaclk 2 J IM oS gi gly (1¥) 
OB Maly Cal ole er oy Sy cal ye ye Y aly pe Jy shal 
cae 3 OF Sy cam ens VY] ball cl we Kap) gla 
Bae ace ie MBE SN lye soa UL Wl fhe Saga Ue gill Stl LI pay 
FEL Bl iy pe WY rarey ASU 

JN GON pagdl ad Looe cobbe GY LSS, pail (4) 
Fh HN pam IMS sill ed Lae) stl edly pth bac 
7 whl 3 rudy ave 

Leb atl so LS lage ye pall a le page eal Jol FOU, (00) 
le JUS, UY ae Eee gt SEs fae iam gh gl coms 92 GT 
lal dg SY Jail Seal Edd + 0 gh Ale US ple 5 gS Uy «a 
Noy Vesa ab alee ob OSL Y tage gh age Lolal cial 


\o 











Qo 


10 


20 


30 


261 Book Eight, Chapter One 


with engaging in showing whether or not it is possible for a subject of 
this sort to precede [another] subject, [and so on] ad infinitum.° 

(16) As for the second of the two divisions, the necessity of finitude in 
it is also obvious. [This is] because the first [thing] is the second only in 
potency, by reason of the opposition between its form and the form of 
the second. This opposition is confined to the transformation of the two 
extremes in that each of the two is subject to the other, so that this is 
corrupted {to become] that and that [is corrupted to become] this. At 
this point, neither of the two is in reality prior to the other, but its priority 
would be accidental—in terms, that is, of individuality, not in terms of 
specificity. For this reason, the nature of water does not have a greater 
claim to be the principle of air than [the nature] of air has [to be the 
principle of] water; rather, it is as though the two are equivalent in exis- 
tence.® As for this individual [instance] of water, it can be [a principle] 
for this individual [instance] of air. And there is nothing to impede mat- 
ters if it so happens that these individual [instances] have neither an end 
nor a beginning. 

(17) We are not speaking here about what in its individuality (not in 
its specificity) is a principle and what is accidentally (not essentially) a 
principle. For we allow that there are infinite causes in the past and 
future. But it is incumbent on us to show finitude in the things that are 
causes in their essences. This is the state of affairs in the second of the 
two divisions—[this] after we also seek assistance from what has been 
said in the Physics. 

(18) The first part, however, is the one where [the thing] in itself'is a 
subjective [material] cause. But the converse, whereby the second becomes 
a cause of the first, does not obtain. For, inasmuch as the second is at [the 
stage] of completion and the first at [the stage] of moving toward comple- 
tion, it is not possible that there would be a movement toward completion 
after completion has been realized in the way that it is possible for com- 
pletion to take place after the movement toward completion. Thus, it 1s 
possible for a man to [come to be] from a boy, but it is not possible for a 


boy [to come to be] from a man. 








rlestl ie LYN an 


he fase JD Jocll Ine Ge Pegs GG GI Ke Joel gly JRE gl ge 
SAY gh tly 

INI N 4b Ew yey Lal pill po gael yw Stull, (99) 
pedi AL lily SOI 5y eo yy Syne gy GU ALLL Jo stall ye Ul 
Be add SU leo y yp ye oly KOKOb adil le WEL 9 
Bo ode Oli vel SY AELE eed lee Lay [PP] cll 3 
wd ay Asstt Gye Hadttl Loeb gl ep abe aad GS fe 
62d ET Les fy celal eld oy clad Le GS ob YI Ula’ 
i gee al a Ya clad ge I GK oI jek ell ye sat ae Ul, 
oy SAY PEAY a bY 

Pel 2 lady eps Ve ati yo LS bys LOS ely (19) 
sJoanlly p2lll dlp Wh Mle JS fle Ske SS gl 5.8 Ub oll Yu 
SE BIL yo log «She Wlydy Ce SU LAYS ale gs gl ele Uy, 
lard BS Lal gala gl ae «pal 

BO rad Key ee yoy Me aly go ill ge pV anilly (4) 
Pe SLY SL ase My SUSY we GSU LO gb J Wile 
WAM 5S SI jem WS SUN Jyuer oe II IS > 9K Gi 
DOTY] Sey ae a ee ole re oy Joy SED SUSAN GL aw 


\o 











10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


262 Book Eight, Chapter Tiyg 


Chapter [Two] 


Concerning doubts adhering to what has 
been said, and the resolution thereof 


(1) We have preferred in this exposition to stay close to what has been 
stated in the first teaching in the book bearing the name The Lesser 
Alpha. There are doubts about this subject that we must bring forth, and 
[we will] then devote ourselves to resolving them. Thus, someone may say: 

(2) “The First Teacher did not exhaust the division in [the case of a 
thing’s being from another, because he stated this [only] in two respects. 
One of the two is a thing’s generation from another that is contrary to 
it—in general, generation [from another] by way of transformation. The 
second is the thing’s completing itself through the thing toward which it 
moves and which is in the process of generation. 

(3) “This does not exhaust the division, because everything that is 
generated from another will first be generated in two ways—namely, 
either that the first, from which [the thing] is generated, [remains] in the 
way it exists, nothing of it ceasing to exist, only the notion of prepared- 
ness or what relates to it becoming corrupted; or that the first [is such 
that] it is only possible for the second to be generated from it by the ceas- 
ing to exist of something from [this] first. 

(4) “The first part [is such that] it is either [the case] that the thing 
is generated from it only when [the latter] is disposed [for such] and, 
thus, [the generated thing] becomes actual all at once, without adopting 
a [gradual] path; or only [when] it is disposed, and [the generated thing] 
becomes actual through a continuous motion, wherein it is in [a state] 
between pure disposition and pure completion. 

(5) “Thus, the generated thing in the first part is related to having 
been generated from one state, as [in] our saying, ‘From one ignorant of 
such and such a matter, there came to be one knowledgeable [of it].’ The 
generated thing in the second part is, at one time, related to being gen- 
erated from a state following a [gradual] path, as when we say, ‘A man 
came to be from a boy’; and, at another [time, it is related to being gen- 
erated] from a state of being only disposed, as when we say, ‘A man is 








leall yp oLyyl vy 


[gO jest] 
pod (VO) 
Yea do bh IS 


PON pct Bae 1 SAN gates gl gk the oo BET aw Geuy (9) 
ayer oh basa Sl ee SS pyle Ge bc gpheal Gall pun UN 
: Joi gh WB gt calls gd. QU 

Bo S50 oT dye eNOS Peet Seed INT aba gl (1) 
Jet JE GM GSU Habs cool FT je tl gS leased sywey le 
OS yb 3 Gilly aA ac je JSC 6 ttl gS Sty LLY 

BWI GS tll (6 USL PV AL oe De lay (1) 
tin en pl al3 oyery le gear GSU SM Kh Ul: ge, Val gay coygery 
A SU SN gS ol Uy cae gh be gh Le oun YY nly oo 
Sly 2 dhe GU AK 

GPP La laa Gay ce ttl ace GK SAVIN melly () 
Sipe Soll Pd Lad ae 9 IK gh Ae pb je ds Jal 
[TY] dpall SUSY Gy Copall slau gy led gS dled 

OSU B cisely De ye Fal ae J pel d GS 9K (0) 
SLi ale 5 56 STAI eS pel 9 gly lle US ph Yall ge 
“a AM Ge GO WB Ld ae le Ge iby hey ous ye GS WS 


\o 











Qn 


10 


20 


30 


263 Book Eight, Chapter Fiyg 


gencrated from a sperm.’ For the designation ‘boy’ is for the one pre. 
pared to become perfected as a man while on the way [to becoming 
a man], whereas the term ‘sperm’ is [applied] to the one prepared to 
become a human without the condition of being on the way [to becoming 
a human]. 

(6) “Thus the First Teacher has left out from the divisions that 
which completion is, where that from which it is generated is not related 
to the motion that is towards perfection. Moreover, not every actualiza- 
tion from a pure preparedness is a perfection. For the soul may believe 
the erroneous opinion and move from potentiality to actuality regarding 
it. But [it] would not be by way of perfection, nor, moreover, by way of 
transformation. 

(7) “Also, generable things are formed from the elements. They thus 
become transformed when mixed, but not corrupted in their essential 
forms, as you have known. Hence, the mixture would not exist in them, 
not because the opposite of the mixture ceases to exist, but simply because 
of its nonexistence. This division would not belong to the division exem- 
plified by air coming to be from water. This is because the elements do 
not become corrupted in their species but become transformed. Nor does 
it belong to the division exemplified by the man coming to be from the 
boy. [This is] because this is not convertible; thus, the boy would not 
come to be with the corruption of the man, whereas {in the former case] 
it is convertible. Thus, from the mixture there would come to be some- 
thing that becomes mixed after the corruption of the [first] mixture. 

(8) “Moreover, [Aristotle] did not discuss the subject inasmuch as it 
is the subject, but only in terms of what the expression ‘generation from 
a thing’ indicates. It is known that this is not said of every relation of the 
generated thing to its subject. For [that thing] among! [the things] dis- 
posed to have a thing generated through perfecting itself has no name 
with respect to its being [something that has] a disposition; and no change 
from its state prior to its becoming something actualized accompanies 
it. Thus, it is not said that a thing is generated from it. Hence, it is not 
said that a man is generated from the human, but [only] from the boy. 








olecsl Sa oly vay 


dacenall sll aly Sghall byt hey Sa 3) aarenall 92 Geral eel lb 
Adsl BK gl bt Y Cig gl 

oH GSN ISG MS TL LV 5 SWI plall Ay 2 (3) 
faye adel eet Fel Sb Lely JULY oo SLI oe 
OKs isd ye Ab fall ced ad ly tas dl gb USCA Jo 
DRL jou Je Lal Yy GLY Jw feo 

ECON ace hate 9S OE le SS polull Gb Lely (V) 
ao Sap LY] Neb FT cl QS ccale L le AIT Ly ype Jield 
add KG Se Sl ell ye 9 ad nl Da 9S bib ase J cht! 
Sal eid go Vy «hare ech ae Yelgl B ads Y peliall W Uy «oll 
cer pl slaty pall GE {Kay VS AY fall ye Jot gS ad 
CUM shad ae al Ae et call 5 OS «See Lary 

Lai ade Jou le pegroall 2 Kipp orll Jo VS Lob Lal (4) 
BE be SB ae yoy J oS Re SS IE Y Le Gl pgleny tl 5 GS 
PL Re ye ad pal Y SUSU etl ee gS CA laa [rE] 
GS + tll GL Stee - Jadl Uy DI JS a NAT Ge i ada, Vy ae 
Le Bye ye A el ral SY «eal Ge Sy ory GLY 5p GSU Bae 
SOS ae USS AL yb Lal VELL YS Ya, tt ys 
«Le pl Shg5 Ab pasa gl LAB Jal MN cy Dl ase ae yp aed) abe doy ow 





aL 


\o 











Gy 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


264 Book Eight, Chapter Tivo 


[ This is] because ‘boy’ is a name for [the boy] by way of his being incom- 
plete and because he becomes complete only through transformations 
[that take place] also on the way of development. It is as though, when 
named [it] has a meaning indicating a name that will cease [to apply to] 
him once he becomes actualized [as a man]. It is as though, as long as 
one does not imagine the ceasing to exist of something in it by virtue of 
which it deserves the name, one does not say that something is gener- 
ated from it. From this it comes out that the formation of that in which 
the generated thing’s relation to the subject is not named is not included 
in this division; and from this it comes out that the relation to the suk- 
ject is accidental, not essential. [This is] because the boy inasmuch as hz 
is a boy cannot become man such that he would be [both] boy and man. 
Rather, the meaning understood by the term ‘boy’ is corrupted so that it 
becomes ‘man.’ Thus, in the last analysis, generation from the boy comes 
to have the meaning of ‘after’; and, moreover, [Aristotle] would then be 
talking only about the subjects that are accidental. 

(9) “Moreover, if air is generated from water, then either it is, in 
some manner, its element, or it is not. If it is not, then preoccupation 
with its mention is vain. If it is, then it does not necessarily follow that, if 
the air changes in its active quality into water, thus becoming an element 
of it, it would not change in some other quality and thereby become an 
element of another thing—for example, if, in its moistness, it becomes 
an element of fire without reverting back into water. The same would 
apply to fire with respect to another quality not contrary to which air 
[was] transferred. The material causes would, hence, regress infinitely 
without reverting back to [a former state]. Thus, it has not become evi- 
dent from what he posited that it must necessarily revert [to its former 
state], but only the possibility of [such] reversion has become evident. 
The possibility of finitude is connected with this. [However,] this is not 
what he is seeking after, his quest being the necessity of finitude.” 

(10) Let us now begin with resolving these doubts. We say: 

(11) The words of the First Teacher are best [understood as] pet- 
taining only to the principles of substance inasmuch as it is substance; 
not inasmuch as it is substance subjected to the occurrence to it of that 
which would neither render its substantiality subsistent nor, moreover, 
perfect it. Hence, his discourse on the generation of substance from its 
element or from a subject belonging to it would be either by way of the 
species of substance absolutely, or by way of the perfection of the species 


of substance. 





lect ye ole at 


OSE SN aa ge end eg tce OS Sid cee Slat any Wl GS 
Shee yy Leal 3 Jo pb peng J gS pe VL 
Shame Y re 8 U all SY ctl iY doll ppl] Kal gS 
> rl mel oe papal all sent heyy Lee POSS Oley pr 
Je KL Lal Ky se eas A AT cally SI 9S. We) ja, 0 
| ph Mole, 2g 
crmg Al \pace elygl an Ola UGS gi LY ab Lal, (4) 
log! S13 Cow ald SS Gly - flol » Sy JAE Sal 5b. bY sl 
SOIT fn Ye SA pase prard ASU Sabet LAS 9 Lacy 
Ciera ps ae pad, Site Te lee ped: 
oll Wall 9 Sd. el gl el es Mile 2b elas 9 lus 
‘ee Kon tl day io ox [tO] gS: aor Up AN pb als 
calles ld ald. alot! KGL oN shady . earl gS gh b « Blow Y pony 
“ALT ery Aigller 
Iaith ASAI ode Job Ni pty (\+) \o 
oe Oe et \) 
AO KS, AS Lal, clyage pp Ld byyee payee gs Pe 
ler ables SS Je le Lal Fao ge gl conat PA OS 
pdt es SISOS fw le Ul, 














YH 


15 


20 


30 


265 Book Eight, Chapter Two 


(12) It is also the most appropriate thing to [understand] his dis- 
course to pertain to natural, not artificial, generation. If this is the case, 
then the element would be an essential part in the existence of the exist- 
ing being and also of the thing generated from it. I do not mean by 
“essential” that it is necessary for the existence of what is composed 
from it and another. For this [state of affairs] exists also for the element 
in engendered beings that are not essential—as, for example, [the exis- 
tence of] the element in a white body. But by “essentiality” I mean that 
the element’s being a part is something essential to [the thing], so that 
that element will not subsist in actuality unless it is a part of that thing ~ 
or [a part] of that for which the thing is a natural perfection, since [tie 
element] would then be part of a substance or something else governed 
by the same rule [that governs the substance]. [I do] not [mean] that the 
element would [initially] subsist without that [thing] and that, subse- 
quently, it would come about for it to become part of [something] com- 
posed of it and of an accident in it that neither renders it subsistent nor 
perfects that which it renders subsistent (whereby its being a part would 
be essential [only] with respect to the composite and would not be essen- 
tial with respect to itself). Rather, it must never be devoid of being a part. 

(13) If this is the case, the subject is not without one of two [alterna- 
tive] things. 

(14) [The first alternative] is that it is rendered subsistent either by 
this thing or by another that takes its place. Thus, there would have been 
in it, prior to the occurrence of the engendered form, some other thing 
that plays the same role in rendering it subsistent, except that [the form] 
would not [now] coexist with that [thing]. Hence, from the element and 
[from] that thing there would have occurred a substance, [but] when the 
second came to be, that [former] composite substance became corrupted. 
This, then, is one of the two [alternative] divisions. 

(15) [The second alternative] is that the element may be rendered 
subsistent, not by this thing that has been engendered, but by a form 
which has not been completed in terms of what naturally belongs to it. It 
has, however, come to be in such a way that it merely rendered matter 
subsistent, without the realization of that thing which is by nature the 
final cause of this form. Thus, the substance would have become realized, 
but not realized perfectly in [its] nature. If, then, that perfection belongs 
to it by nature (natural power being the principle of motion toward per- 
fection that is by nature), it follows by necessity that such a thing would 
not exist in its state of natural wholeness for a time wherein there is 





FAVA] we 
lets ye oly YV0 


OS Hy eral apo arldl 5S Jao aK gl Lal BSI, (09 


Cd Ae SN a yory ob Lely FH age 8 Ltd eye esll GUMS” 


aye bal DAB cok uy 04 SN aged yy 5 Kal aly ol 
Shasta sel SS, «nll LS el ASM SF ISM o paral 
alge SK STVL Jail pel ol psi.9 ct plese pall (5% 
SIV AS AS SV gl ad beje S31 ell lS, W gle as 
Ad LE oy de Sy op eye gles She ay cals 09 ps pall OK, 
SH Boll II le Sy cans Uy a Lge ga 
Mi OS 56 mV gloom ca Gl olill Lib a 

eayal dol 5 Fp ll Jou ol AIS Gh bly (\r 

bE 8 KS celia og SU gl tll Wy LA SGI LL (V8) 
Time CAV acas oli psk Te babi ls yall Jen 3 
dad SU GT Le cage ANS yey pecall ye pam gh 0d 9 KS [TFT] 
steel xe} Vang SL a ght ots 

tae: Sy Sam sill tll ay Vegis 2b petal GS gl Lily (8) 
dram oly « dais P Halll py Coy chee ob YS, abd Y LS AS 2 
MS ar aly far ob ad 9 So: ‘alah, ay guall ody ALE ale yo dll SI 
SUS AL Le Rada yal, celal YUS SLA hd gly . gia 
bh; donc) her Le Io gogo + gill 2 SLY Gling oils. ced al 


\o 








10 


20 


30 


266 Book Eight, Chapter Two 


no impediment for it, while not moving by nature toward that perfection. 
It follows necessarily, then, in this division, that the thing possessing the 
disposition is in motion toward perfection. 

(16) It has become clear, then, that all the types of the generation of 
substance that are considered in this way fall necessarily under one of 
these two divisions; likewise, [it is clear that], in all the types of the gen- 
eration of one thing from another, the recipient in both [divisions] is an 
essential part, considered [both] in itself and considered with respect to 
the composite. 

(17) One should not say that it is possible that the natural powe> 
does not move toward its perfection due to the lack of an external helpe- 
or [because of] a preventive impediment—an example of the first being 
the absence of sunlight for grains and seeds, and of the second, diseases 
that cause wilting. The answer to this is that the words of the First 
‘Teacher are not about that which necessarily moves in actuality. Rather, 
they pertain to that which [is such] that, if there were no impediment to 
its nature and where the natural causes that naturally assist its nature 
exist, then it would be moving toward perfection and it would be on the 
way of development. 

(18) It has become evident, then, that the rest of the divisions are 
not intended in this investigation, [but] only the division mentioned 
[above]. Indeed, [applying] this rule in the rest of the divisions would not 
be sound. For it is possible in [what is] other than the generation of sub- 
stance that, if we suppose a subject with which one begins, that it would 
continue—by reason of accidental matters—to acquire one disposition 
after another without coming to an end. An example of this is wood. For, 
whenever you inform it with a certain shape, it becomes disposed through 
this for some [other] thing; and, if its disposition is actualized, it 
becomes disposed for something else. The case is similar with the soul in 
its apprehension of the intelligibles—and it seems that there is nothing 
to impede [the application of] this idea in natural transformations. 





rest! ye OLY 
old mw 


pot a Piao phos USI Als abl Soca 9b gay abd gle Y 
SSM Goce anced 9S 5I 

sal Ne Coney EM atl OS Sleel cae Gh gil wh ad (4) 
tll OS ge |e Shel oer NS Spy po anil oe soled fois yo 
whrrly Andi doyltol Lb bye Lee 3 Juli oS WSS et ys 
SM I Lait 

WS Ae Yall 5d) 9S gl jou al: Jo Sl WB uly (V) 
ed gb jue yee jlaed JVI SL Ck ge, TIE oH ee jee 
ut dail pall OS Ms 5s OL . AWOL aL AM SU Jit, | sydd, 
iB « Karl Fle So 3 sill ob: «Sail Ao dle VS cil 3 
2 iSy SLA II Sarin OS cia ye Cale ala niall Kall OLS 
[YTV] Sol ab 

pl cet heb toate oF ALN Sle Gi 53h be ass (\A) 
PANS oo jy sb. TMI me ob SL a 28d 
Boye age ainda Isla aK, Shp Y Solis rea Luo 3 13) 
Ze lly oY lh dal ty OE Lb td soley gl ey 
Blas eh sats Ayah padell ISG ST LY wcu| Joell oat ul 
«sll Ne Med ee Yad YELL 5% 


\o 








20 


30 


267 Book Eight, Chapter Tivo 


(19) As for the difficulty that has been mentioned concerning the 
generation of things from the elements, that it does not belong to either 
of the two divisions, its resolution becomes evident from what has been 
said—namely, that the element singly is not disposed for the reception 
of animal and vegetative forms, but that this disposition is realized for it 
by means of the quality that occurs in it through mixture. And in the 
mixture there necessarily occurs some transformation in terms of a nat- 
ural thing belonging to it, even though it is not [something] that renders 
[it] subsistent. Hence, its relation to the form of the mixture belongs to 
the division of what comes to be through transformation. If the mixture 
occurs in it, then the reception of the animal form would be a perfection 
of that mixture for it and [its] nature would move it toward [that per- 
fection]. Thus, its relation to the animal form would be [akin to the] 
relation of the form of the boy to the man. For this reason, the animal 
form is not corrupted to become purely a mixture, just as the boy does 
not come to be from the man, whereas the mixture becomes corrupted to 
what the simple form necessitates, as in the case of water transforming 
into air. Animal is not an element of the substance of elements but is 
transformed to them inasmuch as they are simple. 

(20) [This] mixture and simplicity therefore succeed each other 
over the subject. Simplicity does not render the substance of the element 
subsistent but completes the nature of each of them inasmuch as it is 
simple. Thus, fire would be pure fire in [terms of] the quality that is in 
it that is a necessary concomitant of its form, the same being the case 
with water and with every one of the elements. Therefore, the genera- 
tion of animal relates two [types of} generation, each with a governing 
rule proper to it with respect to the necessity of finitude. It is, thus, also 
included in the two mentioned divisions [above]. 

(21) As for the difficulty that arises with respect to the fact that 
[Aristotle] took from the elements only that of which it is habitually said 
that a thing is generated from it, not that [of which] it is not habitually 
[so said], the answer to this difficulty is that the rules governing things 
do not change with respect to names, but one must seek the meaning. 
Let us, then, seek [the meaning], and let us know the [true] state of 


affairs regarding it. We say: 





lect ye olay vv 


sol fe daly «polit! ye Lh gS pay ull ae ul, (V4) 
Sil Viale a apie path gy «JB 05 Ut Lah lig Yd «peal 
CH been MAAS shall alls ab frase fp ATLL ALL pall 
WS Lee Sahay cal ack yl 3 Llc Vad Sane chy 
OS cil a far bly LLY SS Si alll 3 CIN ype I ei 
A) ead 9S vata Cal Apes eclih HU VIS Bay ye gd 
I MARL ay gall 2adi od I ol ell 25 Sly ype 
Baral om AC ais «Sel ie all GY US lye oper pl 
Jt peleall past Lene bod acd selyell ll ell Jog LS cadet 
Ba Pm oy ell on 

cmd tb lally ppl Jo GLa dLtly cho il oS (-) 
SS dat oe Hee oly Whack JS Ly polall aye pst 
oly SMG WMS Gye UG Yd NAT Sado Hb jl 
PI eae Se lage ly Sy iS Ger aS GB. petal ys 
[YA]. SONI Spaeth 9 Lal Joris gb 

Hoe be poll yw del Ulclage ye eae Sa LI, (79) 
Al gay Atle oe IL cial agg ol Leggs ace All gh dle gh asl 
wails ¢ all dais I om Sy cra yee ie LAN gL cs 
Jed ab SLI oat, 


\o 














QO 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


208 Book Eight, Chapter Two 


(22) If the element or subject from which a thing is generated pre- 
cedes [the generated] thing in time, then it has, in terms of its priority, 
a special characteristic which will not exist when [the generated thing] 
is realized—namely, the strong disposition. The substance is only gener- 
ated from [the element] because of its disposition to receive its form. If 
the disposition ceases to exist with the actualization [that takes place], 
then the substance would exist, and it is impossible to say that it is being 
generated from [the disposition]. 

(23) If, then, with respect to the disposition, it did not have a name, 
but one takes for it its name which it has in itself and which also belongs 
to it when it is not possible for the thing to be generated from it, [this] 
would not be the name with which the meaning of generation is con- 
nected. If it did not have a name with respect to disposition, then it cannot 
be expressed by utterance, even if the meaning is realized in existence. 
And, if the meaning belonging to the thing named is realized in [some- 
thing] other than the thing named, then its rule governing the meaning 
[of the latter] would be identical with the rule governing the meaning of 
the [former], even though the nonexistence of the name prohibits its 
rule governing the utterance from being identical with the rule governing 
the utterance of [the former]. 

(24) If we take the statement that would belong to that name if it 
were posited, we would be able, then, to say about everything, “It comes 
to be from the element belonging to it.” For example, it would be possi- 
ble for us to say, “The rational soul comes to be from an ignorant soul 
disposed to knowledge,” except that we disallow the use of the expres- 
sion “generation” for what is outside generation in substance. Thus, we 
are not permitted to say concerning the rational soul, “It came to be 
from a soul disposed toward knowledge.” But this is necessarily allowed 
in substances, and this is what we are speaking about. Nonetheless, as I 
consider it, this rule does not differ with respect to substances and their 
essences and substances with their states. 

(25) As for the statement of that [person] who says,” “This would be 
a coming to be from something in the sense of ‘after’ [another],” [the 
answer is that there] is not any meaning of “after” that would render 
void the generation we are seeking.? For the generated thing comes to 
be after that from which it is generated. Rather, what the First Teacher 
rejected as spurious and did not discuss is that there is no other meaning 





elect sy oll YVA 


Spl J Aras GO] «tll ae GS cilegall sl nasal gl (11) 
Lely - Gos satel ay cal pam we OSS Viol dl and de yal gb 
AG AL LAI BL Ly ype Jplslacel ban ad 5 % 
Ais Sa il Ste I Vw G8 paghl vey « fal 

#1 gO Amel ad SST ye ee ge od Sal (14) 
BS ell oe So ce ttle GK alee V lace Lala oS il 
ly <add She SI Se eel aba aN ge yd Kh GB -g KI en 
eB Meole mall 5S Sill all GU lady fo yegl Gel all 5 
SKI es pe pre IC gy alld Ke geal BAK Gh jan 
. lls Se ball 3 

gl kee LSI Ley SS J po US 9 Keil Jl tasl bb (v4) 
GES WL ail Sei gl TT 9e a peill yp KL BS 
F Sa GSO IE LS GSS LB laa et SLY cll bac ee Mabe ail 
Sy Spal acne al ye C58) SABLA ll 3 Jad gl jou 98 «pad 
Si Wa Bide Vmod Leb al le Yd LOSS ald 3 de Y jee 
[Th] Whale aibl ay Wilde aids 

Bh lh a ene tll ISK bie ol tl a Ul, (v0) 
“AF OSE BVA Serra sill SN Koh GES am eas 9 
OY Sl sea sy Vy JM lal ai 5th Ul ghee Law IN 9 SI 


\e 


\o 





10 


20 


30 


40 


269 Book Eight, Chapter Two 


[involved] except posteriority, as in the example he gives and explains. 
If, however, it is generated from the thing in the sense of being posterior 
to it, in that there remains in it from the substance that [the generator| 
had that which is also [part] of the substance of the second, then it is not 
[generated from it] in the sense of [being] posterior only, and this would 
be the thing we are discussing. 

(26) As for the statement of that [person] who says, “[Aristotle] dis- 
cussed the element that is accidental, not the element that is essential,” 
a sophism befell it, for the reason that the element for generation is not 
identical with the element for rendering something subsistent in the 
consideration [of this matter], even though in essence it is one and the 
same. For the element in essence for generation is an essence connected 
with potentiality, whereas the element in essence for rendering [some- 
thing] subsistent is an essence connected with actuality. Each of them is 
an element by accident to that to which it is not an element by essence. 
[Aristotle’s] discussion is concerned with the element that is for genera- 
tion, not for rendering [something] subsistent. Thus, he would only have 
taken the element by accident if he had taken the element for generation 
as a principle for rendering [something] subsistent. For the boy is not an 
element for the rendering of the man subsistent, nor would the sub- 
sistence of the man be from him; but he is an element for the coming 
to be of the man, and [it is] from him [that] the coming to be of the 
many takes place. 

(27) If someone says, “The First Teacher is discussing the principles 
of subsistence absolutely, why, then, does he avoid [discussing] the ele- 
ment belonging to substance in its subsistence—as, for example, the 
subject of the heavens—restricting himself to the element belonging to 
substance in its generation?” The answer to this is [as follows]: 

(28) The element of its subsistence is part of it, existing in it in actu- 
ality. The finitude of things existing in actuality within something finite 
existing in actuality is not problematic. Howbeit, he who has advanced 
to study this science and has known the rest of what has preceded will 
find problematic, in the matter of the finitude and infinity of causes, 
only [the question] of whether the same [state of affairs] obtains in the 
elements that are potentially one after the other, differing in proximity 
and remoteness. 

(29) As for the other doubt concerning the discourse about water 
and air, its solution is easy for one who has known our discussion about 
the clements where we discussed generation and corruption. The dis- 
course here, however, pertains to generation of one thing from another 











rlecdl oy oll v4 


Br tN OSL Uy ae pty ea eit) JN Aine pb gi ll 
Fan Bt pe y bal » LL yas or de db coon SSI 
Ad LO gill GS Led we a 

BN paeall G99 ey gall pall 3 AK ail: fa da JB Uy (yn) 
els patel ame gh pas) GSU pat jl ae Ree AS aby wd coIdTL 
bya Ryle 1d yo GS OIL pawl gb LL g» 92 3S Gly lsd 3 
wed Ce yall pee ot ge oly Sy c Jai Bll ld paelydll til paslly 
UE gS pled gall BY 5 SU gil ell bay oldtl a Lpese yo 
Iya ed all ob pls Lee oS att pest Sel Soy, pestl del 
SPH OF Ky SN GS pee Ky oN dae SY, Sell ed 

6 lb Ulan oh tgale 3 KK LJ all gl 8 Jb GB (vy) 
EAI pall Je pally cll ppoye fe ald 9 papal gill poll ye 
alld Ge Ci bb Sa Sd page 

Bayona yy gals tay « ail dae pty cae peal d pare (vA) 
Bay [PE] call ta hes olay je gl de «atl sprigs se dg asl 
Kgl Ke oal Yas Yy dll als yl pale Key Ub GL L fle de 
dally eb Ms ST oy Lely sdb Sl polall 3 Us 

BE By ye Se per dod coldly Ul Que 9 SVL Ul, (v4) 
OF 2 bee IS gl le. sLudly 5 Io LG Ee pola (3 Lo” 


\o 








er 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


270 Book Eight, Chapter Three 


essentially. Every change from that which is in essence is in one opposi- 
tion, being confined to it. Thus, that which is essentially generated from 
it becomes necessarily corrupted in terms of it. The same applies to the 
other [instance] as well, so that the totality of changes becomes restricted, 
each class of them confined to two extremes, the one reverting to the 
other. Thus, all the mentioned difficulties have been resolved. 


Chapter [Three] 


On showing the finitude of the final and formal causes; 
on proving [the existence of] the first principle in an absolute 
manner; on making decisive the statement on the first cause 
absolutely and on the first cause restrictedly, showing that what 
is absolutely a first cause 1s a cause for the rest of the causes 


(1) As for the finitude of the final causes, [this] becomes clear to you 
from the place in which we attempted to establish their existence and 
[where] we resolved the doubts concerning them. For, if the existence of 
the final cause is established, its finitude is established. This is because the 
perfect [final] cause is the one for the sake of which all things are, it itself 
not being for the sake of anything else. For, if beyond the perfect [final] 
cause there is a perfect [final] cause, the first would be for the sake of the 
second. The perfect [final] cause would thus not be a perfect [final] cause, 
when it has been supposed to be a perfect [final] cause. If this is the case, 
then whoever allows perfect [final] causes to proceed continuously one 
after the other would have denied causes that in themselves are perfect 
{and final], negating the nature of the good which is the perfect [final] 
cause, since the good is that which is sought for its own sake, everything 
else being sought for its sake. For, if something is sought for the sake of 
some other thing, then it would be [merely] beneficial, not a true good. 

(2) It has thus become clear that rendering the infinity of perfect 
[final] causes necessitates the removal of perfect [final] causes. For, who- 
ever allows the possibility that beyond every perfect end there is a perfect 
end annuls the rational act. For it is selfevident that the rational being 





Hladdl je oly! YVs 


a “ 


parte broly inline Sb 9g SUL SO yo pd Sy SIL etl ye etl 
JP MS BEV fy ayy Ig ed lal we GO Gil KS. Ide 
Je Leasol per abe Me ipa Yer dh JS ciypase ll de 

£5 SOM <2 eae chest 0B. 5) 


[ESO Laid] 
ches (>) 
liber JI LM Ltly ay gally Aslal fla Pea YD 
Nada JN alalh y « las JST all 3 Syl) Judy 
Sua sli ale dillen yale ye Lgl glay 


Whey BLL ad Wyle i aol yo ct gad A3b0h Jl ats UI, (9) 
alah GY Sy {gals cab Laogeny Cat GL A2tal aladl gb yl oA 
Bob Tet ely oS Wey LA LS I 
By chal abe BVI SG alo ASE Jo Sl cS Ral ae LL ala eL,, 
oad ALN Iho 95S gh je Ged LS GEG [rey] uli dle cy 
A go BM DN hace Maly etl BRAM Jl By 0 gel ae tne 
rot EU ale oils LAW plang caida coill ge LI 3) cL 
Lake | Leal 8 51 «5 lly 
SOF SRAM Jhb AAACN Jth als Y Glad 9 gi pail a (v) 
be ads UL La SF aan le lb th Jd Slad aib LE gti Seg Gl je 








10 


20 


30 


271 Book Eight, Chapter Three 


performs only whatever rational act he performs because he seeks an 
objective and a final end. [ This is] so much so that, if an agent among us 
were to perform an act without having a rational purpose, it is said that 
he is acting frivolously and recklessly, that he acts not inasmuch as he is 
someone possessing reason but inasmuch as he is an animal. 

(3) If this is the case, then the things which the rational person qua 
rational person enacts must be limited, yielding objectives that are 
sought for their own sake. And, if the rational act can have only a limited 
objective—this not belonging to the rational act inasmuch as it is a rational 
act, but inasmuch as it is an act through which the agent seeks an enc, 
and, hence, it is as it is by way of being something having a purpose—the1 
its having a purpose disallows the possibility of there being a purpose for 
every purpose. It is thus obvious that the statement of someone who says 
that beyond every purpose there is a purpose is not true. As for natural and 
animal acts, it has also been known from other places that they are for the 
sake of teleological ends. 

(4) Regarding the formal cause of the thing, the finitude [of formal 
causes] is quickly understood from what has been said in the Logic and 
from what has been known regarding the finitude of the parts existing in 
actuality for the thing according toa natural order—that the complete 
form of a thing is one, that the multiple comes about from it by way of 
generality and particularity, that generality and particularity require the 
natural order, and that that which has a natural order is known to be 
finite. Reflecting on this much [of the matter] is sufficient and dispenses 
with lengthy elaboration.! 

(5) We [now] begin and say: If we say [that something is] a first 
efficient principle—rather, a first absolute principle—then it must nec- 
essarily be one. If, however, we say [it is] a first elemental principle and 
a first formal principle and the like, [such a principle] would not have 
the same necessity of being one as the necessity of this in the Necessary 
Existent. [This is] because none of [these causes] would be a first absolute 
cause because the Necessary Existent is one and has the status of the 
efficient principle. Hence the one, the Necessary Existent, would also be 


a cause of these first [causes]. 





re ote xv) 


ALE A ely ad Io be Le Je GB all om cial lopade pad Jil a 


Ohne 98 Ey Jie 93g LY aly Sjbony Coe | 5 lie 

Se a Le lal Yat yA GSS gl ond IK bY (1) 
ape WS Y Saal Jadll STL. ya sagas CUE 0S ciogane 
M(B de 8 Ler Sh lee Jab ge Ledge ye ial Lal) old ty call 
ail eae Ib aS gab ALE 4d ye Le tg AMIS 33] 992 all foal 
JAI LI, aE Ws, a Sols gay JB oar Y ail yall ALA 
AG eel aly 3 Lal le a idl phy dala 

M2 «AD JB UE Meals a3 oe tick oll ala UI, (<) 
Mal by guall slidacncas eas ‘stl bagel ely als oy ole 
Prise ol esally pull pi ge Le py SS Sly ciaenly « + gall 
4b ei Ih ob dy cali le ab ab as ley acl CS gah 
[TEX]. shill je aby 

oF ond Glan Sy ee lob yi by Us bo Uydentty (0) 
Nom MS oy hey ye Sl iley aes Jol tle Us [5] Ul, loss 
sls lpr vel, Ys GSS VAY cope erly Fld yey ely GK 
cals mt gh So. deta Ll dab > 92g cody aye only SY « lille. 
SM A dey Ia Lal ye ayengl 


\o 




















or 


10 


20 


30 


272 Book Eight, Chapter Three 


(6) It has become evident from this and from what we have previ- 
ously explained that the Necessary Existent is numerically one. It has 
{also] become evident that everything other than Him, if considered in 
itself, [is found to be] possible in its existence and hence caused, and it is 
seen that, [in the chain of things] being caused, [the caused existents] 
necessarily terminate with Him. Therefore, everything, with the exception 
of the One who in His essence is one and the existent who in His essence 
is an existent, acquires existence from another, becoming through it an 
existent, being in itself a nonexistent. This is the meaning of a thing’s 
being created—that is, attaining existence from another. It has absolu:e 
nonexistence which it deserves in terms of itself; it is deserving of none x- 
istence not only in terms of its form without its matter, or in terms of its 
matter without its form, but in its entirety. Hence, if its entirety is not 
connected with the necessitation of the being that brings about its exis- 
tence, and it is reckoned as being dissociated from it, then in its entirety 
its nonexistence becomes necessary. Hence, its coming into being at the 
hands of what brings about its existence is in its entirety. No part of it, in 
relation to this meaning, is prior in existence—neither its matter nor its 
form, if it possesses matter and form. 

(7) Hence, the whole, in relation to the first cause, is created. Its act of 
bringing into being that which comes to be from it would entirely rule out 
nonexistence in the substances of things. Rather, it is an act of bringing 
into existence that absolutely prevents nonexistence in things that bear 
perpetualness. This, then, is absolute creation. Bringing into existence 
[in the] absolute [sense] is not any kind of bringing into existence. And 
everything is originated from that One, that One being the originator of 
it, since the originated is that which comes into being after not having been. 

(8) [Now,] if this posteriority were temporal, then the antecedent 
precedes it and ceases to exist with its origination. The [antecedent] 
would, hence, be described as something that was before and is now no 
more. Hence, nothing would have become disposed to become originated 
unless there had been something before it that ceases to exist by its com- 
ing into existence. Thus, origination from absolute nonexistence—which 
is creation—becomes false and meaningless. Rather, the posteriority 
here is essential posteriority. For, the state of affairs that a thing pos- 
sesses from itself precedes that which it has from another. If it has exis- 
tence and necessity from another, then from itself it has nonexistence and 





elect 5 oly vy 


coal, sels ogg oly gh aad GLY Ley ba ge gh ob (4) 
PAA, Miler SS coo yey BIKE KIS oI Bhslger Lgl ghy 
Gl age ably cooly ail ge oll 2o1 JY! ott F g5b all Ble Yas Lel 
Wy ID Od pecly cy ul Ay ab Ge ayes ae bc ageey Ald) ya 
(Glee lb 9 ann p06 aly cod Ge ayo fi dl led sgt aS gas 
Ia} IS LIE, bs cal yee 92 Salk gl eadole gys Ay gas poral Gorin, LE] pel 
ole O38 CI we Cony a dais dl otoly cal wel lel orto 
Vy aio Yc call Nae pla 99 Goat Ae Hm pal LI al ao ghl 3 
By pey 9b I OSG) cy pe 
lslex] ae sory Woskenl aly pie Jl alll lela jal Kb (Vv) 
Mae Joon Lad Ul pa og bed J oA pale Ge Sal pale 
lb oF ale +t Fb Lt ut lel i, «all plaYl go los 
Fi ple om gS gall g2 Sod 3] a Siow sol gl abby aos 
Pott IK A> Co prey jeall aden Libey GI GL wel Lay (A) 
“oh ahdy Yh et Sao sl Le Kolb [Er] (SH jay cal ab Gyro gl 
vO see VEL pi ty c ila at 56 SLAM 9K corey pas! 
SB and ola yo yl 50h pA 31 TL gid andl go bya oil vol 


NI ae . . . . 
OMY) poll dats 3 Alb edly ode yal QO bly oyb oy ad gill 


CES 





\o 



































al 


10 


20 


30 


273 Book Eight, Chapter Four 


possibility. Its nonexistence was prior to its existence, and its existence 
is posterior to nonexistence, [involving] a priority and posteriority in 
essence.” Hence, in the case of everything other than the First, the One, 
its existence comes about after not having been—[a nonbeing] that it 


itself deserves. 


Chapter [Four] 


On the primary attributes of the principle 
that is necessary in its existence 


(1) There has now been established for you something whose exis- 
tence is necessary. It has [also] been established for you that the Neces- 
sary Existent is one. Hence, the Necessary Existent is one, nothing 
sharing with Him in His rank, and thus nothing other than Him is a nec- 
essary existent. Since nothing other than Him is a necessary existent, 
He is the principle of the necessitation of the existence of everything, 
necessitating {each thing] either in a primary manner or through an 
intermediary. If the existence of everything other than Him derives from 
His existence, He is [the] First. We do not mean by “the First” an idea 
that is added to the necessity of His existence so that, by it, the necessity 
of His existence becomes multiple, but by it we mean a consideration of 
His relation to [what is] other [than Him]. 

(2) Know, moreover, that, if we have said—indeed, demonstrated— 
that the Necessary Existent does not become multiple in any respect 
whatsoever and that His essence is utterly unitary, pure truth, we do not 
mean by this that [certain] existences are also not negated of Him and 
that relation to existences does not occur to Him, for this would be 
impossible. This is because, in the case of every existent, certain modes 
of existence, varied and multiple, are negated of it. And every existent 
has a species of relation and reference toward [the other] existents.’ 
{This is] particularly [true of] the existent from whom all existence 
emanates. But [what] we mean by our statement that He is one in 
essence and does not become multiple is that He is as such in His essence. 
If, thereafter, many positive and negative relations become attendant on 
Him, these are necessary concomitants of the essence that are caused 
by the essence; they exist after the existence of the essence, do not ren- 
der the essence subsistent, and are not parts of it. Should someone say; 





eledll soe 
or oheil vv 


pz tg ONG Arey AL ere oe [od 399] oden9 Lars 5S, 


sAands Slircnl So) Le ony od yergd cvelyl SSI 


[eld pail] 
}() 


d9>3l Cmts Lael nl cladl 3 


Sloot IMCS 3h opslool oot Soledad (1) 
ely alee Ht WB cr aS) oS Lty Y roly opel Col: rely 
1A SS oa Sho peey be gb copes oly alge ot Y 5ly faye 
Os! 968 029% 9 iy org sb one «od 55K il -tlewly | Uy! blew! Any 
SE Oye SG Copy py Moher om SVb gs Vy 
sorb J] aLe| jel 4 

eS ote SAY oped only hcl J ls By Ul ely (1) 
clay ae ha Y Lal al ely ah 8 co eee Spee Glany ld gly 
dorm IN Udy KY ae Gb ology J BLo} a [vet] BY, 
EH aged ope ge Sy i TRS oye ly rlodlace CLs 
bas 6) se ol I oye Mace ae coil Le paty duly dLSY 
(I A 5S hong Kalen OLS] Cas Lad alld bal SG Ys 


ob. Vel Yy old deg cut CONN oye y ow reg lal Ube lal 








93 9799 +0999 














20 


25 


30 


27/4 Book Eight, Chapter Four 


“If these are caused, then they would possess another relation [and so 
on,| and this would regress to infinity,” we would obligate him to reflect 
on what we have ascertained concerning the category of relation in this 
[metaphysical] discipline, where we strove to show that relation is finite? 
In this is the resolution of his doubt. 

(3) We now return [to our discussion] and say: The First has no 
quiddity other than His individual existence.? You have known the mean- 
ing of quiddity and the things by which it differs from individual existence 
at the beginning of this our exposition.* We say: It would not be true [to 
maintain] that the Necessary Existent has a quiddity of which necess uy 
existence adheres as a necessary concomitant. Indeed, we will start from 
the beginning and say: 

(4) The Necessary Existent? may be intellectually apprehended as 
the very necessary existent itself, just as the one may be intellectually 
apprehended as the very one itself, From this, one may intellectually 
apprehend that the quiddity [of the Necessary Existent] is, for example, 
a human or some other substance, when that [same] human is [also] a 
necessary existent,° just as one may intellectually apprehend of the one 
that it is water, air, or human, {each} being one. 

(5) You may reflect and know this from the controversy over [the 
question] of whether the principle in the natural sciences is one or many. 
For some have made the principle one, some many. 

(6) Among those who made it one, some made the first principle not 
the essence of one, but something [else] which is one—for example, water, 
air, fire, or some other thing. Some [on the other hand] have made the 
principle the essence of one inasmuch as it is one, not something to which 
the one has accidentally occurred. Hence, there is a difference between 4 
quiddity in which the one and the existent occur accidentally and between 
the one and the existent inasmuch as it is one and an existent. 

(7) Hence, we say: The Necessary Existent cannot be of a characteri- 
zation that entails composition so that there would be some quiddity 

(that quiddity being necessary in [its] existence) such that that quiddity 
would have a meaning other than its reality (that meaning being neces- 


sary existence). For example, if that quiddity consists in the fact of being 








eleds| of oly oT 


OB Aled pe aly «51 LS] Lal Yo ale ol IS yb : 6 J 
SLO gj! oad Gl bay! om « ll laa ye ball Gt Cpokaio Le poly gl a 
KE Weil alld ay. ak 
alll gar C6 aby AM baal VS GL dsb ony (1) 
cote Y oss carly gh tyes Le LL s CUA 9 ab ls LD ALY Gls Nblcg 
oth dbp oes Cay Yohaal a oS ol 
yet Jin od aL cage Sh Cody a few od oye oly gl (€) 
us, pis FT pte al ghall he Go ab of US sp finn oy cael 
olga gl Le all xtylh ye be 43 cl LS c ageeall cule 90 coll ga gLucdl 
. daly sty gleil 3 
delyobacdail 3 ball gh bE a aby Ue alls bed Jo way (0) 
[£9]. 1S alae ppiany Lely Lall ror pgiand «Sl 
SE cae ob YY Ll lary ped ely pga ily (1) 
eV old Vad Jar Ge agg ld pe gl yb gl ela gl ele fe cael gs 
PINS Gee Rake Gy G3] Gad Coed oye AY ely ptin 5 
dyergeg domly Lem pp oem ally aL s Quy cogeslly 


SF Med Saka! le OK gl jue Y agegll Coty gh dei (¥) 


Fall MI GSS cope Mil Kall als 9S, Laat dag KS o> 


Pe glesl ail Al ole S1Ste Gay Slesgey pall alls Gass oe 





\o 





a 


10 


20 


30 


275 Book Eight, Chapter Four 


a human, then the fact of being a human would be other than the fact of 
being a necessary existent. For then there would either be a reality for 
our saying “necessary existence,” or there would not. It is impossible for 
this meaning not to have a reality when it is the principle of every reality; 
indeed, it confirms [every other] reality and validates it. 

(8) If [this meaning] has a reality which is other than that quiddity, 
then—if it is necessary for that necessity, with respect to existence, to be 
connected with that quiddity and [if the necessity] would not be neces- 
sary without it—the meaning of the Necessary Existent inasmuch as it is 
the Necessary Existent would come to be through something which is nct 
itself. Hence, it would not be the Necessary Existent inasmuch as it is the 
Necessary Existent. And, viewed in terms of itself inasmuch as it is a nec- 
essary existent, it would not be a necessary existent because it has some- 
thing through which it is rendered necessary. 

This is impossible if it is taken absolutely, unrestricted by pure exis- 
tence that attaches to quiddity. If taken as attaching to the quiddity, 
then, even if it is connected with that thing, that quiddity is not at all 
absolutely necessary in existence; nor does the necessity of existence 
occur to it absolutely, because it is not necessary at all times, whereas 
the absolutely necessary in existence is necessary at all times. This is not 
the state of existence if taken absolutely, not restricted by the pure 
necessity that attaches to quiddity. Hence, there would be no harm if one 
were to say that, in this respect, that existence is caused by the quiddity 
or by some other thing. 

(9) This is because it is possible for existence to be caused, whereas 
absolute necessity that is essential is not caused. It thus remains that the 
absolutely necessary existent in essence, realized inasmuch as it is a nec- 
essary existent in itself, is a necessary existent without that quiddity. 
Therefore, that quiddity would occur accidentally—if this were possi- 
ble—to the Necessary Existent that realizes its existence in itself. The 
Necessary Existent is, hence, indicated in itself by the mind. And the Nec- 
essary Existent is realized even if that occurring quiddity did not exist. 
Hence, that quiddity would not be a quiddity of that thing indicated by 
the mind as being a necessary existent, but [it] would be the quiddity of 








rlecdl oy oly Vo 


sesh sey Ul gS gl Ld JAY Sod oes oly acl 2 gluil al 
Kaci Sloe say hake gall IQ SY gl Jley KY gl ckbin Je 
\emciy Aad! SF > J 

23 pee Sls GEG AAU IF ay dide al gS GB (A) 
Poe ed erly sae VSS «Migs Cow Vy alll GI ae ol aaah 
erly PE eM oly GSW. ge ad ete 9, 9S] oly 
SN copes carlo ged asersll ely pe em ye ald Ul lady. oye gl 
PE GN Spall opel ade ob ilar SS Nal Jl aay ey, 
Hall IE cle «2 ald gle 3 GO Gly SBA aLU EY el Ly al 
AVY Wer se slog Lojle Uy  Ullor ago gland, [ren] 
WL agers Sle Se july 5g J bee Milles aed only by MB 
SE GB IG ob LAU jo Gill Spall gel ade ye Ulla sl 
wl etl gh igh oinm sy Ryalall Jolae 9 yo a 

Yootatl, sith gable dly Myer OS ol gee ope gl GV allay (4) 
Soars sh ae ie aoe Lier ISI ope Moly GS Gl ad Vee gS 
Searls Rae she Rall My Sb Rall Ii yy9 5 2 yell only cena 33! 
613 op fell al ghee oe Sort dS GGL canis ll ancl aed 
Spl allel 3 930 do lll alll alt $I 5), pe Sooly gecy 
Eby a Ge eT e kal Copel only al Jas all Le + gil 


\o 




















10 


20 


30 


276 Book Eight, Chapter Four 


something that attaches to it. [But] it had been postulated as the quid- 
dity of that thing and not another. This is a contradiction. Hence, there is 
no quiddity for the Necessary Existent other than its being the Necessary 
Existent. And this is [the thing’s] “thatness,” [its individual existence}, 

(10) We say: If individual existence and existence were to occur to 
quiddity, then they would become necessary concomitants of it either 
due to itself or due to something extraneous. It is impossible [for this] to 
be due to the quiddity itself. For, that which follows [another] follows 
only an existing thing. Hence, it follows necessarily that the quiddity 
would have an existence prior to its existence, and this is impossible. 

(11) We thus say: Everything that has a quiddity other than [indiv d- 
ual] existence is caused. This is because you have known that, with 
regard to the quiddity which is extraneous to individual existence, exis- 
tence and individual existence do not take the place of the thing that 
renders [another] subsistent. [Individual existence] would, then, have to 
be a concomitant. 

(12) Hence, either it would be a necessary concomitant of the quid- 
dity because it is that quiddity, or it would be its necessary concomitant 
because of something [else]. [Now,] the meaning of our saying “necessary 
concomitance” is to be a follower of existence. Nothing follows an exis- 
tent except an existent. If, then, individual existence follows quiddity 
and is in itself a necessary concomitant of it, then, in its existence, indi- 
vidual existence would have followed an existence. And, [in the case] of 
everything that in its existence follows an existence, that which it follows 
exists essentially prior to it. The quiddity, hence, would have existed in 
itself prior to its existence—and this is contradictory. It remains that the 
existence it has is due to a cause. Hence, everything that has a quiddity 
is caused. The rest of the things, other than the Necessary Existent, have 
quiddities. And it is these quiddities that in themselves are possible in 
existence, existence occurring to them externally. 

(13) The First, hence, has no quiddity. Those things possessing quid- 
dities have existence emanate on them from Him. He is pure existence 
with the condition of negating privation and all other description of Him. 
Moreover, the rest of the things possessing quiddities are possible, com- 
ing into existence through Him. The meaning of my statement, “He is 
pure existence with the condition of negating all other additional [attri- 
butes] of Him,” is not that this is the absolute existence in which there is 








eleés| of oly V4 


Al pb ong Cold Lal hb IS Leo +A + lll Ral cue 5 
AY pp obty foe ol, 
Yeh ol Le) poy WAAL yo le Lyle J spel, GY Gl sty (0°) 
lery We Y alll 5b all oy Syl dle, Oe ee tl gl «Mgt 
«Slow Lady clergy 3 ope y Kall 9S aoe 
BY alld {le oP ASN [POV] pF RL AL Gl gy (99) 
Pine AY GF dey Oe AU oy py Vogel AY Gl cule 
-elialll » GR. ce gall 
Lal Weg! 9 GI Ly Ral lt WY all 5h gl Ll: doe e (V4) 
AT YB logy VW oyey CDs oer AS ail Wb aeey ot Oy 
L Ss cages Langey eas BAN GK Lid psy alll aay) 
Ploy Baye ge RaW 9 SCS cald SILL oe y, AE gmt S19 ld gey orgy t 
Joker ale 6d JO tle 35 Wordly Kgl Lt? Ae Nay claayeny L 
ie pent SU ge Lal iy Solel Yoo Sots LAY gL, 
TIE oy 299 Vee Uy cope gl 
Pm 9 Ae oe Sl ple as oLalll olydy cal ial Y IY (\") 
WeoLL Ys “LAM ple! fas slogl slay posi cl bts 30-4 
las BIg ple cle Lo pts ogo Sl oye al IB ee pady ty ag AK 
“all al pad lls Gb Cine oe oy GEG) ad ALE allel aye 


\o 





Nn 


20 


30 


277 Book Eight, Chapter Four 


participation [by others]. If there is an existent with this description, it 
would not be the pure existent with the condition of negation, but the 
existent without the condition of positive affirmation.” I mean, regard- 
ing the First, that He is the existent with the condition that there is no 
additional composition, whereas this other is the existent without the 
condition of [this] addition.’ For this reason, the universal is predicated 
of all things, whereas [pure existence] is not predicated of anything that 
has addition.® Everything other than Him has addition. 

(14) The First also has no genus. This is because the First has no 
quiddity. That which has no quiddity has no genus, since genus is spoke 
of in answer to the question, “What is it?” and [moreover] genus in one 
respect is a part of a thing; and it has been ascertained that the First is 
not a composite. 

(15) Furthermore, the idea of genus is either [the same as] the Nec- 
essary Existent, in which case it would not depend on there being a 
differentia, [or it is not]. If it is not the Necessary Existent and renders 
the Necessary Existent subsistent, then the Necessary Existent would be 
rendered subsistent by that which is not a necessary existent—and this 
is contradictory. The First, then, has no genus. 

(16) For this reason, the First has no differentia. Since He has neither 
genus nor differentia, He has no definition. There is no demonstration of 
Him, since there is no cause of Him."® For this reason there is no “why” 
regarding Him, and you shall know that there is no “why-ness” for His act." 

(17) Someone may say, “Although you have avoided assigning the name 
‘substance’ to the First, you do not avoid assigning Him its meaning. This 
is because He exists in no subject; and this is the meaning of substance, 
which you have rendered a genus.” 

(18) We answer: This is not the meaning of the substance we have 
made a genus. Rather, the meaning of [the latter] is that it is the thing 
having an established quiddity whose existence is not in a subject—for 
example, a body and a soul. The proof that it would not be a genus at all 
if this is not intended by “substance” is that the thing referred to by the 
expression “existent” does not require its being generic. The negation that 
follows it does not add [anything] to it above and beyond existence, except 





PAV BAl| . - 
or ate vvy 


Vest eae all IMB el olny byt V oyesll Ltt by 
BE Jere SSI OTL yb toby bt Y dergll ye SUI Nay LSS aaly 
345 Skye ope rt By vioky Dla Fe ao Valliy co gt 
Wad dale Vey cad Sale YM GV ely fal ee Y Lal gy (10) 
My stl fan pny oy gel gw bleed dg all 5] £4) ee 
[YEA]. Sy 5 ail 5 og 
BAW coped oly gS gl bl oY Ll car gl Lal (10) 
WF rer dhoel byie iS oe tint Kall per dteog Koll 
4 pie VB le aay ase Moly peed LE Lage aed oly 
Wy ad am Hd ad Uy ad pace V aly ad had YIM lb oli, (M9) 
sabe LY al ay SY aly cade VA cae ghey 
po aA el Sl Ue Ll gi te 3 Sa gl ay (0) 
sell hay Fog BY oye ye aN Ullby Sale ade Lyall I 5 tbc 
A ogee gil pagh| 
eRe gee Jy oles Sl hl ge ae id gi oy) 
Inbal he Lat Sad I mS Ero ye oP yal eayry il By yell Aalll 43 
Phd sora Bal ale Jal gl ye Ch Lae So lie hl a 
Fal ay Raa a Yager Je saay Vag job ll Lally cal ase 
Aah eh cally Ay cope oe ears ot Olt) ab 


\o 











10 


15 


20 


30 


278 Book Eight, Chapter Five 


the relation of distinctiveness. This [latter] meaning does not include 
any realized thing after existence, nor is it a meaning of something in 
itself; but it is only in terms of relation. Hence, the existent is not in a 
subject. It is only the affirmative meaning in it that can belong to some 
entity [that] is the existent. What comes after it is a negative, relative 
thing, extraneous to the haecceity belonging to the thing. Taken in this 
way, this meaning would not be a genus. This you have learned in a per- 
fected way in the Logic. 

(19) You have also learned in the Logic that, if we say, for example, 
“all A,” we mean everything that is described as “A,” even if it has a real- 
ity other than being “A.”!* Hence, in defining substance, our statement 
that it is the existent not in a subject means that it is the thing of which it 
is said that it exists not in a subject in [the sense] that the existent not in 
a subject is predicated of it, and has in itself a quiddity—as, for example, 
man, stone, and tree. It is in this way that substance has to be conceived in 
order to be a genus. The proof that there is a difference between the two, 
and that genus is one of them but not the other, is that you would say of 
some human individual whose existence is unknown that he is necessarily 
[someone] whose existence would [consist] in his not being in a subject. 
But you do not say that he necessarily exists now not in a subject. It seems 
as though we went into great detail in explaining this when we discussed 
[it] in the Logie. 


Chapter [Five] 


As though a confirmation and a recapitulation 
of what has been previously discussed concerning the unity 
of the Necessary Existent and all His attributes, 
by way of conclusion’ 


(1) It is proper that we should repeat the statement that the reality of 
the First exists for the First, not [any] other. This is because the One, inso- 
far as He is the Necessary Existent, is what He is in terms of Himself?— 
namely, His essence. His meaning is restricted to Himself either by virtue 
of that meaning itself or due to a cause. For example, if the thing which is 
the Necessary Existent is this human, then he would either be this human 
by virtue of his humanity and because he is human, or not. If [it is} because 








Plot GS! 5m sills SUNN cal Ul fpey oY opel’. Lis 
DS AN GSS MW hdl oe Gb Shang ole pt eons Saye 
Ade We hall 9 a cate sicily Lae Kl wey Ina be aa 5) 
tt Slee Me ly 92 Us Nal Ul Lad glad 3 Gate ro (14) 
serdar adie obo dV PEE METS cb dbapey 6 
SE Pree PY rym y ade Se Gill + ttl ail oles [144] Frere 2 
‘bly Glad So Ral Mads by cube Iyer Ppoge BY oye 
axl oy bl de Wally Lae a ats I on UR. ety 
Vail ose Bdge glad) att I bl SM ys Lael abl gly Bp 
PVM apy toe Vail i Vy pee BASLY Gl aagey Le ya alle " 
+ Gell 2 SS to be yal 9 lal UG poy 


[etl el 
a2 ( 2) 
SB erly eS ye Bhs WIS, SG SK 
CN do fe AL line pany . 


Mdy fob hyo JySt dagm ye pill tiie 5 2 dail xa gl Erb, (\) 

Mf oliney £4513 pay ogo ya eo — serslooly ele — etgl gy 
Me ae sae thal + tN G9 rhe cid lc gall LIS OSI ae Ly uate 
VC b SSVI gh cd, Glaw be gS Gi LL aoe glial 


Q 


10 





20 





279 Book Eight, Chapter Five 


he is human [that] he is this [human], then humanity entails that he is 
only this [human]. If [humanity] were to be found in another, then it would 
not entail that he is this [human]; indeed, he would be this by reason of 
something other than humanity. 

(2) The same state of affairs obtains with respect to the reality of the 
Necessary Existent. If it is by virtue of its very self that it is this specified 
thing, then it would be impossible for that reality to belong to another. 
Hence, that reality would not be anything but this. If [on the other hand] 
this meaning is realized for this specified [thing], not from itself but from 
another—it only being itself because it is this specified thing—then its 
existence, which is specifically confined to it, would be acquired from 
another. It would then not be the Necessary Existent—and this is con- 
tradictory. Therefore, the reality of the Necessary Existent belongs only to 
the One. And how could the quiddity stripped from matter belong to two 
entities when [any] two things are two either by reason of this meaning, by 
reason of that [subject] of which the meaning is predicated, by reason of 
position or place, [or] by reason of period and time—1in short, because of 
some cause? [This is] because any two things that do not differ in mean- 
ing will differ only in terms of something that occurs to the meaning and 
is connected with it. In terms of what, then, would anything that has no 
existence, except the existence of a meaning which is not connected with 
an external cause or state, differ from its like? Therefore, the First has 
nothing that shares His meaning. The First, then, has no peer. 

(3) Moreover, we say: Necessary existence can in no respect whatso- 
ever be a meaning shared by a number [of things]—neither [those] 
agreeing in realities and species, nor [those] disagreeing in realities and 
species. [For,] to begin with, necessary existence has no quiddity that 
connects with it other than necessary existence. Hence, after necessary 
existence, it is impossible for the reality of necessary existence to have 
[something] different. 

(4) [If there were something different,} moreover, than that in terms 
of which the individual instances of necessary existence differ after agree- 
ing in necessary existence would be things either [(a)] existing for each 
one of the agreeing [instances], in terms of which [each] of its compan- 
ions is at variance with it, [(b)] existing for none of them, or [(c)] existing 
for some of them, the rest having nothing other than their privation. 





PABA Be oll vva 


. 2b od ery Gl Seed a gS ol pals GLY cle ga lil 


ALY Fy lar she Ul oe oS gl Lag 

9 eds Jo CISL YB opel coy dade BUGS (1) 
sols Ve YY cad RL AI 9 S3 coped GAEL Oy SF gh JL pal 
IY ga ya Lily coed Ge calld ye Y gpl ag all Ine et [YO] 
Wary «ger lh Coely GSD coyb pe liane ad oD apy 9K «cull 
oF bed all OS GS Lb Loot W] Se glColslaeie gab ke 
cattle coms Lay call cee el etl SUES Ue glattly eget aol 
SN Sal jp tld aby Sly C381 ome gf GU I a shes Ul 
A de SG Ea Slee peal aye pte GUMS UB cea GUL Y ol 
Gale Bly Idlad dole Ble glo Kot Bea Vy «gee ayrry Moyes 
AAV ING sole 3 Aloe d GY 336 

idl a3 Cyt gee VS) jee Se Sosry Slide WB Lal, (1) 
bb Jel Ul iM, GLI Ay My BELL fle Y caged Ge aoe 
tab 9K 5) Kod oy ary nF Ald dal Y oye ogey gh 
Soggy ow OMS pedo, 

SLEW om agg oly slot He LG Kgl Wl ba lal (4) 
ao sl ctcole Ailey Sail y soy Kinny etl apedlogey 3 
poe YS LAND ply panda ge ge glo lye * sot) 89 gm 50 





aml oats 


\o 














er 


10 


20 


30 


280 Book Eight, Chapter Five 


(5) If [(b)] they do not exist and there is nothing in terms of which 
there would occur disagreement after agreement, then there would be 
no disagreement in their realities. They would be, thus, agreeing in 
{[their] realities, when we had stated that, after their realities share [in 
necessary existence], they disagree. 

(6) If [(c)] they do not exist in some but exist in others—for example, 
[if] one of the two separates from the other in that it has the reality of 
necessary existence and something which is the condition for the sepa- 
ration [from the other], whereas the other has the reality of necessary 
existence with the privation of the condition belonging to the [forme: ], 
separating from it only because of this privation (there being nothing 
other than privation in terms of which it is separated from it), then it 
would be of the nature of necessary existence in terms of the reality 
belonging to it to remain subsistent with the privation of the condition 
attending it. But privation has no meaning realized in things; otherwise, 
there would be infinite meanings in one thing, for then there would be in 
[such a thing] an infinity of differences of things. 

(7) [To continue with (c)], either necessary existence would be real- 
ized in the second without the addition it has, or it would not. If it is not, 
then without [this addition] it would not have necessary existence. This 
would also be a condition for necessary existence in the other. If it is, then 
the addition would also be a differentia and not a condition for necessary 
existence. With this, it would [also] be composite, when necessary existence 
is not composite. And if [as in (a)] each of the two possesses that which 
separates it from the other, this entails composition in each of the two. 

(8) Moreover, either necessary existence would be completed as nec- 
essary existence without either of the two additions, or this would consti- 
tute a condition for it to become complete. If completed [without either 
of the two additions], then the necessary existence has no variance in 
essence, variance being only in the accidents that subsequently attach to 
it, while existence has arisen as necessarily subsisting, dispensing in its 
subsistence with these subsequent attachments. If not completed, then 
either it is not completed in having the reality of necessary existence 
without this [condition], or else necessary existence would be a meaning 
realized in itself, where neither the one [addition] nor the other is 
included in its haecceity inasmuch as it is a necessary existence, but 
where it inevitably requires one of them to become realized in existence. 








LAN ge oly YA: 


DEY! oe GOES a ale 8 Nhe ly doge ge pb CK (0) 
oa \ytlee Gs; Mp) EB dy GUL ae ge SUL Lge Go os 
GES a 

jg) ipa Le Dam eay pam dirgrm ye pe CIT GI, (1 
Phyl phy oe slop Mie d 5h SM Ge pad! [1700] Lael 
V8 Ul oll gill bails Se Sloyry ted SH,  JLedi 
Bey ee “ot Te aly «Ll pall Une 
Marre dl ine Y porlly « A Geb poe ASB glad URAL 5 9 
alg Hy oth yt a gb: ANY Glee oly SOK, LAV GY 

Alay Oso ye GUILD led oo) 99 OK Gl Ll deeb (v 
Pept OSKy op slowy 4994 pod 9S Kl ob OKI ca 
Lord op ely cba had byl 3K oh ly Lal STNG oe dl oes 
sly gS Gly Sy pe SB elgy Sy Clb ao gay | esos 
vege sols FB So pits of OS 56m ain Le Lg 

O99 299 pry my opel sey GK Gl Ly Lad se Yt (A) 
Yop does € ob adh ba bt lls OS I cgay sly § 
ka, 29S eB ody cael NN 2 Lyall 2 COSY) Lh OINL ad yt 
IPB oe I Le] slew Me acd Sly - GiMlal jewls oa. 


Anat ss Se easly OS Gl Udy « dergl gry dade dK 


\o 


ew aS, eB cody com Cie BIE Lael Yy utib uly y- 





H 


10 


20 


30 


281 Book Eight, Chapter Five 


[Take,] for example, hyle: even though it has substantiality included in 
the definition of its being hyle, its existence in actuality is by means of 
either this or that form. [Take,] also, color: for, although neither the 
differentia black nor the differentia white renders it subsistent inasmuch 
as it is color, nonetheless, each one of them is akin to a cause for it to 
exist in actuality and to be realized. Neither of the two is in itself a cause 
for it, but whichever of the two happens to be there—one in one circum- 
stance, however, the other in another. 

(9) If the matter is according to the first aspect, then each of the two 
[additions] is included in rendering necessary existence subsistent and is 4 
condition for it, so that, when there is necessary existence, [each] must b: 
with it. If [the matter] is according to the second meaning, the Necessary 
Existent would require something through which it becomes existent. 
The Necessary Existent—after the meaning that it is a necessary existent 
has been established for it—would then require something else through 
which it becomes existent. And this is impossible. 

(10) As regards color and hyle, however, the situation is not of this 
form. For hyle, in being hyle, is one thing; color, in being color, is one 
thing and is (another] thing in that it exists. What is comparable to color 
there is the Necessary Existent here, and what is comparable to the two 
differentia, blackness and whiteness, are the two hypothesized [additions] 
here. Thus, just as each of the two differentiae, blackness and whiteness, 
has no inroad in establishing “being color,”? similarly, the property of 
each of these two hypothesized [additions] has no inroad in establishing 
necessary existence. 

(11) There [in the case of color] the inroad of the two differentiae con- 
sists in the fact that color became an existent. That is, color became some- 
thing other than color and additional to [the fact] that is color, whereas 
here [in the case of the hypothesized additions to necessary existence] 
this is not possible. [This is] because necessary existence is established 
existence; indeed, it is the establishment of existence—nay, existence is 
a condition for establishing the quiddity of the Necessary Existent, or it 
itself is in conjunction with the privation of privation or the impossibility 
of [the] annulment [of existence]. 





elect ye Oly YAN 


tor WOK ly - aed gl fo cle prov] 2erfl pole a 
AB coal Lay £5 2VU sles palloly Ul adh Lrrgey GB — lye ve 3 
oly ale cotell ed Vy a pe tem ye — args Y lye ad Gh oly 
cl ag cat SMe Lease ay Jama Jal dex 3) SaaS ge 
Je sully Je gus 5, 

foi BSE le ge ely J I Mae gl ae le NI gh GB (4) 
ly ee GS Sl Gey copes ogey SE E28 Ad bby oe dopey 
OSS cA dey gt bee ase elys SO call patie le gt 
Plat eles — aye corly ail gael yal be Mey — erdloels 
Slows Nay cy omy 

SB By peall oe he Mee pM ld deal by call Ly (5) 
sy td oe tl dy rt ad al Dally ot ee Wl Bal 
yee pte ally alpall ad phy ely ope gl oly ya tle 3 gi 
Jeo Y etilly alll shad ye ely Syl LSS. Lys neg ll yo ely fe 
Vane yell ghey rely Role 9K gh om WIS high ys Od ly 
[Yor]. oer oey ye oo ly) Jou 

she gh clayey Gil jhe gh} hall Joall 55 cles Ly (99) 
W239 DY Sl Ss oad gay Ssh le Lay call pb a Ct gull 


Ake i ibs dyag]l fb (dsm) Pb cd9ms)l ype om 33 


\o 


+ rle, PLE gh cpus pas ar den gt gl ecg gl oly ve 











10 


30 


282 Book Eight, Chapter Five 


(12) In the case of color, however, existence is an adherent that 
attaches to a quiddity which is color, whereby the quiddity which is in 
itself color comes to be through existence as an existent in the concrete. 
[Now,] if the special property were not a cause in establishing the quid- 
dity of necessary existence but [were] for the realization of existence for 
it, and if existence were something external to that quiddity in the way 
it is external to the quiddity of color, then the state of affairs would pro- 
ceed analogously to the rest of the general things that are separated by 
differentiae—that are divided, in brief, in terms of different meanings. 
But [in the case of necessary existence,] existence must be realized for its 
necessity to obtain. It would be as though the special property would need 
[the different meanings] as something in a matter which is [the very thing] 
that has been dispensed with. And this is an impossible contradiction. 
Rather, necessity does not have existence as a second thing that it needs 
[in the way] that being color has a second existence. In short, how can 
something extraneous to necessary existence be a condition for necessary 
existence? Moreover, [with respect to] the reality of necessary existence, 
how could it be dependent on [something] that necessitates it, whereby 
the necessity of existence would in itself be the possibility of existence? 

(13) We will confirm again and say: In brief, differentiae and what 
runs their course are not [such] that the reality of the generic meaning 
qua its meaning is realized for them. Rather, they are only a cause for 
rendering the reality subsistent as an existent. For “the rational” is not a 
condition on which animal depends in having the meaning and reality of 
animal, but [a condition] for being a specific existent. If the general 
meaning were the same as the Necessary Existent and the differentia 
needed for the Necessary Existent to exist, then that which is akin to a 
differentia would have been included in the quiddity of that which is akin 
to genus. The situation where a difference not in terms of differentia 
occurs in all this is apparent. It is thus evident that necessary existence 1s 
not [something] shared. The First, hence, has no partner. And since He is 
devoid of all matter and its adherents and of corruption—both being a 
condition of that which falls under contrariety—the First has no contrary. 

(14) It has become clear, then, that the First has no genus, no quid- 
dity, no quality, no quantity, no “where,” no “when,” no equal, no partner, 
and no contrary—may He be exalted and magnified—[and] that He has 
no definition and [there is] no demonstration for Him.* Rather, He is the 








let oll YAY 


PAU 2253 ol dal ph PY oe JB coll GU, (0) 
tool yy Ble od Lol CIO oe dh togey bee Gs) eas os 
SAW AE io Let Ip age dG cola bare gl db copeslgey 
thai bd) LAY gly LB le ee pA call Gabe Go eye 
Jo Nele 'Si5l cow asl SI gle peel ALLL, J pat 
a6 4b gal gill ge yl oo AS diets YOR 5K yey GK 
aM US cal] cll gl a tS opel) pad gel fe lee ME aay 
wre? ibys ser dlosrs FUE 8 GS GSU, GU opey 
99 GS Cor gt Bes GS aye dl ogeny Mae Gb Ul tis Soars 
[TOE] Sagal GEA] aud 3 aye 

Me GOAT alee soem by Sail gl LL sd ly ye agdy (VV) 
OB Bagong MD eyed We GIT fp cole Coe ye eed all de 
ORS pany Sled ged I oledl a gles byt ot ght 
Choe ail Sc ayerslh oly add 92 pla geal gly. Laas lagen 
Pha ob had y0 be Jos wid clogege sed ooly Kil Jal 
ery Shad . ale Nos cere Fhe yb SN oy We JULy eb” 
Fs Whey Bale Sys toy 2 Sly ALLY ING 05 HL ad oped 
dao VV stall ed pi, bw byt Las « oLull 

AASV MRIS, Ea Yy cal poor VN gl oy alt (\¢) 


Be Vals bey Sl cane Vy cad byt YW, UY Wy a GY, ov 





OA 


10 


15 


20 


30 


283 Book Eight, Chapter Six 


demonstration of all things; indeed, there are for him only the clear evi- 
dential proofs.° [It is evident] that, if you ascertain the truth about Him, 
[you will find] that, after [the fact] of His individual existence, He is only 
described by means of negating all similarities of Him and affirming to 
Him all relations. For all things are from Him, and He shares nothing in 
common with what [proceeds] from Him. He is the principle of all things, 
and He is not any of the things that are posterior to Him. 


Chapter [Six] 


That He is perfect—indeed, above perfection—good, 
bestower [of existence] on everything after Him; 
[that He is] truth and pure intellect; that He apprehends 
intellectually all things, and the manner of this; 
how He knows Himself; how He knows universals; how 
He knows particulars, and the manner in which it is 
not permitted to say that He apprehends them 


(1) The Necessary Existent is thus perfect in existence because noth- 
ing belonging to His existence and the perfections of His existence 1s 
lacking in Him. Nothing of the genus of His existence is extraneous to His 
existence, existing in another in the way, for example, it exists extrane- 
ously in another in the case of a human being.' For, many things belong- 
ing to the perfection of his existence are lacking in him; and, moreover, 
his humanity exists for another. Rather, the Necessary Existent is above 
perfection because not only does He have the existence that belongs only 
to Him, but every [other] existence also is an overflow of His existence 
and belongs to Him and emanates from Him. 

(2) The Necessary Existent in Himself is pure good. The good in 
general is that which everything desires, and that which everything desires 
is existence or the perfection of existence in the category of existence. 
Nonexistence is not desired inasmuch as it is nonexistence but only inas- 
much as existence or the perfection of existence follows it. Thus, what 
in reality is being desired is existence. Existence is thus a pure good and 


a pure perfection. 





leds] Sa oll YAY 


Aowal sl SYN abe Ul ye ces Fle gladly fp cale olay Vy cal 
YS obey Glanky cae lplidl Ls 291 ow Choy Lib cain BL al, 
Cobh ly tk I ke ay cae UG Le gt ly tae gd GB cal 

[100] sam eLtV 


[alent [voll ] 0 
b22 (5) 
cGy cade et K ackey sty (lll 9 Je pb al 
phn AS AST pln AS DS AS ct 5 Jing «gare ie ly 
65x Sli dl ayem Vary Gl ley obit ale GS col 


00929 WSs 0299 ye eh ed NV cope sll al opel oly (1) \: 
Ciea’ WS cop dep crgny Go rr se He My cas \pet 
CSL] QB Lal, Sace dpolb ney MUS pa Sell 5b GLa fb coe 
Jt Laid a gill ogg al if pad GM SELON GS spel Coly p copal vers 

AS Ailey caly codgery 5S Juold og Lal oy & 
ot Fabyts bb wad diy. aoe ps ail oped Coley (1) Vo 
Se oe polly oN Ob ye ope sl ILS gl coped gm eg Ma yth by 
CPN GSS. ap SUS gl ayey ann tem pep cad Doth Vere ys 











On 


10 


20 


30 


284 Book Eight, Chapter Six 


(3) The good, in general, is that which everything within its [own] 
bound desires and through which its existence is completed. Evil has no 
essence but js either the nonexistence of a substance or nonexistence of 
what constitutes rectitude for the state of a substance. Existence is, hence, 
goodness; and the perfection of existence is the goodness of existence, 
Existence that is not joined by nonexistence—whether the nonexistence 
of a substance or the nonexistence of something belonging to a sub- 
stance—but which is always in act is a pure good. That whose existence 
in itself is [only] possible is not a pure good, because existence for it itself 
is not necessary through itself. Its essence, hence, bears the possibility 
of nonexistence; and that which in some respect bears the possibility of 
nonexistence is not in all respects devoid of evil and deficiency. Hence, 
the pure good is only that whose existence is necessary in itself. 

(4) “Good” is also said of that which bestows the perfections of things 
and their good [qualities]. [Now] it has become evident that the Neces- 
sary Existent must in Himself be the furnisher of all existence and every 
perfection of existence. Hence, in this respect also He is good, deficiency 
and evil being excluded from Him. And all that is a necessary existent is 
truth. [This is] because the truth of each thing is the particularity of its 
existence that is established for it. Hence, there is nothing more “true” 
than the Necessary Existent. 

(5) “Truth” is also said of the veridical belief in the existence [of 
something]. Hence nothing is more worthy of this reality than [the 
object] of veridical belief who, in addition to [being the object of] the 
veridical [belief], has permanence—with His permanence being due to 
Himself, not to another.” [As for] the rest of things, their quiddities, as 
you have known, do not deserve existence; rather, in themselves and with 
the severing of their relation to the Necessary Existent, they deserve non- 
existence. For this reason, they are all in themselves nugatory, true [only] 
through Him and, with respect to the facet [of existence] that follows Him, 
realized. For this reason, “all things perish save His countenance” [Qur’an 
55:26]. Hence, He is the most entitled to be [the] Truth. 

(6) The Necessary Existent is pure intellect because He is an essence 
dissociated from matter in every respect. You have known that the cause 
that prevents a thing from being apprehended intellectually is matter 
and its attachments, not [the thing’s] existence. As for formal existence, 
this is intellectual existence through which, if it resides in a thing, intel- 
lectual apprehension of the thing comes about. That which bears the 





lett yo ol gy VAG 


Y pithy sas yar way re 9 end Sat Le ally Sb (1) 
Neca 223b ANI De pre shee par Ll ye peal ol 
Yy ree ede Y — prs dla Y cil ope lly rsd dye [OV] aged 
ued alde 231 Sally. fame ps ab — Jal LBs ge aye “st pas 
Sool ley cpa JOE AIS sally ayer lh al oy Y al als GY Laas Lt 
WA A a SBD aly AH ye Cay alge eae oy pull Le ery pal 
Ady ofl Col gl 

doh Sy sy LAN OLS Le Us Lal gy wy (4) 
O38 i 968 299 JUS Ky copy SO lade wi OK Gon ayes wrly 
Siam V5 ab ee lol SG Vy Ga btn Lal yh 
eS oely i VL Gale WoL cites Ane pat + gt 

Diy ole. Wolorrgeny aN GK Us Lal e 5 Steady (0) 
Flag fas) VAL Aly9 ery «Lilo adae pay «Bolo sayery we Ku 
WeShe| day al 3 Ley cope goad Vocals US pl Le gh Lt 
Ley Al aay Alb Yaad 3 YS CLA Spaall goed ae fl oly ofl 
Me Sab Sel yb ayes Vell et KUNI tLel ah cillacgl Il 

My hoy Sj fol Ble oi AY aoe ic derdloely (1) 
Pal Uly ongeny Y Wadley dll ga e gttl few V gi gc gleaye 
Jee ase gll jhe Hod baal 15] cl ogee Sl gay Hesll 99> 31 592 5) pall 


\o 





Ma 


10 


20 


285 Book Eight, Chapter Six 


possibility of attaining it is an intellect in potency, and that which attains 
it after potentiality is an intellect in act, by way of fulfillment. That for 
which [the form] is its essence is in itself an intellect. Likewise He is a 
pure intelligible, because that which impedes a thing from being an 
intelligible is its being in matter and its attachments. This is the impedi- 
ment preventing [the thing] from being an intellect. This has been made 
evident to you. 

(7) Hence, that which is free of matter and [its] attachments [and 
is] realized through existence separate [from matter] is an intelligible 
for itself. Because it is in itself an intellect, being also intellectual'y 
apprehended by itself, it [itself] is the intelligible [belonging] to itsel?. 
Its essence is, hence, [at once] intellect, intellectual apprehender, and 
intelligible (not that there are multiple things here). This is because, inas- 
much as it is a haecceity denuded [of matter], it is intellect. Inasmuch 
as, in its case, one considers that its haecceity denuded [of matter] is for 
itself [an object of knowledge], it is for itself an intelligible. [Again,] inas- 
much as, in its case, one considers that its essence is for itself a haecceity 
denuded [of matter], it intellectually apprehends itself. For the intelligtble 
is that whose quiddity denuded [of matter] is [the object of knowledge] 
for some thing, and the one who intellectually apprehends is the one who 
has [as an object of knowledge] a quiddity denuded [of matter, being an 
object of knowledge] for some thing. It is not a condition for this thing to 
be it* or some [specific] other, but a thing in a nonrestricted [sense]. And 
the thing in a nonrestricted [sense] is more general than it or another. 

(8) Thus, the First, with respect to having a quiddity denuded [of 
matter as an object of knowledge] for some thing, is an intellectual appre- 
hender. And, with respect to [the fact] that His [own] quiddity denuded 
[of matter is an object of knowledge] for some thing, He is an intelligible. 
This thing is His essence. He is thus an intellectual apprehender in that 
He has the quiddity denuded [of matter as the object of knowledge] for 
some thing, this [thing] being His essence, and an intelligible in that His 
[own] quiddity denuded [of matter is the object of knowledge] for some 
thing, this [thing] being His essence. 

(9) Whoever reflects a little will know that [the existence of] the intel- 
lectual apprehender necessarily requires [the existence of] something 
that is intellectually apprehended. This requirement does not entail that 
that thing is [either] some other or [the apprehender] itself.> Indeed, if the 
thing in motion necessarily requires that there is something imparting 








elect ye Lg YAO 


dat HE foal: Jar pe sya we all oily Bgl fac goals [olan cil, 


OY Warm pine 92 WIS aly Jas ye ald ye [rv] sally SUSU 


OSI oF alll ay Wdley BU 3 aK Gl ge Yaw aK gl opt pu 
. aN ps ody . Mes 

Ay lat Jian 90 Gylall ayo gh jeacdl « spbaly salll ge teydB (Vv) 
Dea glY Jinny ley Jie S95 Syne gp sli Jyine Lal gay sly fie 
ANN aye Cyye glad oa Ley (Sie aye ye ye Lea dy 5S Ll 
Gall y2 Sstall Sb LAS Ble sis em Ryoal cla gla pe Ley calli Jyier yg 
We Lod aly tpt ayes Ral a gill go BUlly co gt sayell Cab 
seb al ah oe pol Ulan «pty liber ob STL ga 5 Sol sll 

Call Lely {Ble 2 tiger tals gl Leb JVB (4) 
Maou Lalla gh Ble yb S4ild ge ec Lay { Syine gh ce oth do pall 
ATS go ol otal Coal Sh shay call ge oo 

Vela liay Voie Lt ae ball gl ale 9b XE ye SS (4) 
Ld ad Kl Soe Lb a's WL Dad fy ge gl ele cttt ahs gh jay 


\o 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


286 Book Eight, Chapter Six 


motion, this very requirement does not necessitate that this [mover] is 
either some other or [the thing in motion] itself; rather, some other kind of 
investigation necessitates this, and it has been shown that it is impossible 
that that which is in motion is that which imparts [its own] motion. For 
this reason, a group, not few in number, did not stop from imagining that, 
among many things, there is something that is moved by itself, [continuing 
in this belief] up to the time that the demonstration for its impossibility 
came to be. The very conception of mover and [object] being moved did 
not necessitate this, since the moved necessitates that there is a mover in 
the absolute [sense] without the condition that it is either another or itself, 
and that which imparts motion necessitates that it has something that is 
moved by it without the condition that it is either another or itself. 

(10) Similarly, with relations, their being a duality® is known due to 
some [external] matter, not to the very relating’ and relation that is sup- 
posed in the mind. For we know with certainty that we have a faculty by 
which we apprehend things intellectually. The faculty with which we 
apprehend this faculty is either this very faculty itself—in which case it 
itself intellectually apprehends itself—or else this is intellectually appre- 
hended by some other faculty, where we would then have two faculties: a 
faculty by which we apprehend things and a faculty by which we intellec- 
tually apprehend this [latter] faculty, the discourse regressing infinitely. 
We would then have within us faculties intellectually apprehending 
things that are actually infinite.* It is, hence, evident that a thing’s very 
being an intelligible does not necessitate that it is intellectually appre- 
hended by some thing, that thing being another. 

(11) With this, it becomes evident that [to be] an intellectual appre- 
hender does not necessarily require that he is an apprehender of some- 
thing else. Rather, whenever the quiddity denuded [of matter] exists for 
him, he is an intellectual apprehender; and every quiddity denuded {of 
matter] that exists either for him or for another is an intelligible, since 
this quiddity is in itself an intellectual apprehender and in itself also an 
intelligible for every quiddity denuded [of matter], whether or not sepa- 
rated from [such a quiddity].° 

(12) [From this] you thus understand that His being an intelligible and 
an intellectual apprehender does not necessitate that there are either two 
things in the essence, nor also two things in terms of consideration. For 
the realization of the two things is nothing but the consideration that 
there is a quiddity denuded [of matter] belonging to Him and that He is 
a quiddity denuded [of matter] to which His essence belongs. Here, we 








etl 5 oly YAN 


ay tells cancel y sles J <0) STL Kgl oy laa 
295 ob GP ants gl el Cll, ow bo Ayes be oS GI MEL yy al 
Frphy 02a de ladle glety heals ge Bate hs Lt oI 
Boe 88 Kgl coy Spel 365] calls cog Ae AB ya al 
Lyd as Sole bh Solon g A Sly cys gh etal bt oh tlle 
[Vos]. ya gi sta 

diay ill SLoVy Koch aed Ye Yet] oy obLall WS (1+) 
AMasdl SS gl UB LAY lp Jas a3 UI gl lak, be ale Ub § jadll 
3 MS SiN AGI Saad ds oo SS «pS a gl ae lp Js 
John capil ade Wy Jin 38s ly LEW fon 58 2968 WSS ol 
vt 5b 0 «aah aN Ok LEY Jos 2 bo KS AMF Gl pil 
1 lo All NS ce td Vy OS gl peg Y Vee ‘ll os 

UK hi set Ble gol Bul 2h tal gs yy (19) 
PCIE DL Spine gions gh oF bap Labs yc fhe bia ell all a 
ABU Uy) BUS dopo al KI gine Lad lily cable igi) allt 

cll Sas Siglo eV ley Vpn 8S pls gh ong a (1) 
CAND bag ge Reale Gh LEI ppl feed ab Lal USN etl Yy 


\o 





Qi 


10 


20 


30 


287 Book Eight, Chapter Six 


[simply] have the rendering of [things] prior and posterior in the ordering 
of meanings, the realized objective being one, without division. It has thus 
become clear that His being an intellectual apprehender and an intelligi- 
ble does not necessitate multiplicity in Him at all. 

(13) It is not possible that the Necessary Existent would intellectu- 
ally apprehend things from the things [themselves]. For then either His 
essence would be rendered subsistent by what He intellectually appre- 
hends and, hence, its being rendered subsistent would be through things, 
or it would accidentally occur to it to intellectually apprehend, in which 
case [the essence] would not be a necessary existent in every respect-— 
and this is impossible. [Moreover,] He would [be such that], if it were 
not for external matters, He would not be of a state [of His own] and 
would have a state that is not necessitated by His essence but by another, 
and thus another would have an effect on Him. The principles previously 
[established] refute this and its like. Because He is the principle of all 
existence, He apprehends intellectually from His essence that of which 
He is a principle. He is the principle of the existents that are complete!° 
in their concrete individual existence and of the generable and corruptible 
existents—first in [terms of] their species and, through the mediation 
of these, in [terms of] their individual instances. 

(14) In another respect, it is not possible that He would apprehend 
intellectually these changeables with the changes [they undergo] (inas- 
much as they are changeable) in a temporal, individualized manner but 
in another manner we will be [shortly] showing. For it is not possible that 
at one instance in a temporal [act] of intellectual apprehension He would 
apprehend them as existing, not nonexisting, and at another instance [in 
a state of] nothingness, nonexisting. For then each of the two situations 
would have an intellectual concept apart from the other, neither of the 
two concepts remaining with the other, and thus the Necessary Existent 
would be of a changeable essence. 

(15) Moreover, when corruptibles are intellectually apprehended in 
terms of the quiddity denuded [of matter] and the things that attach to it 
that are not individualized, they are not intellectually apprehended inas- 
much as they are corruptible. If apprehended inasmuch as they are con- 
nected with matter and the accidents of matter, with a [particular] time 
and individuation, they would not be intellectually apprehended but would 
be sensed or imagined. We have shown in other books that each sensible 
representation and each imaginative representation is apprehended inas- 
much as it is either a sensory or imaginative representation by an organ 








eletll » Oley YAY 


tit bt eyily US Ob iby cad byay Yall dee dal al 
ENS b cog VW oiery Whe 4551 gh oB AL3 Nb vol, 

Vy HEY ye LEY fan ope oly GS ol jae gedy (19) 
We «find gl YP eagle Lily SLAY posit G53 few Leds LY ats 
Fa ee oe axl Vd aKay Slee ling ye By opel daly gS 
Jelly «Bb ab ond SK nd oe lb oe VIE Ky Slee 
Vice ge Lewd oy Jind aymy Se dy aptly (1'O8] Lie jlas Ad 
Mgt Yelp Ratt SAH tage bly YBLeL GLI ola go yal Wad php. cal 
syoletiels las, 

o> oy La pe oll aay Wile GK gl gee Y Slay yy (\t) 
St OK ol joe VSB acd ST os le fp Lette Lb alas bya 
ab ayaa \gl lps ley ris Jew ast hayden yb 53 ony If lye Ul Mae 
Ro pall y iol, Wy Bae fe Ae ay ye ply rely KS coy y 
NB pe oye dl oly 9G StH Ce 

Sep pamtls Y LE gas Ley dae all lie gf olan (\o) 
SS oh abby ch yy tale oylyey Sal Ble po LES ol ly cael ow 
Repos ye SGI Bl D leg ob ply AS legion igi 
Sy yates gl de poe ge tee oy Aes “BAILS t,o Sy 


\o 





Q 


10 


20 


288 Book Eight, Chapter Six 


that is divisible.!! And, just as the affirmation of many acts for the Necessary 
Existent is [to attribute] to Him imperfection, so would the affirmation of 
many acts of intellectual apprehension. Rather, the Necessary Existent 
apprehends intellectually all things in a universal way; yet, despite this, no 
individual thing escapes His knowledge. Not [even] the weight of an atom 
in the heavens and the earth escapes Him.” This is one of the wonders 
whose conception requires the subtlety of an inborn, acute intelligence, 

(16) As for the manner of this, it [takes place] because, when H- 
intellectually apprehends His essence and apprehends that He is the 
principle of every existent, He apprehends the principles of the exist.nts 
[that proceed] from Him and what is generated by them. There is, am ong 
the things that exist, nothing that is not in some manner necessitated by 
Him [as] cause—this we have shown. The collision of these causes results 
in the existence of particular things. The First knows the causes and their 
corresponding [relations]. He thus necessarily knows to what these lead, 
the time [intervals] between them, and their recurrences. For it is not 
possible that He knows [the former principles] and not this. He would thus 
apprehend particular things inasmuch as they are universal—I mean, 
inasmuch as they have attributes. If these [attributes] become specified 
individually in [the particulars], [this takes place] in relation to an indi- 
viduated time or an individuated circumstance. If this circumstance is also 
[simply] apprehended with its attributes, it will be in the same position 
as [the particulars].'? But, inasmuch as [these attributes] would depend 
on principles where the species of each is [confined] to its individual 
[instance], they are attributed to individual things. 

(17) We have said that such dependence may give these individuals a 
description and a characterization confined to [each of] them. If that 
individual is one of the things that are for the intellect also an individ- 
ual, then the intellect would have access [for apprehending] the thing 
described. This is the individual which is the only one of its species and has 
no similar—as, for example, the sphere of the sun or Jupiter.’° If, how- 
ever, the species is spread out in individuals, the mind will have no access 
to that thing’s description, unless this [individual] is directly referred to 
initially, as you have known. 

(18) We resume [what we were discussing] and say: Just as if you 
[are in the position to] know all the heavenly movements, you would 
then know every eclipse and every particular conjunction and disjunction 
in its concrete existence, but in a universal way. For, regarding a certain 











ele ye oly YAA 


Mad ip SS OL] WS cl gad oe Colt pol Soul gl 
HPS 58 WON ary SS gos le + tS fin Lil ope ll oly J 
Bcabeall ye lady eM By olgentl 953 Jl ae Oye Vy «pate 
Rou ale) Of) Ley pai Tyee 

Sil Je coy Slav al Jae, ald fac 436 wb aS, (09) 
dye Gp she aby Vay, LY Ot Ay lee Wn Ly we lage ll 
225 5 J Wilralas gals LM abe GS. Loe ley ay foe Lely L 
SOL bag lad «Mfr GLAM ple Jy A511 6A Ips [1A] 
pbs Uy cl lg SI Se pac) GY Shag ge Uy Ley Ree Nl ye Ney Lay « Yl 
Oy line Yom ye 6] AK etm yy hl WN Khan 9K ce 
ale cel Fated Sle gl jatetle Gly IGLOS Ladd lp Coanast 
Pre sles sols Sisse Bas TUS] Wes Lal GIS pln, JUL 
shpateds yl J) alald Ava 

Leeyy ey Lert fore vd LLY Lae be ol: Wa od, (Vv) 
Gia 5S Leal past Jel ae ga UE ad tN ld GIT GB. le pel 
ISS ch WS Vas yo sely ge gill etl ya lls, chem poll bs 
JI Se Sop et Lt pall BLU, gg | ote att 
‘Used ony hs be le ell Ut gh doe tl 

Fa GS Fpl ctl YT oblast! Oe ale "[I] whl US (90) 
“eo S 3 i OY SS gos le Sy ae SK Sie Shel J Jha 





usc ce lal dab" BUSES 


\o 











oa 


10 


15 


20 


30 


289 Book Eight, Chapter Six 


eclipse, you would say that it is an eclipse that occurs after a period of 
motion of a certain [orb] in such and such northerly position; that it is half 
[an eclipse]; that the moon dissociates from it to take a position opposite 
such and such [an orb]; that, between it and a similar one, either preced- 
ing or succeeding it, there is such and such a period—likewise between 
the states of the other two eclipses—so much so that you would not sup- 
pose any accidental occurrence of these eclipses which you would not 
know; but you would know it universally. [This is] because this meaning 
can be predicated of many eclipses, the state of each being identical with 
this [one]. You would know, however, through some argument, that that 
eclipse will only be a certain specific one. This does not remove univer- 
sality [from it], if you remember what we have previously said.'® 

(19) Despite all this, however, it may not be possible for you to judge 
at this moment the existence or nonexistence of this eclipse, except by 
knowing the particulars of [the celestial] motions through sensory obser- 
vation and by knowing the temporal interval between this observed [thing] 
and that eclipse. This is not the same as your knowing that, among the 
[celestial] motions, there is a particular motion whose characteristics are 
identical with what you have observed, and that there is between it and 
the second particular eclipse such and such [an interval in time]. For it is 
possible for you to know this by this type of knowledge, but not to know it 
at a time in which it is doubted whether [the motion] exists. Rather [in 
the latter case] there must have occurred to you by observation something 
[directly] referred to, so as to [allow you to] know the state of that eclipse. 

(20) If someone” disallows naming this knowledge of a particular in 
a universal way, there is no [need] to argue with him. For, our purpose 
in this is something else—namely, to make known how particular things 
are known and apprehended by a knowledge and an apprehension in terms 
of which the knower undergoes change, and how they are known and 
apprehended by a knowledge and an apprehension in terms of which the 
knower does not undergo change. For if you knew the state of affairs of 
eclipses as you now exist, or if you were always existing, you would have 
knowledge not of the absolute eclipse but of every existing eclipse. More- 
over, the existence of that eclipse and its [subsequent] nonexistence will 
not change anything in you, for your knowledge in the two states would be 





Aes » oly YAM 


ae yell aie Lined WLS IIS ye IS YR So gly ww VSS 
ONS all tae yas) a ats us uy assy Say cls ale 
Kale Yb Kl alk Golo ye Leyle at VY Se Gol gb SI JE 
sols SES ob S le Jaw gl iyo od gall ae GY LW cule US, 
Lal Wo Y Sp Sil abis g) baad ahs UST JL al we OS 
JB gp ollBl: $55 STN ay Y Hany cae [TV] 

pS apy SW le 3 SS Gl jon ky aS lds eels, (14) 
aaltdl laagy Le ply dnbldasltdl OGL oli 8 oY coy VI 
ihe 5 jo DEGLI Ga gl; wb ats Ls pads coal ga opel alld guy 
Ol gem 3 NS Gib IS EL tlh 5S cy pce coaaltl die Ye 
on pio age te Mg ab cbtale caby abel Vy oly py Ia le aks 
By SiI Ald Sle pled 2 ad) ple +t iat UW Jam 3 9K gl 

Shae KES kee Mb AS ye ye Hp Bayes Iam gene ddl ae a (v*) 
Le Ayal oleh ASAE L yy Gl Lad Ob yay cel pe 8 OY Leg gb 
Ud Sal yer pits Y SLpaly Lake A yayy ole 2S; cllal Lager ats SL 
Y ple eb gS clits age ye OS gd gl cil ges LSB, SH pl cule 5] 
we Y ny Bp SS ope9 ITE SGT K fg GS 
































10 


20 


30 


290 Book Eight, Chapter Six 


one and the same—namely, that an eclipse exists, having certain qualities, 
[and will take place] after a certain [other] eclipse or after the presence 
of the sun in the meridian in a certain way during such and such a period 
([the eclipse] occurring after such and such [an event]), and [that], after 
it, such and such an event will take place. This intellectual act on your 
part would be true before that eclipse, during it, and after it. 

(21) If, however, you introduce time into this, whereby at a given 
time you know that that eclipse does not exist and then at another time 
that it exists, then your [former] knowledge ceases when [the eclipse] 
exists, but a new knowledge comes to be. There will then be in you the 
change to which we have referred. And it would not be true that you are 
in [the same state] at the time of the clearing [of the eclipse] as you 
were before [its] clearing. This [applies to you] who are temporal and 
exist in moments of time. But the First, who does not enter time and its 
governance, is remote from making a judgment in terms of this time and 
that time by way of His being in it and by way of this [involving] a new 
judgement on His part and a new knowledge. 

(22) Know that you arrive at knowing particular eclipses only because 
of your knowledge of all their causes and [because] of your knowledge of all 
that is in the heaven. If knowledge of all their causes and [the] existence 
[of these causes] takes place, then one moves from them to [knowledge 
of] all [their] effects. We will be showing this [which has been] previously 
[mentioned] with more explanation. You will thus know how He has knowl- 
edge of the hidden. You will [also] know there how the First, through His 
essence, knows all things; that this is because He is the principle of all 
things; and that He knows things in [terms of] their states, since He is the 
principle of a thing or things whose states and movements are such and 
such, and [knows] that such and such [things] result from them, [know- 
ing this] to the utmost detail and in the order that necessarily belongs to 
this detail in terms of what is received and what is conveyed. These 
things, then, would be the keys of the hidden things which no one knows 
save He. God is the most knowing of hidden things; He is the knower of 
the unseen and the seen; and He is the Mighty, the Wise. 











elecs| Sa oll v4. 


MS chee 2994 BAS gl gay cle GK cMlbl Bebe gb ul ok. 
MS a GKiy ASG BAS Jab DB path ogory ay gh Sg Soe 
soag Anny Sp SII MS JS Bole cles f Jaa] Ina Gy WS oan, 

Br Si he gl Bye IB cald li Bglylebesl gh UB (¥y) 
ch 60d gay 6 lS Chae Go pl cogye ail ST STB Caled cages pul 
By BOSS 5 apy al Ul il pst La Ky aT ale tay 
BNI Sy Gly ily ie YI 3 pray eS Le le ney 
7 DUB ely SLT Neb WSS Soe Gl aay gd AK GL5 Gd Jew 
Bde AP ary Layne aan So ge hae ey Ad pe Cae 

gon UY asi ob Si dhol Jl begs eS il atl lel, (YY) 
cLeageay Well anos AY cds 5b eld BL tbl, ly 
AS lad GSU 5 6d ys Me pee poy Shell ace le Jz 
Fhe SS Is 52 Fpl A AM 3 a hy al 

by IS Kay We tl let Slaw ya 3] Whe se LE aly «og 
“ela Snel ONS eh sill ol eb cot Jat 3) US ge 
aill lel alll « ge Yl] sol Ngee, YS al elie LAM on 3 ‘aL, 
«SI jujall 529 daetly Ladle yay 





do oc fall. aaall” 


\o 


ey 


10 


15 


20 


30 


3S 


29] Book Eight, Chapter Seven 


Chapter [Seven] 


On the relation of the intelligibles to Him; 
on making it clear that His positive and negative attributes 
do not necessitate multiplicity in His essence; that to Him 
belongs supreme splendor, the loftiest majesty, and infinite glory; 
on explaining in detail the state of intellectual pleasure 


(1) Furthermore, it must be known that when it is said of the First, 
“intellect,” it is said in the simple sense that you have known in tae 
Psychology, that in Him there is no variety of forms arranged and differing, 
such as there is in the [human] soul, in the sense previously [discussed] 
in the Psychology.! For this reason He intellectually apprehends things all 
at once, without being rendered multiple by them in His substance, or 
their becoming conceived in their forms in the reality of His essence.” 
Rather, their forms emanate from Him as intelligibles. He is more worthy 
to be an intellect than the forms that emanate from His intellectuality. 
Because He intellectually apprehends His essence, and that He is the 
principle of all things, He apprehends [by] His essence all things. 

(2) Know that the intelligible meaning may be derived from the 
existing thing, as happens when, by astronomical observation and sensa- 
tion, we ourselves apprehend from the celestial sphere its intelligible 
form. The intelligible form, however, may not be taken from the existent, 
but conversely—as, for example, [when] we intellectually apprehend the 
form of a building which we invent and this intelligible form moves our 
organs until we bring about its existence. Thus, it would not have [first] 
existed and then we intellectually apprehended it, but [first] we intellec- 
tually apprehended it and then it existed. And this is the relation of the 
whole to the First Intellect, the Necessary Existent. For He intellectually 
apprehends His essence and what His essence necessitates. He knows 
from His essence the manner in which the good comes to be in all [things]. 
Thus, the form of the existents follows the intelligible form He conceives 
in the intelligible order [which is conceived by] Him, [but] not in that it 
follows it as light follows that which gives light and warming [follows] 
heat. Rather, He knows the manner in which the order of the good [takes 
place] in existence and that it [proceeds] from Him; and He knows that 
existence emanates from this act of knowing, according to the ranking 
that He intellectually apprehends as good and as order. 








eles Sa oly 


[all Jos] 
J-2?( 5) 
‘halls Ryle Mai lie gl chal By call Mell os 3 
vi Dl, plac cya gly Sail bmg 
‘eal Sal Je Jovadi by galEN tl ally 


SF SA Doce gall Je 8 Jy5N fir J Lal ola gl oad (1) 
Je th BOS SA Las aye ON at pall IS 
of Baoly abs LBW Jin OMA gi § tll ASD nee Stl [UP] ull 
ype ae sandi p c Layyey ald eao Fy gea’d gl ote Oly SS gle 
413 few a, . + Ahae ie Aa pall yo Mas SSG Gb yl ay a) sins 
ot Fal ie find gt Slav ail, 
biel gi oye WS cogil cll G2 ob Sgtall all : 5 ply (¥) 
BSL 5 Wha yall SS 5y al giall Sy xe ptly woth wlll 5s ps 
eal ell 9 SS A! WEES ATs By yo Jind UL LS SIL Yp cogeegll oe 
Lehi Sy Lablid ores SS WE. Loos ol i hac Sou i gall 
bey 4513 fay ald Se ge oss ots JY faa en icenycrese 
M90 Hytall iy pe As SUD MISES oy play cll ans 
dba, « * gtall + yall pil ket Vi Je cscs Stall plas le cage gl 
PAM a Shiley seedy sped 3 SWS Sle aboss 
Lally | abi gill O55 SE dedi ge 


\o 


cag 


10 


20 


25 


30 


292 Book Eight, Chapter Seven 


(3) {He is] a lover of His essence, which is the principle of all order 
and good inasmuch as [His essence] is such [a principle]. Thus, order of 
the good becomes an object of His love accidentally. He is not, however, 
moved toward this by desire. For He does not undergo influence from 
[this order] at all. He desires and seeks nothing. This, then, is His will, 
which is devoid of [any] deficiency brought about by desire and [any] dis- 
turbance in the quest of some objective. 

(4) Nor should it be thought that, if the intelligibles with Him have 
forms and multiplicity, the multiplicity of the forms He intellectually 
apprehends would constitute parts of His essence. How [can this be} when 
they are posterior to His essence? For His intellectual apprehension of 
His essence is identical with His essence; and of [His essence] He intellec- 
tually apprehends everything posterior to Him. Hence, His intellectual 
apprehension of His essence is the cause of His intellectual apprehension 
of what is posterior to His essence. Thus, His intellectual apprehension of 
what is posterior to His essence is the effect of His intellectual appre- 
hension of His essence. The intelligibles and concepts, however, which 
He has posterior to His essence are intellectually apprehended in the 
manner of intellectual intelligibles, not [in the manner of things appre- 
hended] by the soul. With respect to them, He has only the relation of 
the principle from which [something] proceeds, not [of something] in it. 
Rather, they are relations [arranged] in order—one prior to another— 
even though coexisting, not preceding or succeeding [one another] in 
time. Hence, [for Him] there is no passage in the intelligibles [from one 
intelligible to another]. 

(5) It should not be thought that the intellectual relation belonging to 
[the intelligibles] is for them a [haphazard] relation, obtaining in which- 
ever way they happen to exist. Otherwise, every principle of a form in 
matter, where that form is of a nature that is intellectually apprehended 
by some means by way of abstraction and the like, would have to be an 
intellect in actuality. Rather, this relation belongs to them when they are 
in a state of being intellectually apprehended. If [the relation were to 
obtain] with respect to their existence in external reality (only], then [the 
First] would intellectually apprehend only those that exist all the time 
and would not apprehend the nonexistent among them until they exist in 
external reality. Hence, He would not intellectually apprehend of Himself 
that He is the principle of that thing in [its proper] order, except when He 
becomes a principle [for its existence].* [As such,] He would not be intel- 
lectually apprehending His essence, because His essence is of a nature 








ere ae vay 


wt US pte oy pty old Se go Halls pile, (¥) 
See NAS Sd 6 al MA VAS coy a Bytes pl 
CPF Oot tle yal ip LI asl) ob alle Vy LL SAN, cathe 
[YN] ee aed 
Fara SIE ES yo as Oi wld IT al ge Yy (4) 
F Si ey cl cialis 3 S4il5 oe GSS ty AS S451 eyo! Ul 
ON LS as Jan 13 aay Laid cli ay Lalas Ae ail ald foam Le 
Apea YA Leal OM all go Je isin LiL SIS aay al Ny pally eM dal 
JP Ween CSN de ble by cad Vac 9% oath Ll wats ld Ul, 
tall BIE Shen gS SLND EE Yy als Y LB 5p cae 
F 5S YW, dey BS |p) BLS} \e}] eel BLEY 5) Glas Y, (°) 
OK copes we ce pod Ji Slay pall OM Gt pale binge rw 
M2se 9 eee CIS dy sian low ty Ms) LeY ode fc badly Mae ge 
SAN A lee pptall Jia Vy cy FB ay Le fin LSS ged 8 
Mase Wl de ot a hae AT Aad oy Jin YK coe gh ol 


\o 


aa 


30 


293 Book Eight, Chapter Seven 


that all existence emanates from it. [Moreover,] its apprehension of [itself] 
inasmuch as it is of such a nature necessitates its apprehension of the 
other, even if it does not [yet] exist. Hence, the Lordly Knower knows 
[both] realized and possible existence, and His essence would have a rela- 
tion to [the intelligibles] inasmuch as they are intellectually apprehended, 
not inasmuch as they have existence in external reality. 

(6) It remains for you to examine the state of their existence as 
intellectually apprehended, as to whether they exist in the essence of the 
First as necessary concomitants that are consequent on Him; or whether 
they have an existence separate from His essence and the essence of 
other[s] as separate forms, having an order placed in the region of Lord- 
ship; or [to examine them] with respect to their existing in an intellect 
or soul, becoming imprinted in either one of the two when the First 
apprehends these forms. Thus [in the latter case] that intellect or soul 
would be akin to a subject for these intelligibles, and [these latter] would 
be intellectually apprehended by [the intellect or soul] as existing in [the 
intellect or soul] and intellectually apprehended on the part of the First 
as [proceeding] from Him. [Moreover,] the First would apprehend intel- 
lectually by His essence that He is the principle for them. Thus, among 
the assemblage of these intelligibles, there would be the intelligible that 
has the First as its principle without an intermediary, its existence, on 
the contrary, emanating from Him first; and emanating from Him sec- 
ondarily [would be] the intelligible that has [the First] as a principle, 
{but] through mediation.® This, then, would be the state of affairs with 
the existence of these intelligibles, even though their imprinting is in 
one thing. Some, however, would be prior, some posterior, according to 
the order of the causal and the being caused. 

(7) If these things impressed in that thing [whether intellect or soul] 
are among the effects of the First and are, hence, included among the 
things of which the First intellectually apprehends His essence to be a 
principle, then their proceeding from Him would not be in accordance 
with what we have said—namely, that, if He intellectually apprehends a 
good, it comes to be—because they are identical with His very intellectual 
apprehension of the good, or else the matter would regress [infinitely. 
This is] because He would need to apprehend intellectually [the fact] that 
they have been intellectually apprehended, and so on ad infinitum, which 
is impossible; and, hence, they would be identical with His very intellec- 
tual apprehension of the good. If, then, we say that, when He intellectually 
apprehended them, they came to be without there being with them 








era var 


FE Lely casey Slee et gl GLb yo ats GV lS Jin 90 
Hem atl lll SSS eel aly AN Als] oy LS Ig Gla ee 
coy Vie ote a Kes] RbLel add yy SEL, Poll ayo 3h 
LEB oey 

ASH Saye tes Us lags, Je 3 ett 23 (1) 
EF MEG yee 5 pS 0b Olby SII lee ogny WG Kal Aad A oj UT 
Jie md I fir Booger tin ye gl Arash ane [TV] depos 
AD Bey A pa Jill oS 9S gS gl Be meiyl espa oe Li 
Sing 5 WB de SM jp Dying cA Gl Jo dt sine 5 Sy cAlgill yall 
Ice JM gle Js UM il I tae oe 5S. Leal yo Jil 
ari 9 Lage a Li al ace J eal ley Wpl ase aogey ach dey 3h 
APL IE Gly OV fall ol oy 3 JL GS US . Ute 
ll et de coe leans J eae Sly 

PS SNM ee ie tll Sit LAM alt IL, (y) 
Aloe UBL Je jd ae Leyes 9 Ka. Md he al Jie JIL alae 
Vl fix ol clea aM Jule sl (el ais ait WV sory Lys fis 5] 
Mae WLS Ib. no ali ll gb ewe allay RY YL IS ccs 


flys yr, 


\o 


nN 


10 


20 


30 


294 Book Eight, Chapter Seven 


another act of intellectual apprehension—their existence being nothing 
other than acts of intellectual apprehension—this would be as though 
we had said, “Because He apprehended them intellectually, He appre- 
hended them intellectually,” or, “Because they came to exist from Him, 
they came to exist from Him.” 

(8) If you make these intelligibles parts of His essence, then multi- 
plicity will take place. If you make them consequential [concomitants] of 
His essence, then there would occur to His essence that which would not 
be a necessary existent with respect to them—Ithis] because of its adhe- 
sion to the possible existent. If you make them things separated frora 
every entity, then the Platonic forms would occur. If you render thera 
existent in some mind, then there would take place the impossible [con- 
sequences] we have [ just] mentioned before this. 

(9) You must, hence, exert your utmost effort to extract yourself 
from this difficulty and guard yourself against [the error of] rendering 
His essence multiple. You must not heed [the fact] that His essence is 
taken conjoined to some relation whose existence is possible. For [His 
essence] is not a necessary existent inasmuch as it is a cause for the exis- 
tence of Zayd, but with respect to itself. You must know that the Lordly 
world is very great. You must know that there is a difference between the 
emanation from a thing of a form whose nature is to be intellectually 
apprehended and the emanation from a thing of an intelligible form 
inasmuch as it is intellectually apprehended without anything additional. 
He intellectually apprehends His essence as a principle for the emanation 
of every intelligible, inasmuch as it is an intelligible that is caused, just 
as He is a principle of the emanation of every existent inasmuch as it is a 
caused existent. You must exert yourself diligently in reflecting on the 
principles [already] given and those that will be given, so that what ought 
to become clear may become clear to you. 

(10) The First intellectually apprehends Himself and the manner in 
which the order of the existing in all [things] exists in this order because 
He intellectually apprehends it as® [something] that is emanated, gener- 
ated, existing. [Now,] everything whose existence is known (the manner in 
which it comes into being from its principle being [known] to its principle) 
and which is a good that is not incompatible [with the order of the good] 
(being a consequence of the goodness of the essence of the Principle and 
its perfection, both of which are loved for their own sake)—[such a thing] 
is willed. But what is willed by the First is not [willed] in the manner in 
which [something] is willed by us, where He would then have a purpose 








lanl i olyyl YAg 


LW U5 KS UWS ontes \glY) easy Si aly cel jis er Kiply (doy 
AE dey ae oary WY sl cae ic a 

ANd Sol) Yele Sly SG aye alld eho oGyllada cle gly (4) 
Whe oly 29] Se Ce apes Coty We aS gl alll poe 
Le Jae age ys Mle ily ALLY yall coe tb SS a5 Lis 1 yl 
[119]. SAL je Lie 15 OSS L Lal oye 

ISG gl Lancy cg tthe ye Ab ne of ol aed (4) 
PEs WE - apr gl KEL Blo) adsl ob 9S gh YL Yy cas 
pe aj lll Talay GIB Lom Gp hy opel erly Coed wh agony de 
FF aly 5 OI WE yp pe «stl ge dade Shon Gp dl bey cle 
SF hac lace wild Jin pay 3515 9 Ayaan ot Sam oy A giae 5, po 6 5 
DI am i Dap S slated Lae ge WS slae Joie gh tone ip J gine 
HSI Ae bel CSI AL Ay sled Jel Yb gS oe 

plas Ui. SEAS Sd oye lh bi plidy als Jew JV ‘a 
WE due 5 OS igey (OS pyle 5% pre GS gatas ghy alin a 
cUngilad gb yall WLS bull old tb el pty Ble pb ys yay cae 


SE LAGS Ze tale pi le wed ly yal aly + gill wlbas 


\o 


10 


20 


30 


3S 


295 Book Eight, Chapter Seven 


regarding that which proceeds from Him—this is something whose 
impossibility it seems you have [already] known and which you will know 
[again]. Rather, He in Himself wills this type of purely intellectual will- 
ing. His life also is this very same thing. For the life which we have is 
completed from means of apprehension and action—namely, the 
imparting of motion—both [being] emitted by two different powers. 
[Now,] it is correctly [established] that [with the First] the very object of 
His apprehension—namely, that which he intellectually apprehends of 
the whole—is the cause of the whole and is itself the principle of His 
action. This is the bringing into existence of all [things]. Hence, one idea 
pertaining to Him consists in being [both an act of] apprehending and a 
way of bringing into existence. Thus, life, in His case, does not need two 
powers so as to be completed by two powers. Nor is life, with respect to 
Him, other than knowledge, all this belonging to Him in Himself. 

(11) Moreover, if the very existence of the intelligible forms occur- 
ring in us (and thus becoming a cause of the [externally] existing artifi- 
cial forms) were sufficient for the generation from them of the artificial 
forms—[this] in that their forms are, in actuality, principles of [the 
things] of which they are forms—then the intelligible with us would be 
the very same thing as power. This, however, is not the case. Rather, their 
existence is not sufficient for this but needs a renewed will, springing 
forth from an appetitive power through which together the motive power 
is moved, and it moves [in its turn] the nerve and the instrumental 
organs, then the external instruments, then matter. For this reason, the 
very existence of these intelligible forms is neither power nor will. 
Rather, the power in us is perhaps with the motive principle, while this 
[intelligible} form moves the principle of power, becoming thereby that 
which moves the mover. 

(12) Hence, the will of the Necessary Existent does not differ in 
essence from His knowledge, nor does it differ in meaning from His 
knowledge. For we have shown that the knowledge belonging to Him 1s 
identical with the will that belongs to Him. Likewise, it has become evi- 
dent that the power belonging to Him consists in His essence being an 
intellectual apprehender of the whole in [such] a way that the appre- 
hension is a principle of the whole, not derived from the whole, and a 
principle in itself, not dependent on the existence of anything. This will, 
in the form we have ascertained (which is not connected with a purpose 
within the emanation of existence), is nothing other than emanation 
itself. And this is munificence. Now, we have ascertained for you [the state 








lect ow oly Y40 


7 PANN oye AI ge fp cplny Ue Waal cule ud KG oe ace 
dey Lah JSS bce NLL 5B ae Lal ewley dad Lidl asl Ml 
oF this be 929 — Syne padi I ere By fds Ed ge gla cher gs 
Pte sols gd 5 IS shoal lly Ald Le ae ty Ss ge — 
MANY, Ss oh So iB I AEE daa LB obey als! 
-Aoy A) ald By abel nb au 
Boge By yall Loe praih bb Sad SN A giall pall gl Lady (9) 
a, pog SS jb Relea pall yng SEMA Lragey pais I PLEA 
ue} Aly Baill ace y0 bce Jpdall 55) — ye al a Wigole rw] Jal 
AB BEB y Rare irse doll We low cold 3 OY bogey boli 
Be BIW AS faa easly neal cb sgl lee Lage I oct 
coh be cdalyl Vy 505 Dyeall , yuall ods 29 pt Svs slid 
ABN Bye 9 capa MN Soo by gall cdeny AA ll vos bday 
vale psgill Sylar Vy cAabd Oldll Sylar Waly) ound speglcole (VY) 
4 Asad gl eas 03 WS vA) SUN BSL YN ye age 4b gl ball gl Ley od 
Ystiy laay «Se BSL Y Sb Le po rtie Sb die wb gS 
U2 ye Hes YS) Laliaem (18) gall de dal, olay oe gt dey be 


\o 


10) 


ly 


IY 


50 


290 Book Hivht, Chapter Seven 


of affairs] regarding the matter of [divine | munificence, fand,] if you 
remember it, you would know that this will is itself munificence. If {fur- 
ther] ascertained, {it would be shown that] the primary attribute of the 
Necessary Existent consists in His being a “that [Ele is|” and an existent.’ 
Then, {respecting} the other attributes, some will include the meaning 
of this existence with [something] additional, [and] some [will include the 
meaning] of this existence with a negation. Not one of [the attributes] 
necessitates at all either multiplicity or difference in His essence. 

(13) Thus, those [attributes] that intermix with negation [are such 
that, for example,] if one, without due respect, says of the First that fe 
is a substance, he would not mean fanything} but this existence with dic 
negation of His being ina subject. And if he says of Him “one,” he would 
mean only this existence itself} where either quantitative and categorical 
division are negated of Him or else a companion is negated of Him. If he 
says {that He is] intellect, intellectual apprehender, and intelligible, he 
would mean in reality only that this pure being® fis such that] the possi- 
bility of mixing with matter and its attachments is negated of Him, with 
the consideration, however, of [there being} some relation. If he says of 
Hin “first,” He would mean only the relating of this existence to the 
whole. If he says of Him “powerful,” he would mean by it only that He ts 
the Necessary Existent, to which is added that the existence of [what is| 
other than Him truly comes about only from Him in the manner that has 
been mentioned. If he says of Him “living,” he would mean only this 
intellectual existence taken in relation to the whole, which is also intel 
lectually apprehended in the second intention, since the living is one ho 
is an apprehender and an enactor. If he says of Him “willer.” he would 
mean only that the Necessary Existent’s being with His intellectuality— 
that is, the negation of matter from Him—is the principle of the entire 
order of the good, and that He intellectually apprehends this. This would. 
hence, be composed of a relation and a negation. Hf he says of Him 
“munificent,” he would have meant it by way of this relation with negit- 
tion with the addition of another negation—namely, that He does not 
seek an objective for Himself. I he says of Him “good,” he would only 
mean either {the fact] that this existence is [ree from mixing with what is 


and this is negation—or His [state of | hems 





in potency and deliciency 
the principle of every perfection and order, this being a relation. 


ue) Ole! van 


oh pM ie WA ob gay eed Eb USS Y cage gb oO 


tinal VSG odd lly clog $5 ped LM ode gh cle $5 Lil Le ah 
el OS baw GEM oli Per sey jial ssaglools Jil 
Loy lee rely Vy Gay coke pt ope gl Ie Yeay AbLo| ae age il Ne 
glee Vy CNIS ails B 
prt Sh Pea ly IN 6 UB Sch LIS Lue (vr) 
prety 8 NBL) pregdl 2 GST ae ose gay caged a We 
Atl as Lgl gl csi gh SU deni ce Ula aud ogeegh DO Yl 5 
wo ghee ayo Un gl RLY uc slany Bley Joe 298 bly [OMA] 
‘Le Yl a AACE Le Le] Lisl ao (Widley alll AL jl 
Rice eyes merece cr pl 38 14) SB lily. S01 Ul opel be 
Ia Yl Sed se 8 JB Bly. $5 gill poate wre Re Ulant opey gl 
PALL SOI weal Lal Syed $I Ley ~ ie dele 
whe gh = Me ae oe SI oly GSU jared coe ta) J lay. Jlaal aal 
sepals Wi We GSD MS foe gay aS pled Lae — ae soll 
Val gan ciciats hell ae BLEM oka tom ole «alge 24) JB ly 
Le tie 56 Loe add GSU jug gt a IB by ld Loe gos 
FLa| Nady platy SUS Se SS gl Ls any ally al 


\o 





10 


20 


30 


297 Book Eight, Chapter Seven 


(14) If the attributes of the First, the Truth, are apprehended intel- 
lectually in this manner, nothing will be found in them that would neces- 
sitate parts or multiplicity for His essence in any manner whatsoever. 

(15) There can be neither beauty nor splendor above the quiddity’s 
being purely intellectual, pure goodness, free from each one of the facets 
of deficiency, one in every aspect. The Necessary Existent thus has pure 
beauty and splendor, and He is the principle of beauty of all things and the 
splendor of all things. His splendor consists in His being in accord with 
what ought to be His. How would the beauty be of Him who is in accord 
with what ought to be in necessary existence? All beauty, harmony, anc 
apprehended good constitute an object of affection and love. The principle 
of all this is its apprehension—whether sensory, imaginary, estimative, 
conjectural, or intellectual. Whenever the apprehension is greater in 
depth and ascertainment, and the object apprehended more perfect and 
noble in essence, then the love and enjoyment of the faculty that appre- 
hends it is greater. 

(16) Hence, the Necessary Existent—who is ultimate perfection, 
beauty, and splendor [and] who intellectually apprehends Himself in this 
ultimate [perfection,] beauty, and splendor by a perfect act of intel- 
lectual apprehension and by an act of intellectual apprehension that 
[grasps] the intellectual apprehender and the intelligible as being one in 
reality—[is such that,] for Himself, His self is the greatest lover and 
object of love and the greatest partaker of enjoyment and object enjoyed. 
For enjoyment is nothing other than the apprehension of the suitable 
inasmuch as it is suitable. Thus, sensory enjoyment is the sensing of the 
suitable, and the intellectual [enjoyment] is the intellectual apprehension 
of the suitable. Similarly, the First is, hence, the best apprehender through 
the best apprehension of the best object of apprehension. He is, thus, 
both the best one who enjoys an object of enjoyment and [the best] object 
of enjoyment—this being something with which nothing is compared. 
We do not have names for these meanings other than these names. Who- 
ever finds them repugnant can make use of others. 





lett on oly vay 


rH st led dened caghlobe le hi I Molise elie bb (1¢) 
apd op eg 5S gl ell ala 

iyo lame blas Kall 9 SSIES ely Jka g Kgl KeVy (10) 
sD cols de LS] sively «ail ebeal ys wely K5ediy cdaaae 
SSI Say tt Seley tS Slee hae gay cab olplly JUL 
Jo 5 Seely 2B Goon be be WS be She GS ch coe be 
cg bl ST oS hey Gp tee pone dla psdy [PIN] edhe 
EST tt SL oY SLY «del Uy coll Ly eas Ly ILL Ll, 
Sha WIL, oY Kalli lop bb Sth, JST all, ae al, 

Sim Sl elgly SLL SUSU ALE 5 4 gil ogee gll Cotte (19) 
doly Lgl Je Sadally BLM fics «Jacl ploy SLLly elplly bal wht al 
cand Bll GID Slay BY plasty Gytaey Gils acl wild ails OSG aay 
“pL Jad LLedlly SM ole} ddl Db ge be Ae oy SUL! JLo! Y] 
GBay «Shey SY abl go Alar LBV Aol Jad aon asl Jo os, 
OS estos sb clad Sal dg! Uae paly oe gt al otis Y Lyd ats 
aT yw a ow Va 





ils. 


\o 








10 


20 


30 


298 Book Eight, Chapter Seven 


(17) It should be known that the intellect’s apprehension of the intel- 
ligible is stronger than the sense’s apprehension of the sensible. [This 
is] because it—I mean, the intellect—conceives® and apprehends the 
permanent, universal thing; unites with it, becoming in some manner 
identical with it; and apprehends it in its internality, not in its outward 
[aspects]. This is not the case with the senses [in relation to] the sensible 
object. Thus, the enjoyment which necessarily obtains for us when we intel- 
lectually apprehend a suitable thing is above the enjoyment that obtains 
for us by our sensing a suitable thing; there is no comparison between 
the two. It may so happen, however, that the apprehending faculty does 
not enjoy what it ought to enjoy due to accidental impediments—as, for 
example, [when] the sick person does not enjoy what is sweet, hating it 
because of an accidental impediment. It is in this way that one must 
know our state as long as we remain in the body. For, when there is real- 
ized for our intellectual faculty its perfection in actuality, it does not find 
in terms of enjoyment what is [fully] due to the thing in itself. This is 
because of the impediment of the body. If we were to set ourselves aside 
from the body, then, by our contemplating our essence—which would have 
become an intellectual world, concordant with the true existents, true 
beauties, and true objects of enjoyment (connected with them in the 
manner in which one intelligible is connected with another)—then we 
would find, in terms of enjoyment and splendor, that which is infinite. 
We shall clarify all these ideas later on. 

(18) Know that the enjoyment of every faculty consists in the realiza- 
tion for it of its own perfection. Thus, for the senses there are suitable 
sensible things; for anger, revenge; for hope, success; and, for each thing, 
that which is proper to it. For the rational soul, there is its becoming an 
intellectual world in actuality. The Necessary Existent is an intelligible, 
regardless of whether or not [others] intellectually apprehend Him; and 
[He] is loved, regardless of whether [He is] loved [by others] or not. 








etsy» olyyl YAA 


cgmorall bl All oe gal stall Jol lal Gl ale gl ogy (19) 
PE PP tty ooty «SI BU NI Aang iw — Jill el - a3 
WA ANEW fo pmreall abl WIS jal cop YAS Shang cle arry 
SS ages Ani Vy LDL aos Gh WSS NSM SS Ge cde Jes gh 
PMS lye Mas gh coy i SL Vall 3B GS gl oye os 
Dad Ble Lhe Gy ple GI Con, WIS Yo oy AHI a Y 
Udy Aen 9 esl Gow Le Balll ge ot Y Jal WLS ALL yd fee Lab 
Les We jlo aby c bald Elles Wie jal ye boys gly gall sls [yVe ] 
Sheil ly tare Raab! Oly ARAL SYLL, CARED lo ge yall Volles 
vay YE Gl che ea geny ALG YL elglly all yo od cians Jie 
AD ola gnttl paolld WY WLS Iam 58 $54 gl abel, (14) 
le eye MoU pally chao Le 6d Sy « lll ee ly is asl, 
Seog! gl gts CD gerne « Jeng) sl Jas Spine 99> J] Cols. jail, Lee 


an 


10 


20 





BOOK NINE 
On the emanation of things from the 
first governance and the return to Him; 
[consisting of ] seven chapters 





Chapter [One] 


On the attribute of the efficacy of the First Principle 


(1) It has become manifest to us that there is, for the whole, a Prin- 
ciple whose existence is necessary, [that is] neither included in genus nor 
is subject to definition or demonstration; [that He] is free from quantity, 
quality, quiddity, place, time, and motion; [that He] has neither equal, 
companion, nor contrary; that He is one in all respects because He is not 
divisible—neither in terms of parts in actuality, [nor] in terms of parts by 
supposition and estimation (as with the continuous), nor in the mind in 
that His essence is composed of varied intellectual ideas from which an 
aggregate becomes united; [and] that He is one inasmuch as He does not 
share at all [with others] the existence that belongs to Him. He is thus, by 
this unity, single. He is one because He is perfect in existence; nothing in 
Him awaits completion, this being one of the aspects of the one. The one 
is only in Him in the negative manner. [ This is] unlike the one belonging 
to bodies—by reason of connection or combination—or to some other 
thing among [things] where the one is in it through a unity which is an 
existential meaning that appends itself to an essence or essences. 


— 299 — 











PEDRO LP UPS 
Jp has 


[dsl Jaa 
51) 


Ja Lidl eb aie 


J yee BED Ee opeglcely lee Sb gi Wb a8 [rr] (1) 
BY Ly Sly My all BSI, SII oe Hoy cgbay har cd Bl 
eM BY spate pb a oye a ge tely aly ol wo Vy al abt Vy a) 
oiSy sb GSS Gb Jal BY, hal pagly call chad BY, fal 
PEN Dee Fg toe ge sey ally Mle lpr and syle Ais le 
Fe hd hy age Spb AY oly gay od ine gl ady gb dl gilloagey 
‘cartel SN Se MAb oN ply ed SN agen sol ha GB 28y op 
AP relat GS UMD pb gl pled yl Slat «plist gall wALI pal 
GIS gh Bb seks ergs Ue gh taey 


—-YAA- 


\o 


Nn 


25 


30 


40 


300 Book Nine, Chapter One 


(2) It has [also] become clear to you, from what preceded in the nat- 
ural sciences, that there exists an infinite incorporeal power and that it is 
the principle of primary motion. It became evident to you, moreover, that 
the circular [heavenly] motion is not temporally generated.' It [also] 
became in some way evident to you there that [this] is a principle per- 
manent in existence. After this, it became evident to you that the Existent 
Necessary in Himself is a necessary existent in all His aspects and that it 
is impossible for a state which did not exist previously to commence for 
Him. With [this], it became evident to you that the cause in [terms of] 
itself necessitates the effect, so that, if it is permanent, it necessitates 
the effect permanently. If you are satisfied with these things, they would 
suffice for you regarding what we are in the course of explaining. We will, 
however, enlighten you further. 

(3) We say: You have known that every temporally originated thing 
has matter. Hence, if it [previously] had not come into existence and 
then was originated, then it would either be the case that [(a)] both the 
efficient and receptive causes did not [previously] exist and then came 
into existence; [(b)] that both existed, but the efficient cause did not 
impart motion and the recipient did not move; [(c)| that the efficient 
cause, but not the receptive, existed; or [(d)] that the receptive cause 
existed, but not the efficient. 

(4) We will now say in a brief manner, before turning to details, that, 
if the states respecting the causes are as they [always] have been, and 
nothing at all that did not exist came to exist, then the necessity of the 
generable thing proceeding from them or its non-necessity would be the 
same. As such, it would not be possible at all for a generable thing to 
come into existence. 

(5) If, then, something which did not [previously] exist came into 
being, then either its coming into existence would be in the manner in 
which something comes into existence because its cause comes into exls- 
tence all at once—not in the way in which something comes into existence 
because of the proximity or remoteness of its cause—or else its coming 
into existence would be in the way in which something comes into exis- 
tence due to the proximity of its cause or its remoteness. As regards the 
first alternative, its temporal coming into existence must be due to the 
temporal coming into existence of the cause, and [this must occur simul- 
tancously] with it, not delayed after it at all. For, if the cause did not exist 
and then existed, or, if it existed and the effect is delayed [after the cause], 
then what we have said earlier? regarding the necessity of another tem- 
poral being other than the cause necessarily follows.? That originated 








FAV Ball Ba oly Ye 


ye Aske po as 29209 Aone eglall jo thes La ul eal aby (¥) 


WSS BS cand Spal BLN hl gy cdg Doble Ugly ciao 


SINS dm OB gb aby df Slo Lae al Lasey oy Sen ye all gb ody « Ly 
le db Gls Sl jem Val, A oe ers oaly dle ope soos 
Shall meg cule Gib Jello ye 9 \FlN aba GID gh wal a SG al 
[VE] ives Say UY) aod ojos LSU LAY alt, GUST Jy Ltls 

psa db dooagl gO bb iol ab ale Sol cule wb ull: Jad (1) 
Y Jew oF A, GW)  Baed USS JAN, Lleldl Uhe ASS gl Ll foe 
Sell SS py lal G5 pl c hl Kaly Joti Syl Apc Y Jl, Ane 

Salige j NeMAO La] sail fo gll JB heme VS Joby (4) 
easy Vleles (RIGS Oey 56 Ke yl x3) Sea ly IOUS 
EN GE bie 5l pb QSL 

Le Joe gle Ayre Sgt LL LE Gl pl ove gb (6) 
GI gh ae gl le Gy dane be fee he Y dads alle yak chase 
SS I cad IN pel Ub. Lae gl che Gy Sar, Le fou Ge algae 
Boge ge pb Mall SIE Gaile SIT Ipe Ue Ugaey dla! dyad ahyam 


& 


| Sole oy cy Syl op olild Le oj! ¢ J} gall oust, Bd gy 9! (Om 


\o 


Qo 


10 


15 


20 


30 


301 Book Nine, Chapter One 


thing would then become the proximate cause. If the matter is repeti- 
tively prolonged in this manner, then there would necessarily ensue causes 
and temporal events coming all at once that are infinite and would nec- 
essarily occur simultaneously. But this is something for which we have 
known the principle dictating its refutation. It thus remains that the 
temporal causes do not [come about] all at once—[that is, the effect not 
being] due to the proximity to or remoteness from a first cause. 

(6) It thus remains that the principles of generation lead in the end 
to the proximity or remoteness of causes, and this by means of motion, 
Therefore, motion is preceded by motion, [the latter] motion leading the 
causes to this motion. The two [motions] are, hence, like two contiguous 
[things]—otherwise, the discussion will start again with regard to the time 
between them. This is because, if no motion touched [the intervening 
time], then the infinite temporal events among [the generated things] 
would be in one instant, since it is not possible for them to be in instances 
that meet together, that are contiguous. This becomes impossible. Rather, 
one must in such an instant have become proximate after remoteness, or 
have become remote after proximity, so that that instant would be the 
termination of a first movement, leading to another movement or to 
something else. If it leads to another motion and necessitates [it], then 
the motion which is akin to a proximate cause for [the former] motion 
would be contiguous to it. 

(7) The meaning of this contiguity is understood [as entailing] that 
it is impossible for a time to exist between two motions without there 
being motion in it. For it has become evident to us in the Physics that time 
follows motion. Engaging in this mode of exposition, however, informs 
us [only] that a motion precedes a motion; it does not inform us that 
that motion is the cause of the origination of this subsequent motion. 

(8) It has thus become clearly evident that motion does not come into 
being after nonexistence except because of a temporal occurrence. That 
occurrence {in turn] does not come to be save through a motion contiguous 
to this motion. Do not heed what temporal event that event is—whether 
an intention of the agent, a volition, knowledge, instrument, nature, the 
occurrence of a more suitable time for action than another, the occur- 
rence of a preparedness or disposition on the part of the recipient that did 
not previously exist, or an arrival from the effective cause [of a factor] 
that did not previously exist—for whatever it is, its occurrence is con- 
nected with motion. Nothing other than this is possible. 








elestl yo ole a 


coy hl ade le yl gale GB Ay dadl yo Sotbl als 56 cabal 
Allah oll Joolll Lye Ut Ling. lee cneegy AK pb dads Sal yong le 
song glile jo oR Vids YR Js gS Y gl Las 
23 gab. SLL elds, bose gl eos UI es Ml wole gl 23 (4) 
Vy cpl Lge SLU oe yl Mell choy SLI lb, So SLi Js 
[YVO] 6S > aati! 3 al aly. Lager Si GL Srl gL OST ae 
halen RB OW SS Gh yyw VSL rely Td lee RAL ail Sol ght 
Sop ae gh cae ae SVU G8 8 vols OK GI Coe J calls Jub 
glo gb FT pi eel Se hos Ul Se ay SI os SO 
WAS a SS Lo NSM oS cosy gel So 
OS > a db GK) Vl ge pope Lode 3 sally (¥V) 
bby JAY Sy Sod ab gly gloladll § Wok 4b SEY, 
SL lb 5! ae Wy Se 3 Se [gh] ye gl y peull 
AEN! SL ode Syvd tle 
Ady Dalb VSG alle me Got VSG Gl becly (yg yb 0B (A) 
boll 3 GO Sale cl UL Y, SLi oy LU Spee VY Suse Y sath! 
Seal Sag) dy Jem ghee gh call i clake gi easly yl etal op baad 
Fa FH yy Sey al Keel lal ow sland gl 5g Sper sh obs ayo 
Nae nb Se V SLY Gee Syed GO GS ab 





edd 
ol 


\o 


10 


20 


30 


40 


302 Book Nine, Chapter One 


(9) Let us return to the detailed [exposition] and say: If both the active 
and the receptive causes are entities that exist,’ there being, however, 
neither action nor the affection between them, then the occurrence of a 
relation between them that would necessitate action and affection is needed. 
With respect to the agent, [this would be something] like a will that neces- 
sitates the act, a nature that necessitates the act, an instrument, or [an 
appropriate] time. With respect to the recipient, [it would be something] 
akin to a disposition that did not previously exist. Alternatively, with respect 
to the two together, [it would be] akin to one of them reaching the other. It 
has become clear that all this [takes place] through some [form] of motion. 

(10) As for there being an agent but not a recipient at all,° this is 
impossible. As for the first [reason for this], it is because the recipient, as 
we have shown, does not come into existence except by a motion or a con- 
nection. Hence, before motion there would be motion. As for the second 
[reason for this], it is because it is impossible for something to come into 
existence so long as it is not preceded by the existence of the recipient— 
namely, matter. Thus, the recipient would have had to exist in order that 
the recipient could come into existence. As for positing the recipient as 
existing® but the agent as not existing, then the agent would be some- 
thing that temporally came into existence; and it would follow necessarily 
that its temporal coming into existence is by a cause that has motion, as 
we have described [the matter]. 

(11) Moreover, the principle of the whole is an essence necessary in 
its existence, and what proceeds from the Necessary Existent is necessary. 
Otherwise, [the Necessary Existent] would have a state which did not 
[previously] exist and, hence, would be necessary in all His aspects. If the 
newly occurring state is placed not in His essence, but extraneous to His 
essence, as some have placed the will,’ then the question regarding the 
occurrence of the will remains—is it through will, by nature, or by rea- 
son of some other thing, whatever that may be? As long as something is 
posited as coming into existence after not being, it would have to be posited 
either as occurring in His essence or not occurring in His essence but as 
something different from His essence, in which case the [question] persists. 
If it were to come into existence in His essence, then His essence would 
have undergone change, when it has been shown that the Necessary Exis- 
tent in His essence is a necessary existent in all His aspects. 

(12) Furthermore, if, with the origination by Him of the different 
things, He [remains] as He had been before their occurrence and nothing 
at all [regarding His state] that had not existed comes to be—the state of 
affairs being as it had been when nothing came to exist through Him— 





rletll oly! ey 


Pry Lb, ell ll 35g) 1,28 fei sles () 
SLAY Jed Cog lagen, Aaa aby ned « Lagi Slat Yy Jb Uy cl 
olay gh Al gl Jud Rage Keke gh ull Kye aly] JE cell ge yy Ul 
Jey fo ene yer oy gh Kid skacel fb lilaye yp UL [rv] 
be Sow V8 Qe Gl ey aby SN Lael 

SB Ey! Ll: lowe yp CNG Kole lageeye Jelill GILL, (+) 
Ya WELL Sy SLI 5 9K Seal 4 Spe Were Y key LS pl 
ae fe dl GF 3 SRS Ball gay cla ogery arta) b dae gl 
R prey Sore Jed 629 98 pe! Jelilly aye ge lal 5 022 ol Lay. Sola 
olny bb he Sym Old tle Bye GK 

dong, Le corly syed only <opell Roly Old SS las Lay (99) 
JU carry SB lee pam oy orl only eld SG Je ald Vy cae 
Sigde le SG aol Yl apa par Sail Ge Ey fowls BY MUL 
yl 022 ses SoS yl sl ei yl 3 eb) Bally ge Je Sel (gs sal ¥l 
Al Je fails poske 3 Ley ald Bale aoy gl Ub ial be 
Gi By Lie alld QU caild B bam gly GE OT 9 KO cast gle ot 
[TVV] Alger eee ye aor sil cords Sly opel ooly 3 

ly Mbgae J gS WS ace SLL Syae ace ge GIS] Lady (1¥) 
woe lb et ae to Wy OL le IS (Kd AE ee 


\o 


A 


10 


15 


20 


30 


40 


303 Book Nine, Chapter One 


then it is not necessary that anything should come to be from Him. 
Rather, the state of affairs and the matter [in question] would remain as 
they had been. Hence, there must be a differentiating principle with 
respect to the necessity of existence [proceeding] from Him, and [there 
must be] the rendering of preponderance for existence [to proceed] from 
Him—l[this] through an intermediary occurrent that did not exist when 
the preponderance was for nonexistence from Him, His state being [that 
of] refraining to act. This [occurrent] would not be something extraneous 
to Him. For we are speaking of the occurrence of the occurrent from Him 
Himself, without the mediation of something occurring from which the 
second comes to occur in the manner in which they speak regarding the 
will and the willer.’ 

(13) The pure mind that has not been adulterated bears witness [to 
the fact] that the one essence, if it [remains] in all respects as it had 
been—nothing previously having come to be from it, it now remaining 
the same—then now also nothing would come into existence by it. If it 
comes about that now something comes to exist from it, then there would 
have occurred in the essence an intention and will, a nature, power, or 
ability, or some similar thing that did not exist before. Whoever denies 
this separates himself from the dictate of his reason with his tongue, 
returning to it in his heart. For that which is possible to exist or not to 
exist does not become actual, and existence for it is not rendered prepon- 
derant, except through a cause. If this essence belonging to the cause 
[remains] as it had been and is not rendered preponderant, and [if] this 
preponderance does not ensue necessarily from it—there being no motive, 
benefit, or the like—then there must be a new occurrence that necessitates 
preponderance in this essence, if it is the efficient cause. Otherwise, its 
relation to that which is possible remains as it has been before, no new rela- 
tion occurring for it—the matter remaining in the same state, the possi- 
bility would [remain] a pure possibility in the state [as it had been]. 

(14) If a new relation does occur for it, then something [new] would 
have occurred. [This] must occur for Himself and in Himself. For, if it were 
external to His essence, then the discussion would remain [the same] and 
the relation would not be the relation sought after. For we seek the relation 
appropriate for the existence, after nonexistence, of all that is external to 
His essence [taken as] a whole, as though [it were] one aggregate, and in 
the state where no other [external] thing existed. Otherwise, something 
from the aggregate would have been taken away and one would be looking 
at what comes after it. If the principle of the relation was different from 
Him, then it would not be the relation sought. Then, according to this 





lett ye oly rey 


2S a3 ofp AI OTL se My WIS pas wey gl 
OS a pal eal Se Kid bag abe ace opel ny cae 
wo EI Sym 3 KS Ub fae Lele Lyl Ids ay calle Jail ge flac 
«SAMs OLY LB Gia LS eg a baend Saoy yl Manly yd 

wor of C8 bet gl otal gl agi SK ol gl tarall Laaly (0¥) 
Lal SG MSM pay ce ot JB Lad lps an VIS EIS Ue 
wad OI Soe oad 4 ot pe sey Mile bt ee wey 
2b Nie Sol jy Sid nats a gh Ky 55 gl cael ch 
Vere Vals send] UGB. Lae all ogny UL aie cc Gb 
AES all SNM oe Sly Sas Wary hd ey Jal 
we cells pF Vy deer Vy cls Vy (Teerrll be ps Con Vy ey 
Fi OV, Rell asl 2 ISG] ott de 3 eas ay bole 
OB alee AG KS osha YOY, [gS le Kil I 
ley bye KG] 3K 

+451 By ail Dace gl oy an Yy cpl ue 2d hanes YJ Gre lly (9€) 
a Ub ae Slat tl oo SG ay «Ca OT ghd ye dele AK gl Vb 
WS pacrl Kiel bw sls Ge CLE ge LS age) RL all [PVA] 
JoeB Jy BU ysl BY, ft ed Le Gy ney thee 
JM coal gale $a flat Rll oo eld ca Lyle dell Lane G8 lb «aay Le 


\o 





10 


15 


20 


30 


35 


304 Book Nine, Chapter One 


[mode of] discourse, the first occurrence would be in His essence. But this 
is impossible. For how can something occur in His essence, and from [what 
source] would it occur, when it has become evident that the Necessary 
Existent in Himself is one? 

(15) It is thus seen that that [thing] is other than what would have 
come into existence from Him, and, hence, it would not be the relation 
sought after. This is because we are seeking [an answer to the question] 
regarding the relation necessitating the actualization of the first possible 
[existent]: Does it [proceed] from another necessary existent? But it has 
been said that the Necessary Existent is one. Moreover, if it were from 
another, then [the latter] would be the first cause; and the discussic.n 
concerning it would remain fixed, [the same]. Moreover, how is it possible 
to differentiate in nonexistence between a time of refraining [to act] and 
a time of beginning [an action]? And with what would one [moment] of 
time differ from another [moment] of time? 

(16) Furthermore, if it has become evident that the occurrent does not 
come to be except for the coming to be of an occurrent in the principle, 
then the occurrence produced by the First is either by nature, by an 
accident in Him other than the will, or by the will, since it is neither 
compulsory nor coincidental. If by nature, then the nature would have 
changed; and, if by accident, then the accident would have changed. 

(17) If by will, let us set aside [the question of whether] it occurs in 
Him or is separate from Him, saying, rather: What is willed is either the 
very act of producing existence or it is a purpose and benefit beyond it. If 
what is willed is the very act of producing the existence of [the thing], 
why did He not bring [it] into existence earlier? Is it that He found it the 
right thing [to bring into existence] now, or [that] its due time has [now] 
arrived, or that He has the power [to enact] it [only] now? There is no 
sense in saying that this question is vain, because the [self-same] ques- 
tion recurs with respect to every [moment] of time. On the contrary, this 
question is true [precisely] because it is recurrent and necessary with 
respect to every [moment] of time. 

(18) If [the occurrent in question is produced] for a purpose and a 
benefit, then [the answer is] that it is known that that which relates to 
something in such a way that its own existence [and] nonexistence are 
on a par is not [produced for} a purpose, while that which relates to 
something in such a way that its generation from it is preferable [to its 
not being generated] is beneficial. But the First Truth is perfect in His 
essence and is not benefited by anything. 








rlettl ye obey oe 


CH MND bre jl Se SS Shae aS Salld Ua Jyl lae le 9 % 
Saely dldy ope gh only gl gh ody daee ary 
colle CY a abl ctl od go ae boll lbs Gl gd (10) 
Sh dB By SAT ay Condy ge coal Jal SJ SM yd he ll at 
Peat a OK, IM aba 8 eT ye WO GLal ey ely ses, 
SSS gl e581 dey bly Seat dy 35 by pal Bridal 
Ho Nadh b Sle dyad Woven Ybolhl gl gh slelad, (99) 
GM pb ge Ab Gaye gl caddls JAM ge Gore b Sym GK ol Ul sey 
of 5 «tall pal od ald OG. SUI Yy Gee a 5) aol WL 3 
| Ppl 3 a ol 
aI UL ry fy cal dhe ghadectae Ul Ab cash YL gh Gly CV) 
CAIN slew Gah oll GU GB oy deany Loge gl coleadl Qua ol dl 9S 
cee Vy SM ade 3 gl 43, Sue 4} QV ect all Sys sey0) ol 
Ine fy cable by FS Moat YS Ghb Sigil the gl pal alge Lo prvay 
ply ale 23, 6 ba te She 
Ys CS ome iat a Sil pond haiany opal ISL (VA) 
JV By £8 9b Dol ae BS toow tll 92 Gilly ol ab aj 
ts ne Voll LO 


\o 


QO 


10 


20 


30 


305 Book Nine, Chapter One 


(19) Moreover, by what does the First precede His created acts? By 
His essence or by time? If only by His essence, as one is to two (even though 
both are simultaneous) and as the movement of the thing in motion 
in that it moves by the motion of that which moves it (even though both 
are simultaneous), then it follows necessarily that both are temporally 
originated—[that is,] the eternal First and the acts generated from Him. 

(20) If [on the other hand] He had preceded [His created acts] not 
by His essence alone, but by His essence and time in that He-alone 
existed without the world and without motion—and there is no doubt 
that the expression “was” refers to something that has passed and rot 
[to something that] now [is], particularly as your statement “then” 
comes immediately after it—then there would have been an existence 
that had passed before He created creation, that existence being finite. 
There would therefore have been time before motion and time, because 
the past is either in terms of itself (namely, time) or in terms of time 
(namely, motion and what it contains and what is a concomitant with it). 
This has become evident for to you. 

(21) [Now,] if He did not precede by some past thing the first temporal 
moment of the origination of creation, then He would have come into 
being in time with its temporal coming to being. How, according to the 
[things] they had posited,® would He not have preceded the first moment 
of creation by some state when He “was” and there was no creation, and 
[then] He “was” and there was creation? For, [the statement] “He ‘was’ and 
there was no creation,” does not remain [true] in conjunction with [the 
statement] “He ‘was’ with creation.” Nor does “His being before creation” 
remain [true] in conjunction with “He being with creation.” [Further- 
more, the statement,] “He was and there was no creation,” is not identical 
with His existence alone, for His essence [continues to be] realized after 
creation. [The statement] “He was and there was no creation,” does not 
[signify] His existence without creation without a third thing. For the 
existence of His essence [continues to be] realized “after” creation, non- 
creation being characterized as [something]" that “was” and is not now. 

(22) Underlying our saying “was,” there is an intelligible meaning 
other than the intelligible [meaning] of the two things. [ This is] because, 
if you said, “the existence of an essence and the nonexistence of an 
essence,” what is understood by it is not precedence; but it may be correct 
to understand being delayed by it. For, if things were to cease to exist, 
His existence with the nonexistence of things would be true; but it would 
not be correct to refer to this [existence as] “was.” Rather, precedence is 








rletsl ye OLY Yo 


Ob Sob pl Tay! Sot abel qu SLE IM gb Lady (94) 


Syots gh — Appell Say — ee UK GL, — get els fe eb aly gi 


fold! JVI thor LAOS US gl cond — lee WT gly ae Dad b Spon 
as WSK Jha, 

ple Vy mrory GS gh Sbaily aly pc Laid why Y ge 08 GH Gly (1) 
hedaay be gay SV ely gia yl le Jus «38 ded glade Y, - SY, 
SL GO wi Soke gS allay « ILI GE Gl IS pee SOK OB — Geb lls 
BBN gay cGlph Ly c gles gay wildy Lol GY call, SLI 3 gly 
Nel gk aad Slee bey ed bey 

pale of ALI yam op JM Cod ob ye pl gee dob (19) 
G6 by ALI ye SM CBU L pb agelogl le Ge GRY GS yee 
4S Vy KBE y WS KS vce LE «GE Yy G8 Gedy Say 5G ale Y, 
BN sodomy 0d sey pa KHE Yy 3 dy «BBN oS er al «ght J 
est (Ah BEL pe we ereey 2 MIE Yy OM Vy gbt aw dele ails 
[TAS] SY pucdy SUES Syrerye GE prey (HH ae role sd ayery ole 

28 Ib] OY Capel Iytee gy dpi cee GD FU Ged, (19) 
{BU ane agin! eas OB pc jue ae Lgl Kid Mb pay ld ngs 
‘43S ht Sta g! Cet oly LAM psy sages on Liens Jab 


\o 


Qn 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


306 Book Nine, Chapter One 


understood only through a third condition. For the existence of the 
essence is one thing, its nonexistence is [another] thing, and what [the 
term] “was” signifies is something that is existent other than the two. 
This meaning has been posited for the Creator as extending without a 
beginning, and it was allowed as possible within [this posited meaning] 
that He creates before anything [that is] imagined to be a creation. If this 
is the case, then this priority would be measured and quantified. This is 
what we call time, since its measurement is not the measurement of 
something that has either [spatial] position or permanence but is by way 
of [being in a state of] renewal. 

(23) If you wish, then, contemplate our statements in the natural 
sciences. For we have shown [there] that what the meaning of, “was and 
will be,” indicates is [something] that occurs to a state that is not sta- 
tionary. And the state that is not stationary is motion. If you ascertain 
(the matter], you will know that for them the First does not precede the 
creation by a precedence that is absolute, but by a precedence in time, 
having with it motion, bodies, or a body. 

(24) [Now,] those deniers of divine attributes who have denied God 
His munificence must concede either [(a)] that God was able, before cre- 
ating the creation, to create a body with movements commensurate with 
times and periods, terminating with the creation of the world, or that 
[such a body] would continue to exist with the creation of the world, hav- 
ing, up to the time of the world’s creation, limited times and periods; or 
[(b)] [that] it was not for the Creator to initiate the creation except [at the 
time] He initiated [it]. This second alternative necessitates the transition 
of the Creator from [the state of] impotence to power, or the transition of 
the creatures from [the state] of the impossibility [of their existence] to 
[its] possibility, without a cause. 

(25) The first alternative divides into two parts [in arguing] against 
them. It is thus said: Either it is possible for the Creator to create a body 
other than the one terminating at the creation of the world—having 
(however] a greater period and motions—or it is not possible. It cannot 
be impossible for [the reasons] we have shown. If possible, then either it 
would be possible [for Him] to create it with the creation of that first 
body we mentioned before [mentioning] this body, or it would be possible 
only before it. If possible with it,"' this would be impossible; because it is 
not possible for the beginning of two creations, equal in motion as regards 
speed and slowness, to take place such that both would terminate with 





rlestl oly a 


il she CIF IS GOB WS ad pny GL gl JS BE) AS Shey 
ATs oy 63 pad ped opal 3) gle aed Gill go lay AG yale 
- dazzll Joe be 

GS ar ale Jon Lgl by 3) Racal Uh gl EE LS (1¥) 
Jal gl cule eait 15b SB pill boy, ob ST arly K, 
spe al ploy Sim tae Slay Vom Ulan Lene yd paves GLI jue i 

All Ugaben, gl Ls bee Yoo ge 6 alll Igllac ill lanl gay (16) 
JAE Reajly Bgl jad OK eB Lee Ge ol hl Gee ol JS Lobb of 
sealy Oy) Lal Go S5y S14 9 Ky SU GE & fa cal ge ey 
SE oe GO pel Lay Ll ge MI gb teata.gl BLEW Kel gf edagaee 
[YAY ] Ale dh GEOY pa 5 SB LAN JU gl cao I jastl ye gb! 

SI ESO GK UL Mey SES cya le abs I Mealy (10) 
Wyle ST Wy sae lal GE Gl ds Ll edd USF Lee tbl alee 
pedis Gee alle & gl Ld Sl GB volig Uc Ke V gl Jey . Ke 
VAY {Slee gb can Sl gb ahd Ke Li yl cpl le JS USS gill JN 
Shaky tore clay ebally Ae pall SLI gL yds HG) gy Sol KG 


\o 


NH 


10 


20 


30 


307 Book Nine, Chapter Tivo 


[the time] of the world’s creation, when the period of the one is longer 
than the other. If, then, it is not possible to be [created] with it, its possi- 
bility being different from it, being either prior or posterior to it, then one 
can hypothesize in the state of nonexistence”? the possibility of creating 
a thing and its nonpossibility—this in terms of one state! but not the 
other, and regardless of whether one is prior or posterior [to the other], 
and so on ad infinitum. 

(26) Thus, the truth of what we have presented regarding the exis- 
tence of motion that has no beginning in time becomes clear. The begin- 
ning it has is from the direction of the Creator, this being the celestial 
motions. It must be known that the proximate cause of the first move- 
ment is soul, not intellect, and that heaven is an animal obedient to God, 
blessed and exalted be He. 


Chapter [Two] 


That the proximate mover of the heavens is 
neither a nature nor an intellect but a soul, and 
that the remote principle is an intellect 


(1) We say:! We have shown in the Physics that motion is not natural 
to the body in an absolute [sense]. The body is in its natural state if 
every motion is by nature separated from that which is natural because 
of a state. The state that is separable by nature is necessarily not a nat- 
ural state. It is obvious that every motion that proceeds from a nature 
[proceeds] from a state that is not natural. If, among motions, there is 
something that is the consequence of a thing’s nature, then not fone] 
thing of the relations of motions [is such] that its essence would cease to 
be while the nature endures. Rather, motion is only consequential on the 
nature because of the existence of a non-natural state: either [(a)] in 
quality, as when water is forcefully heated;? [(b)] in quantity, when the 
healthy body withers through disease;3 or [(c)] in place, as when a clod of 
earth is transported to the space of air. The same applies if the motion 
happens to belong to another category. The cause for the renewal of one 
motion after another is the renewal of the non-natural state and [the 
renewal] of the estimation of the distance from the goal. 








rlatdl oy» olyyl rey 


cA abe 6] OE cee Sed Sly A je abl Lave liny calla gle 

lls, SE Ys tot GE OS] pall JE 3 yaks case ets delet tae, 
AN se JLelb Alay bade ol aby Je Gyo Ie Y 

Lily. les OO WY ean Sp omy py cltead b Gre G29 «oad (15) 

teal ll Gl ply gl Cond Ayladl OL go Ugly cattle ye Weal 0 
+ Slay ALE all gar Gipm elt gly «fee pad JM Sa 


[ ptll ual] 
ipod (VL) 


Se onl Vacdly «ad fp fie Vy dab Voth ual dA gl 


Me pec dark 9S VSL jl ola bby 3 Ul dyes (‘) \ 

AL abil Le Wiles play Sy» FGF Ud] da ddl Me fe bly {GLY 

So Fo) pls dhe Vink bale ball [YAY] Gye Saul, 

tt hace pie OTB tt GT By hark pb We yd ab ye paral 

Aaa as Le] SLI, de Lal ele pe Slat Jl OL Os ye et 

US SIL Lily cpa lll yr BL US USI UY shake Jl ogee) v0 

Flsdl jm Shaya ole 15) US gl 3 Ley Lea Vd comall dl oe 

So ww So 008 Bid, cla 35% 6 SL I bl ws, 
All Ge all padly cdadll pall JIL) ot 





10 


20 


30 


35 


508 Book Nine, Chapter Tivo 


(2) If the state of affairs is of this description, then no circular motion 
would [proceed] from a nature. Otherwise, it would [proceed] from a non- 
natural state to a natural state, and when it arrives at [the latter] it would 
come to rest. It is impossible that there would be in itself an intention 
[to move] toward that non-natural state. [This is] because nature does 
not act by choice, but by way of enforcement,’ and by way of what neces- 
sarily follows it essentially. For, if the [thing’s] nature were to impart 
motion in a circular manner, then it would necessarily move another 
either from a non-natural place or a non-natural position, escaping from it 
in a natural manner. But every escape from a thing that is natural in its¢ If 
cannot itself be a natural seeking for it. [Now,] the circular motion sepa- 
rates from every point, leaving it, but seeks in its departure [from it] that 
[very] point. Thus, it does not escape from a thing but to seek it [again]. 
Hence, circular motion is not natural. 

(3) It may, however, be by nature—T[in the sense], that is, that its 
existence in its body is not contrary to another nature belonging to its 
body. For, even though the thing that moves it is not a natural power, it 
is something natural to that body, not alien to it. It is, thus, as though 
it is its nature. 

(4) Moreover, every power imparts motion only through the media- 
tion of inclination. Inclination is the idea sensed in the mobile body. If it 
comes to rest by compulsion, that inclination in it is sensed resisting 
[both] that which puts [the body] to rest and its coming to rest, secking 
motion. Hence, it is necessarily other than the motion and other than 
the motive power, because the motive power exists when it completes the 
motion, whereas the inclination does not exist. The same is also the case 
with the first motion. For its mover continues to create in its body one 
inclination after another. There is nothing to prevent this inclination 
being called a nature. [This is] because it is not a soul, is not [something] 
external, has neither will nor choice, cannot not move [something] or 
move [it] in a direction which is not specific; and, in addition to [all] this, 
it is not opposed to the requirement of the nature of that alien body. If you 
named this meaning “a nature,” you could say that the celestial sphere 
moves by nature, except that its nature is an emanation from a soul that 
is renewed in accordance with the soul’s act of acquiring representation. 
It has thus become evident that the heavenly sphere is not the principle 
of a natural motion. It has [also] become evident that [the sphere] is not 

[moved] by compulsion. It is, hence, necessarily [moved] by a will. 





lect oy» Oley YHA 


Wy Shale 5 Spann Som SG J cdinall ode gle GIB (1) 
Sl Jp ly Kae ll choy Waly hark Mle Naa’ 22 dle Ge oi 
DEEN Sail cod deel SY eacdal ALI) aa low 4K 
dem He De el 8G lh Yh LY fy pre fe 
Lack We nb sb poy shear gly UWL VS gall 
A Ny ASL Lach Lana am 92 SK Sl ladet oe bow & fas 
F exh Sony Hatt MASS OB natiy AS Aled ISLS syst 
[YAY] Aone ipl SL 53] cl analy Wet 
tac pill Whee ame 9 aay a cl cabal 9% 28 MGIYL (1) 
prs Leck Ct Sha bss Sia oly WIA tS’. ead tl 
Kale AK fase ab pe 
Fee sal gall 2 ly «Jl ag AS bas Sob Lal, (4) 
We i po SN polinada os aol Ld Se ly ocd 
MeSH SANTA by dee VSB bo. Soll 
JY Shee SB SBM LI Lal KB stage ye dd SY LI ols 
caret ob AY cha eal aoe Y bby Le ae de ane pda 
Me ot ee gl dee Sha, kel glial Y, WE y Ys 
We conn Go cy sll peti dab ail slo. Nd a se Vy (B2 grows 
ut oF ad Lack NY] cia ball oo lal 5 sJyii ght gab pal 
Oh Sy cheno Sm Lae ah lll gf Ob A i yt Coy uae 


Ble Vist) oe ob ld at al 








wi 


10 


20 


30 


309 Book Nine, Chapter Two 


(5) We say: It is not possible that the proximate principle of its motion 
is a pure intellectual power that neither changes nor imagines particulars 
at all. It is as though we have indicated in the previous chapters some 
general things that should help in [gaining] knowledge of this meaning, 
We have made it clear that motion is a meaning for renewed relations 
and that every portion of it to which [certain] relations are specifically 
assigned has no permanence and cannot derive at all from a permanent 
meaning alone. For, if [it derives] from a permanent meaning, then it 
must be followed by a mode of change of states. If, however, the motion 
is due to a nature, then it follows necessarily that every motion that is 
renewed in [the portion] is due to the renewal of a proximity or remote- 
ness from the end that is sought after; and [furthermore] every move- 
ment of it that ceases to exist is due to the nonexistence of a proximity or 
remoteness from the end. And, if it were not for this renewal, there would 
be no renewal of motion. For, from [what is stable] inasmuch as it is 
stable, only the stable comes to be. If [on the other hand] the [motion] is 
due to a will, it must be due to a renewed, particular will. For, the relation 
of the universal will to every portion of the motion is one [and the same]. 
Hence, it is not necessary that this rather than that movement is speci- 
fied by it. For, if it were in itself the cause of this motion, then this 
motion cannot cease to exist. And, if it were a cause of this motion 
through the cause of a prior or posterior motion that does not exist,° 
then the nonexistent would necessitate an existent.® But the nonexist- 
ent does not necessitate an existent, even though nonexistents may be 
causes of nonexistents. For nonexistence to necessitate a thing—(this] 
is impossible. [Moreover,]| if [the universal will] is a cause of things that 
are renewed, the question regarding their renewal persists. If [this] is 
[posited as] a natural renewal, then the impossibility we have presented 
necessarily follows; if voluntary, changing in accordance with renewed 
representations, this confirms what we want. 

(6) It has thus become evident that the one intellectual will does not 
at all necessitate motion. It may, however, be [reckoned] in the estimative 
faculty’ that this belongs to an intellectual will that moves [from one 
intelligible to another]. For [it may be argued] it is possible for the mind 
to make a transition from one intelligible to another if it is not in all 


- | 
es 
wf 





eleds| yp Cll weg 


Wy HY Bye Aas 38 WN AS Le GK Sl jee Vd sadly (0) 
Jpaill 3 gall aia Boel Ue Jer Nb By Hold a 
cet panes te gat Sy ll ede ae SLI Gl Leyly deat 
Cat om oF OEE Srey RH eat we Ge Kal gen y OU VA 
onda jp SPI G) Ul MeN Jos y oye [1A] diekigl ot 
pe Sm Sy eagle AMI 5 any O3 suet ab saad Se KGS gl 
PAN GD Soe 228 Sop) over  Y By lel 5 ey Oi pad ae 
FOS 5 od iah| oe a GLU, eat Wace SV eat ye bie 
Biol Aas SL Gy jet FY Asal MGB dpe does dalyl 
pg) bl adg) Ae Glad Ci8 gy] YB oe gy SLL ade eo ged Gl Cay 
hagaae Laos 1 YS Soe Coy BL oi the CHK gly LU sie fla gl 
lac OS BS gy opsbley ORY ppaally desk Ley pgaall 9 
cast alle 6 aly. Ke ae CB pyaadl ogg bly plas ile 
Why] GO Gly calerd coil JAH ri Lack baad gh pb call Lasod Shpall 
62043 GIN Ea gb Goede Ol) gad Gere Jac 

IS Sy Se they Varig ated a Y gl gk ob (4) 
Maine il Joie Go Jiall Jota gl Ge Sb ide Lhe asLY ots oI nye 


\o 





Qo 


10 


30 


310 Book Nine, Chapter Tivo 


respects an intellect in actuality. It is possible for [the mind] to apprehend 
intellectually the particular subsumed under the species as [a] dispersed 
[thing], specified by accidents in a universal way, as we have indicated.® 
One must, hence, hypothesize in the estimative faculty the existence of a 
mind that intellectually apprehends the universal motion and wills it, 
then intellectually apprehends its transition from one limit to another, 
apprehending these motions and their limits in an intelligible manner, as 
we have shown, and in terms of what it is our wont to demonstrate— 
[namely,] that, [where] there is a movement from this [position] to that, 
and from that to that, some universal principle [of motion] is assigned 
to another universal limit by some universal measure thought of in the 
estimation, and so on, until the circle comes to an end. It is, hence, not 
unlikely that the renewal of motion follows the renewal of this intelligible. 

(7) We say: Not even in this manner can the question of the circular 
motion be concluded. For this influence, according to this manner [of 
viewing the matter], would proceed from the universal will—even if by 
way of renewal and transfer. The universal will, however it happens to 
be, [remains] in relation to a nature in which there is sharing, even if it 
is the will for a movement followed by [another] will for a movement. As 
for this motion which is from this specific “here” to that specific “there,” 
it does not have a greater claim for proceeding from that will than the 
motion from “there” to a third limit. Thus, the relation of all the parts of 
the movement that are equal in their particularity to each one of those 
particular intellectual volitions that move [from one part of the move- 
ment to another] is one [and the same]. No one part of this [movement] 
has a greater claim to be related to one of these representations than not 
to be related. Hence, its relation and nonrelation to its principle is one 
[and the same]. For it remains? in [a state of] possibility [in relation] to 
its principle, and [its existence] has not been differentiated from [its 
nonexistence] nor rendered more preponderant. Everything that is not 
necessitated by its cause does not exist, as you have known. 

(8) How would it be correct to say that the motion from A to B is ren- 
dered necessary by an intellectual volition, and the motion from B to C 
by another intellectual volition, without that which is necessitated by 
each of these volitions being different from what is necessitated by the 
other, and conversely? For A, B, and C, are similar in species; and none 














lets ye lg Y\> 


Lise Fall ot GiB Jim Sl Kay call tye Sp Mie Kol 13h AT 
29 prs OO ond all Ul Le le Sey ie ccejhyes Legace 


[TAC] abe apd gl LE Gy L ley calneny Le He Jyten Fs Larges 
pl See NUS Le oped AIS WISH 98 ISLS yp Se ol 
SB sd gleasacl an WO 51 pi > IS Spyay blake 
.  Sgtall (na sf 
JON Le QB Sy MSL ly ol SS Jt ede le Vy sd sed (¥) 


balboa oly AS Byte de’ Gl lal yo LB EI SEG sal Mi, 
cand a Slee SL acm Lee oe SSL ods Uy SL iol,] Yas SG 
Had EN ae J Dba ge SI SL ade Gp SLM OU Ge pat gh GIy 
MAA Oba Melle soy amly Nei Shy LON TL ell ae 
SN pM lh 5p ely Boe Sh Wael peje ly duc til 
(9 rata ly GEL Rie Ge oe wb Geely Ce Vy aha Seed ee 
Cale 23 IS KV ab alle Ge Cone Le Jy 0059 Y ye ayes Toy 
Ales daly) ye cus) KO» a «> oy Sh 3! : Jeg! wai; (A) 

Oy ie ly Boe oh Shays clas gs BLL ee DP Slaw y SA, 
Sele «E> 5 6 9 > SBS SAY OKy cee yg LP Obl yl 


\o 





nH 


10 


20 


30 


31 Book Nine, Chapter Tivo 


of the universal volitions is such that it would specify A without [specifying] 
B, and B without C. A has no greater claim than B and C to be specifically 
assigned by that volition, so long as [this volition] is intellectual. Nor does 
B [have such a greater claim] than C unless [the will] becomes psychologi- 
cal and particular.'° If these limits are not specified in the mind, being 
universal limits only, it would be impossible for the movement from A to B 
to have preference over [the movement] from B to C. Nor would A have 
a greater claim than B and C to be specified by that will, as long as [the 
latter] is intellectual; nor yet B [a greater claim] than C. 

(9) Moreover, how is it possible to suppose for [the circular move- 
ment] a volition and an imaging, [and] then a volition and an imaging 
that differ in something that coincides, when there is no buttressing [for 
the one or the other] by a particular specifying principle that serves as a 
measure? In addition to all this, the mind cannot suppose this transition 
except in association with imagination and sensation. Nor can we, if we 
resort to the pure intellect, intellectually apprehend together the whole 
movement and the parts of the intellectual transition in what we intel- 
lectually apprehend as circulating together. Therefore, with respect to 
all these states there is no dispensing with a psychological power which 
would be the proximate cause of the motion, even though we do not dis- 
allow that there could also be an intellectual power that undergoes this 
intellectual transition after making it dependent on what is akin to 
imagining. As for the intellectual power, denuded from all the types of 
change, it has an ever-present intelligible, [regardless of ] whether its 
intelligible is a universal [derived] from a universal or is a universal 
[derived] from a particular, as we have made clear. 

(10) If, then, this is the state of affairs, then the celestial sphere 
moves by the soul, and the soul is its proximate principle of motion. This 
soul is [continuously] renewing its imaging and will and is engaged in 
[the act of] estimation—that is, it has an apprehension of the changing 
things, such as particulars, and a will toward specific particular things. It 
is the perfection of the body of the heavenly sphere and its form. If it were 
not like this but were self-subsistent in every respect, it would then have 
been a pure intellect that neither changes, undergoes transition, nor 1S 
mixed with what is in potency. The proximate cause of the heavenly 
sphere, even though it is not an intellect, must have an intellect preceding 





etl yw oly ry) 


SP 9 6 [TAT] Gg9 b> yay Sere AS OILY co uly cpl 
Le sal Vi uli ys dks «HUD oye ues oh yl «ap ads GO Oye 
BE (yah ol Noy Age AL as 3M «Hl» or Ub Vy dee 
DP ed» BB aor 5 S| Ke LBS agar ICY dill 3 vga 
Mi SE 9 6 Fe aa dt Bol AD Yy «> She Ge My yl 
Ky yy «UD Vy Ades 2K Lash ¥l 
yl Bolts, Iygaig Balyl od «ly guaiy daly] ld oye ‘ISS (*) 
©S2 Y ill SBA ary Sa, el pede oad ad sll Yy cgi 
Carel all ff loney ILLS, edly LS GL YUEN be oa 
WS eM de Gib. Le sgle alas Ld asl JEM eel, WLI alae Jas GI 
dks 3S gl bY Sly Spall all ll 2 GS GL oe GY 
Adal idl Ly. fds at Saal ay bial JEM Lie Js as 3 Lal 
F Wal gene SO GL c ltl Jyall sole 9S sc Shel oe oF tee 
vdeo b de Be oe Wl 
Som Nae adlly «putt Joc LMM «Lae he SSBB (9+) 
SLA Sal Wb gl dees gay cial My ypelll Sovale ual aly Ayal 
VEIT gy 6 yyey lla pa SUS ty Wplek ase jy aly US 
alates Yy Jeon Vy is Y Leases is 6D chong Be (genity AB pc (SK 
(Sie AS Kgl ood his Kal gly cell) IASI, vagdl L [ray] 


\o 











10 


20 


30 


312 Book Nine, Chapter Two 


it which is the prior cause for the movement of the celestial sphere. You 
have known that this motion requires an infinite power, denuded of mat- 
ter, that does not undergo motion either essentially or accidentally. 

(11) As for the motive soul, it is—as this became evident to you— 
corporeal, transformable, and changeable, and it is not denuded of matter; 
rather, its relation to the heavenly sphere is the same as the relation of the 
animal soul that belongs to us, except that in some fashion it apprehends 
intellectually in a manner adulterated by matter. In general, [its cogni- 
tions by the] estimative [faculty],!! or what is similar to [cognitions by 
the] estimative [faculty], are veridical, and its imaginings and [things] 
similar to imaginings are true—as with the practical intellect in us. In 
brief, its apprehension is by the body; but the prime mover of it is a power 
that is basically not material in any respect. Since {its prime mover] 
itself cannot, in imparting motion, move in any respect—otherwise [the 
power] would undergo transformation and would be material, as this has 
become evident—it must move [another] in the way that a mover moves 
[another] through the mediation of [another] mover. This other endeav- 
ors to [impart] motion, being a willer of it and changeable because of it. 
This is the manner in which the mover of the mover imparts motion. 

(12) That which moves the mover without undergoing change through 
intent and desire is the end and the objective toward which the mover 
aims. It is the object of love. And the object of love, inasmuch as it is the 
object of love, is the good for the lover. Indeed, we say: [For] everything 
that undergoes a motion that is not compulsory, [such a motion] would 
then be for [the sake of] something and due to the desire of something. 
[This] even [holds] for nature also, for nature’s desire is a natural thing 
which is the essential perfection of the body—either in its form, or in its 
place and position. The will’s desire is a voluntary thing, being either a 
will for a sensory thing sought, such as pleasure; or pertaining to the 
estimation and imagination, such as winning; or an opined thing namely, 
[the thing] believed to be good. Thus the seeker of pleasure is appetite; 
the seeker of winning is irascibility; the seeker of the opined good is 
opinion; and the seeker of the true, pure good is mind. This seeking is 
called choice. Appetite and irascibility are not suitable for the body’s sub- 
stance that neither changes nor is acted upon. For [such a substance] 
does not change into an unsuitable state to return to a suitable state, 





lel jy OLY 
rod vy 


etl ha Mie low SL ade gh ede oi alll Sh pt ys 
db Vy Slay Asai Vaal ye 5a ou 

ity Hale lees — al ops WS Yl A aah Ly (94) 
BN AA a SAD Ps ll gee ety 
pli ats L Mpls sh a 5 aL, . Bal pte Mead Lamy feat GI YW Gl 
Wish aces: Lo asl Jal Rade OS ty Ll 3) PSs, dL. 
3! jem ye} 5 dl ip day elds 5 5g EPs Ss rool 
a BIS - lec SE HL Yy dow ji | Popes y sey Sed 
dle SV by EN ASI bags eee Do WSs ow gl end — be 
Al Ae ale Aon ill pull yt Vty Myo pia If aye Sel 

Pay A ob Oly ma sl nb AB toe lly (09) 
“Gab ce SN ey tee e le Sytally , Doctall yoy ABI oy at) col 
seh platy cb y PMA Phd ob Se dees Sol sd | 
PN pred SIT JUSS gy c seco pelted By S15 Lig kat 
ne called ish] LU cool) pl aol Gt, SAniyy tal Lily aly pe 
Bygtll ga sll) Cilles ated DN gay ob yl AMIE LE any gl cane” 
ah ey « all yo gy lal adh ley nail ys [AA] Adal iby 
pe soe tilly Sygtly LSI Me Le cay «Leal ge od ad 
CaP Ale rb lee QM fon Val Jul Vy 95 Y ll aa agh 


\o 








al 


10 


20 


30 


BD 


313 Book Nine, Chapter Tivo 


whereby it undergoes [sensory] pleasure or takes vengeance from some- 
thing [conveyed] by the imagination so as to become irascible. Moreover, 
every movement toward something pleasurable or toward winning is 
finite; also, most of what is opined does not remain opined perpetually. 

(13) Hence, it follows necessarily that the principle of this movement 
consists of a choice and a willing of a true good. This good is [such] that 
either it is among the things that we attain by motion and is hence 
reachable, or it is a good whose substance is in no way attainable but is 
separate. It is impossible for that good to be one of the perfections of the 
moving substance! so as to be attained by motion; otherwise, motion 
would cease.!? Nor is it possible [for the true good] to undergo motion sc. 
as to perform an act through which it acquires perfection, as it is our 
wont to act generously in order to be praised, or to perform good deeds 
so that a virtuous disposition would come to be for us, or to become good. 
This is because that which undergoes action acquires from its agent that 
which would complete it. It is impossible for it to turn around and perfect 
the substance of its agent. For the perfection of the effect is less than the 
perfection of the efficient cause. The degraded does not bestow perfection 
on the nobler and more perfect. Rather, the lesser may prepare its instru- 
ment and matter for the better, so that it will come into being in certain 
things through some other cause. 

(14) As for us, the praise we seek and desire is a perfection that is 
not real but only believed [to be so]. And the virtuous disposition which 
we achieve through action does not have the action as its cause. Rather, 
the act impedes the opposite fof the virtuous disposition]; [it] makes 
preparation for [such a disposition]. This disposition comes about from 
the substance that perfects people’s souls—namely, the active intellect or 
some other substance similar to it. It is in this manner that the temperate 
heat is the cause for the existence of the psychological faculties, but only 
in [the sense] that it prepares the matter [for their reception], not in that 
it brings about [their] existence; but our discourse is about that which 
brings about existence. In brief, if the act is a preparer for the existence 
of a perfection, motion terminates when [the perfection] comes to be. 

(15) It thus remains that the good sought through motion is a good 
that is self-subsistent and is not of [a sort] that one attains. In the case of 
every good which has this character, the mind seeks its imitation only to the 
extent that is possible. Imitating it consists in the activity of intellectually 





elec ye oll r\Y 


Ae 3 9 NS Bol Jey hal Le eo gh SL DL Sle 
aye bles nV gglall Sty Lely saakte 
Us Joe dim Lisl WLS S Lies Le gy Sale (01) 
Ama Jl lone pl GK I a] pes SSL Je eg Kgl ls di 
Vy SAY JLo eM pA MS y Sis Sal json, Sone 58h 
OF SMS Jail iy SG hd ad 0s Kh jg Vy SL coed 
RU en eer prone <a Word JY jody gael oe glisls 
Jal JUS GB Abe yam J. ay I eney abel ye LS] LK J ul 
eH MNS LS, SAAS Y Lush tle tal abst JS uel 
lm 56 A aw 8 gt tn So adoley ll ai eg 
Glee le EIS pad 5 jy alle citi call gl jos Ll, (10) 
ND sey ere ccs all pc ell er usd Jad Yeas Halll <li, 
Fl eee gl = lad atl gay — ttl ad JS ody Kl read, 
Ss Aolaall gyill ope) Ca WLU SILI GB Lhe hey aged [TAN] 
ye Jail GSTHL ALLY ot dal BLS dary Vastly igi le 
yar xe SL gil WS et 
ashley ph sy Lab Le SLY lett Lg Soh as (0) 
3 Jas ga ay Sy {SOY lake a 2h fel lle, UALS Loe pt 6 


\o 











Qo 


10 


20 


25 


30 


514 Book Nine, Chapter Tivo 


apprehending its essence in its perfection, becoming thereby similar to it 
in that there will be realized [for the mind] the perfection possible for it in 
itself, as it is realized for its object of love. Hence, for this reason eternal 
endurance in [its] utmost perfection necessitates a perfection for a thing’s 
substance in its states and necessary concomitants.'* As for that whose 
utmost perfection can be realized at the beginning,” its imitation of [the 
good] is completed through permanent immobility; [as for] that whose 
utmost perfection is not realized from the very beginning, its imitation of 
it is completed through motion. 

(16) The verification of this is [as follows]: It has become evident that 
the mover of the celestial substance imparts motion [derived] from an 
infinite power. [This] power, belonging to its corporeal self, is finite. 
However, inasmuch as [the celestial substance] intellectually apprehends 
the First, [resulting in] a perpetual flow on it from His light and power, it 
becomes as though an infinite power belongs to it. Infinite power [in reality] 
does not belong to it, but to the object of intellectual apprehension, who 
causes the overflow onto it from His light and power. It—-I mean, the 
celestial body—in its substance is in its utmost perfection, since nothing 
in potency remains in its substance; likewise in its quantity and quality, 
but only, first of all, in its position and place, and secondly in the things 
that follow their existence. Its being in one position or place is no worthier 
for its substance than its being in another position or place within its 
space. For no part of the orbit of a celestial sphere or a star has a greater 
claim than another part to meet it or meet a part of it. Thus, when it is 
in actuality in one part, it is in potentiality in another part. Hence, there 
would have occurred to the substance of the celestial sphere that which 
is potential with respect to its position and space. 

(17) Imitation of the ultimate good necessitates the [state of] remain- 
ing at the highest degree of perfection that belongs to a thing perma- 
nently. This is not possible for the celestial body in terms of number."° It 
was thus conserved in species and succession. Motion became a conservet 
of what is possible with regard to this perfection. Its principle is the desire 
to imitate, to the extent that this is possible,!” the ultimate good by 


enduring in the [state of] the most perfect perfection. The principle of 


this desire is what is intellectually apprehended of {the ultimate good]. 











lal i Oley rVe 


Byala IS ald 34) SU SUA Jame SID cae ed YS 
AMIS ajidy diel 3 etl adi gS IST le ead clad Cog 
VOB bey cL oy agats él e 4 AS rare jl Ke 5h ls 
Spent é Ml 3a) pa US Looe ol XS 

P89 oF Ape Sow Gl gb oF Gylaatl hl gl go be gad, (47) 
i Nee ab UM Jing Ue YS RL SL ad Hhagdly ial 
J eal 8 58 GS ALL 5b 55 OT pad — Lethe 4 gy 0) 
Orr 2 — Soleull ed! el = sy By 05 7 Ae Cees GO J penal 
PW AS, SG MIS, ayy layne 3H) a od 5] pail MLS eo 
029 OSGI tal UE A Ut tary a Ley Mylaal lanes 
tt ab toe Bal ST yl dl eagle Sl je optee yl oil 
et slo ab la lob Sob BI SS hale le eel 5 
bel be lal at (256 ob al ST oe 8B [TA] Jb pe 38 
Al glaaioy tye yp 

Las * tll 3S JUS ST Jo lit Coy patil Sh EM, (19) 
SAN jhad SL, pth Lind foul glad! jaye 1 Ds Ke aly 
MEMS BW DY AN SL Stil Ushacey {SLT ae ye SK Uae 
Aon Sing be 92 BAHN Lang «Kell Cow JS SIS de 


\o 


13 


25 


30 


315 Book Nine, Chapter Tivo 


(18) You yourself, if you reflect on the state of natural bodies in their 
natural desire to attain, in actuality, a place, you will not be surprised by 
[the fact] that there is a body that desires to be in one of the positions that 
can belong to it, or to be in the most perfect [state] that can belong to it, 
in being in motion. [This is] particularly [the case] when this [desire] is 
followed by way of emanating states and measures through which [the 
celestial sphere] imitates the First (exalted be He) inasmuch as He is the 
provider of good things—not [however] in that what is being sought are 
those things, so that the motion would be for these things. Rather, what 
is being sought is the imitation of the First (exalted be He) [so as] to be as 
perfect as is possible in itself and in what is consequent on this, inasmucl. 
as [this] is an imitation of the First [and] not inasmuch as [it is an imita- 
tion of one] from whom things thereafter proceed, so that the motion 
would be for the sake [of the latter] by first intention—no! 

(19) I say: The very desire to imitate the First, inasmuch as He is in 
act, [renders] the movement of the celestial sphere proceeding from 
Him in the manner in which a thing proceeds from the conception that 
necessitates it, even though this is not intended in itself by the first 
intention.'§ Because this is an imaging of what is in actuality, there is 
engendered from it a seeking of what in actuality is most perfect. This 
cannot be in terms of the individual and is thus in terms of succession, 
which is motion. [This is] because if the one individual is permanent no 
existence would be realized for [those things] similar to it, and they would 
remain always in potentiality. 

(20) Motion also follows the intended imaging in this manner [and] 
not in being primarily intended, even though that one imaging is followed 
by particular imagings—which we have mentioned and detailed—by 
way of upsurge, not by way of primary intention. These particular acts of 
imaging are followed by [those] motions in terms of which transitions in 
position take place. The one part in its perfection cannot be [realized] 
within this category [of occurrences]. Hence, the first desire would be as 
we have mentioned, everything succeeding it being upsurges. These things 
may have remote [things] similar to them in our bodies that do not corre- 
spond to them, even though [our bodies] may imagine and imitate them. 








etl » oL¥yl Y\o 


aK) ll ot Ob plot Sle ebb bh osl, (va) 
teed yp oy de Kid) By Otte Kgl come cl pa 
Spe SS NISL LST be Kal Mal aS ol Se ou 
Sem of DUE IMU AB th L Stal pola dle Gy als gy lenass 
SLAW Jo SLI 5S LAV oles pedll gS GY cot tll ake ye 
JS 36 S31 8 — SEM ak — Qe I A yp opal Sghy 
wo ye gh ame VST pa tem ye tals Laty ceed KL 
eS apathy 5 Jo SL 5 SF co vam yl 

wo paral Jah pom ye SVL A IS tll ui gl sdsly (14) 
ANS B dpale 55 ST ly A Coal pall ye tpl yoo Aa LI 
Fay SSM fail Ue ace sod July Uy yat ol SSI wal 
SEY Jane 0 rls BBL nell jase SY OSL) gay Coll 9 Xa poll 
[VAN] .a9Bh Lilo acedty coymy 

AI de Yc seul as he opal ype’ as Lad acs Sy (y+) 
BUSS — Ripe Ol pad aL bd ypalll lls GIS Gly Lgl da pee 9 SS 
Nr matl el ay Ss apaill fom he Yb jue le — Lalas, 
OU bed Ss VALS sell ohly plo 3 ly Jedi ot Li asd 
8 Ls, otlatete b gL p Ky 6% Le Je JM Gt 9 Ks 
ASA, WS BT Gly uly Can) LSlal 3 face fll \B roy 


0 











Qa 


10 


20 


25 


30 


316 Book Nine, Chapter Two 


[An] example [of this] is when the desire for a friend or for something else 
becomes intense; this is followed in us by imaginings by way of an upsurge 
followed by motions that are not motions toward the object of desire 
himself, but motions toward something in his path and way, and [toward] 
what is closest to him. 

(21) Thus, the movement of the celestial sphere is engendered by 
will and desire in this manner. The principle of this motion is a desire 
and a choice, but in the way we have stated—[namely,] that the motion 
is not intended by the first intention. This motion is as though it is a kind 
of worship, angelic or pertaining to the celestial sphere. [Now,] it is not a 
condition of the voluntary motion that it in itself should be the intended 
object. Rather, if the appetitive power has a desire toward something, an 
influence emanates from it that moves the bodily members. Sometimes 
they move in a manner through which the objective is reached, sometimes 
in a manner similar or close to it (if this is due to an imagining act), 
regardless of whether the objective is something attainable or something 
by whose example one is guided, [whose example one] follows, and whose 
existence is imitated. 

(22) If enjoyment is attained through the act of intellectually appre- 
hending the First Principle and what is intellectually apprehended—or 
[whatever] is apprehended of Him in an intellectual manner, or by the 
soul—this would preoccupy one to the exclusion of all things and all 
aspects [of things]. From this, however, there is emitted that which is of 
a rank lower than it—namely, the desire to imitate Him to the utmost 
measure possible.'® Hence, the seeking of motion becomes necessary, not 
inasmuch as it is motion, but in the manner we have stated. This desire 
would follow that love, and the enjoyment springing from [love], and this 
perfecting process arising from desire. It is in this manner that the First 
Principle moves the body of the heaven. 

(23) It has also become clear to you from [the course of this discus- 
sion]2° what the First Teacher means when he says that the heavenly 
sphere moves by its nature, what he means when he says that it is moved 
by the soul, or what he means when he says that it moves by an infinite 
power that moves in the way the object of love moves [the lover]. [It has 
also become clear to you] that there is no contradiction and no disagree- 


ment in his statements. 








leds] S oll ryt 


Je Be LSS LB AS ST ed gl Ue GI) BL St 
tight ei OB by aa SLAM gos NOL Cd Oi Ie Shed 
142 SS Oly hae By dnb 

Lajas SL oday . youll ae le Dytlly sol Vi AMIS LG (14) 
alll §9 pode LI WSS gh jad ob SS gall pall le SS, LS Gt 
SHALL byt ye pty aK ASL Laske YER Live, JA 
ob Wg Ce Cel ged DEAS AB GAIN Bgl OTN fo pee do pate GK 
Po iby el Ne ben Gill pull bo dead lad tn 
Ste Il yl la Ll Beall gO alge ss oe GO Lad Gol hale sT 
+09 92m 9p Antinay ogdo (Sononyy Ay 

Be a Byos ghace Ja Ley cal Lad Jas SIN al BU (vv) 
Ls eo Sas, AS cle 5 ot Soe Os Jab GL yh ie ys 
Celle pid SOY glade ay A SS ytll gay [TAY] cae Ripe yal 0 
2S Oot a GK y We y Sy So ote y VSL 
pelle hab Dptll ye Cee LSM Ning case tee SIM) tell 
sled ae JI lad Sou 

Soke al 5236 | aM pal gl « La AL ae ge cl el 3, (vr) 


I bigs Dyer 3 SB gl oo NBL utd Soe a} IB gl fe 15 LAS ade 


MSI, 2S ABI bad aly ce BLS Sybil Dyoe ISAS Rak 


\o 








er 


10 


20 


30 


40 


317 Book Nine, Chapter Tivo 


(24) Moreover, you know that the substance of this First Good that is 
loved is one. It is impossible that the first mover of the whole of heaven 
should be more than one, even though there is for cach of the celestial 
spheres a proximate mover proper to it, and an object of desire and love 
proper to it, as the First Teacher and those peripatetic scholars of attain- 
ment after him see it. For they deny multiplicity only [in] the mover of all 
[things] and affirm multiplicity in the movers, both [those] separated 
[from matter] and [those] not separated,?! that specifically belong to each 
one of the celestial spheres. They thus make the first of the specific sepa- 
rated [entities] the mover of the first sphere. [This,] for those who prc - 
ceded Ptolemy, is the sphere of the fixed stars; and, for those who learned 
the sciences that became manifest to Ptolemy, [it] is a sphere outside the 
[former] which surrounds it and is without stars. After this, [they made] 
the [second of the separated entities] the mover of the sphere that fol- 
lows the first in accordance with the difference of the two views, and so on. 

(25) These, then, are of the view that the mover of the whole is one 
thing and that for each sphere after that there is a special mover. The 
First Teacher posits the number of spheres in accordance with [the 
knowledge] that appeared in his time, making the number of the sepa- 
rate principles follow their number. One of his followers, who is more 
sound than [other followers] in what he says, declares and states in his 
treatise on the principles of the whole that the mover of the entire heaven 
is one, it being impossible for it to be numerically many, even though for 
each of the spheres there is a mover and an object of desire specifically 
its own. [Another of Aristotle’s followers,] the one who expresses himself 
well regarding the First Teacher’s books by way of summaries, even though 
he does not delve deeply into ideas, declares and states that whose mean- 
ing is as follows: “What is most likely and most true [to affirm] is the 
existence of a principle of motion belonging specifically to each celestial 
sphere as being in it, and the existence of a principle of motion belonging 
specifically to [each celestial sphere] as being an object of love separated 
[from matter].” These two are the closest among the disciples of the 
First Teacher to being on the right path. 

(26) Moreover, syllogistic argument necessitates this. For it has 
become true to us through the art of the Almagest that [there are] 
numerous celestial motions and spheres, differing in direction, speed, 
and slowness. It thus follows necessarily that for each movement there 
exists a mover which is other than [the mover] existing for the other, 
and a cause of desire other than the one existing for the other. Other- 
wise, directions [of motions] would not have differed, and [their] speed 








rlecdl sy oly v\V 


SSSI SEY rely IM Sota bi ae ae ghabs cal (v4) 
raed NS 5 3S I GT ly «rely cogd HLeott aLL Sd SSI AN Ane 
72% 9 Sal pla aly be le pat Gptary Dytiey « pate Gad dou 
rll ory Sl dpe 6 550 gyie Ul aglb  gLll eLle Jame 
Both OBL Iyl geod {Myr Laos ley gate TSS Ue 2, Ul 
AN pall bah yo oey Cal ES pe gellen pa 5 ee oy «gE J oes 
SNS Ape lS any ATK by Mlaoes lps EIS pulled yb 
Aon pha Sy «gulf SEI oe Jol 
At Ao alld IS Sy rely ot Side shay Moe (19) 
De lass oxy Abd ob GOL le Soc I se wa dail platy 
Fed — Moy tyes wberal ge VS aul ye ye Jang 25, Lill ces Ll 
AS 226 SKgl jee Yoel elutlahe doug] — SILTY] ole 3 
JVI plell OS ye Le uo ily « hada Opting dome 3 SSO Gly 
Mf tele Lae b Ssic pan « Jbl Sues Kid Sly ued oe le 
Siebb So lau 2929) Adal Je lb isk Sp Le 29 My 
«Sal ele Jal lal 3.98 eld Ol Gling Gyler Gptar dl le 
OS pe ol denen kel, Wee SK a ony Lill gd (19) 
Spe Soe Sond colally Sell By Ah JUD, SHS 
eas! Uy col di oaks UY, SON CM pF Gptey SN Gil e 


\o 

















ws 


10 


13 


20 


30 


318 Book Nine, Chapter Three 


and slowness would [also] not have differed. We have shown that the 
objects of desire are pure goods separated from matter. [Now,] if all the 
spheres and motions share in their desire for the First Principle, then, 
for this [very reason], they share in the perpetuity of motion, and in its 
circularity, We will [now] add [further] explanation of this. 


Chapter [Three] 


On the manner in which acts proceed from the 
lofly principles so that, from this, one would know what one 
ought to know concerning the separate movers that 
are intellectually apprehended in themselves and are loved 


(1) Let us [now] verify this exposition, beginning from another start- 
ing point, and say: Some people, on hearing the exoteric statement of 
the best of the Ancients when he says that the differences in these motions 
and their direction seem to be for the care of the generable and corrupt- 
ible things in the sublunar sphere—and, moreover, having [previously] 
heard and known through [syllogistic reasoning] that the motion of 
celestial things cannot be for the sake of anything other than themselves 
and cannot be for the sake of their effects; they sought to reconcile these 
two doctrines. 

(2) They thus said, “The motion itself is not for the sake of what is 
in the sublunar sphere, but for the sake of imitating the Pure Good and 
[is due to] the desire for Him. As for the difference in motions, this is for 
[the sake] of the differences [resulting] from each one of them in the 
world of generation and corruption in a manner through which the per- 
petuity of the species falls into order. [This is just] as if a good man 
wished to go on an errand of his to a certain place and two roads con- 
fronted him, one confined to the place where he would achieve his end, 
the other adding to this the bringing of a benefit to a deserving person. It 
follows, in accordance with the dictate of his goodness, that he will adopt 
the second road, even though his movement was not for the sake of bene- 
fitting another, but for himself.” They said, “The case 1s similar with 





elect ye OLY Yl v\A 


I gly Salad ler Kaas ols colby LM ok Gl ley aby. eladly de pl 


GE plo Pel AR JM Lb WS Gace WoSLy ois 


Uy ie agi gong. Wg yltl, 


[EIU bcd ] 
jbo) 
I lad SASL geal jo SLAY ygaee LAS 3 
45 pall \glay i gall Lal SAI oy pl gl Coe 


pale Iya Ula ght Std oT Lae oy cay cll a gies (1) 
BK glo Bley OSL oe Bb OKSM GL Ue 3 geod! Job J 
\yekery Lal Lpaner LpSy « yal 3S SW alll AAI IL CA] Aad 
haw Ye Wa ae et JAY KS ol gen Voll ome gl ptt 
“gall bs oy Ipars gl Lal) YY ke Jed 3% 
dh atl Sy pds e2 b fV Sl nd gl: Wyle (1) 
OF le ely By aK be oes oI Cott Ul, a Gyttly Gad 
cos ih abl yt dhe, Gh LS pts ele platy WES! sadly gS le 
Coat Sale ty level oli all opel, pow ca dab 
Se Barcey ioc Nab Jha el J) nda SV, copy Lad 43 sl 
IIB ab AY pont i EV Soe KG ol oly Stl gylall met gl Cys 


\o 


Qa 


10 


20 


30 


40 


319 Book Nine, Chapter Three 


the movement of every sphere; it is [primarily] for the sake of its per- 
petually remaining in its final perfection, but the movement toward [one 
particular] direction and in [one particular] speed is for the sake of bene- 
fitting another.” 

(3) The first thing we say to these [people] is that, if it is possible that 
there should occur to the celestial bodies in their movement some inten- 
tion for the sake of something that is caused, that intention pertaining 
to the choice of direction, then it would be possible for this to take place 
and to occur in the motion itself,! so that someone would say: 

(4) [The celestial spheres] would, through immobility, fully achieve 
a goodness proper to themselves; [but] motion would not be in existence 
harmful to them and would benefit others. Neither of the two [motion or 
rest] would be for them [that is, the celestial spheres] easier or more 
arduous than the other, such that they would choose the more beneficial. 
[Now,] if the cause preventing one from saying that their movement 
comes to be for the sake of benefitting another consists in the impossi- 
bility of their intending an act for the sake of the other [within the realm 
of their] effects, this cause exists in the very intention of choosing the 
direction [of motion]. And, if this cause does not prevent the intention of 
choosing the direction [for the sake of benefitting the other], it does not 
prevent the intention of the motion itself. The situation is similar with 
the state regarding the intention of speed and slowness. This would not 
be due to the ordering of strength and weakness in the spheres by reason 
of their arrangement one over the other in terms of being high and being 
low, so as to attribute [the differences in velocity] to [this fact]. Rather, 
that would be a different [reason]. 

(5) In sum, we say: It is not possible that anything in [these celestial 
spheres] should be for the sake of generated things—neither an inten- 
tion of motion, [nor] an intention toward a direction of motion, [nor] any 
estimation of speed or slowness, nor yet indeed an intention of [any] act 
at all for their sake. This is because every intention is for the sake of the 
object intended and is thus lesser in existence than the thing intended. 
[This is] because that for whose sake another thing exists is more perfect 
in existence than the other, inasmuch as it and the other are in [the state] 
that they are in. Rather, it is through [the object intended] that the 
manner of existence requiring intention is completed for the other. Nor 
can the more perfect existence be acquired from the lesser. Hence, toward 
the effect there cannot at all be a veridical intention [that is] not believed 
[to be true]. Otherwise, the intention would be giving and furnishing the 
existence of that which is more perfect in existence than [itself]. 











ettl ye OLY rvs 


ipl oda MTL SI clits pS MALS fe hd go Ul cold (So us 
= Oy& ates AE pall oles 

GS Bagh ala W dae gl Sl gl dl bg dad Lye (1) 
Care I Kad AISI YB wail Wb Ky sleet Jo Lat 
BB Lo co BN ol 8 eyay ul 

2rd Bani VES, est as a YL GSO KUlgl (¢) 
ob ESB pat gh SU ye Me pel Lemsel Sy clays seis 
JeV ed Lana cel call aed YS pres Gh Soll ye All dell 2 
cipal ALI LSI a [140] nt PB gy Abell ogo OV ball 5s pal 
PUally Re pall ad DJL Sy BL ad ceed Aghl LS) ab Allee 
BE Nyame SF et DIM balls Bgl CIF le US aly. SLL ae 
cows AS ead acs oo feally sll 3 aan 

Boe nad VUE AV eh ee Kil yew: ALL Joey (0) 
My YY CIT a ad Uy op celery Re per pad Vy Sym yp tye sad Vy 
LEY fapaill yo lagrey yal GSS capa Jol ye GK aed KN 
Secale bale de Sly wm ye SI ye ey Aye oT eS ale 
SF SSM ayes akin SI yom Vy «nell JI GeLsl opel ge goudl SU om 
mall GS Vy ti plae pb Gale aad Iyer Ey Se. as et 
sae layeny JST yp be ssed Miaey Law 


\o 





on 


20 


30 


320 Book Nine, Chapter Three 


(6) What is intended by the necessary is something which the inten- 
tion predisposes, while that which bestows existence on it 1s another 
thing—as, for example, [the relation] of the physician to health. For the 
physician does not bestow health but, rather, prepares the matter and 
the instrument for it. What, indeed, gives health is a principle loftier 
than the physician, being that which gives matter all its forms and whose 
essence is nobler than matter. It may happen that the intender errs in his 
intention if he intends that which is not nobler than the intention, in which 
case the intention for it would not be by nature but through error. Since 
[however] this exposition requires detailed ascertainment and includes 
doubts that can be resolved only through full discussion, let us turn to the 
clearer way and say: 

(7) Every intention has an intended object, rational [intention] 
being the one where the [coming into] existence of the intended object 
from the intender is more worthy of the intender than its not [coming 
into] existence. Otherwise, it would be senscless. That which is worthier 
of a thing bestows some perfection [on it]. If [it does so] in reality, then a 
real [perfection is bestowed], and, if [it does so] in terms of opinion, then 
an opined [perfection is bestowed]. For example, a meriting of praise, a 
manifestation of power, perpetuity of name—these and their like are 
opined [perfections], or [as examples of the former category] gain, safety, 
the satisfaction with one by God (exalted and sanctified be He), or a good 
resurrection in the hereafter—these and their like are real perfections 
that are not alone completed by the one seeking them. 

(8) Therefore, every intention which is not frivolous bestows some 
[form] of perfection on the intender such that, had the intender not 
intended it, that perfection would not have been. [Even] frivolity seems 
to be like this; for in it there is pleasure, rest, and the like, or one of the 
things you have known of [those] things that have become clear to you. 

(9) It is impossible for the effect whose existence is perfected by the 
cause to bestow on the cause a perfection that did not exist. For, the 
instances in which it is believed that the effect bestows a perfection on 
the cause are instances [where the statements reporting them] are either 
false or corrupted. A person like you, however, who has come to know the 
various [disciplines] previously encountered is not incapable of reflecting 
on these [instances] and resolving [the difficulties they raise]. 











rlettl ye ole ry: 


bol eh aay aay al Lage alll OK toh Cong wel lily (1) 
dom tcl ly SAV, Goll Ye op jp Remral law Coddlb deesall ola ft 
aU op yl ailby « Layee are dalll slaw, sil Pye eves e 
Sei GS «deal dy ad |e da 13 eed gb Cade anal GS Legg 
YAS aby «Gaby Judes dicen Gt oe GY, ULL 4 ala baled 
28d poy yal jl aad tll pL Yh Jes 

OF pail 295 GS GH ge de lily copa ab ona KG! (V) 
rote Bel 9 Ball pty yan ae Vy cass oey Vy welll, Jy] well 
fo eked ah gS aly Leda LY gig) [1A] «LVS ak wb 
eps) Hebe OS Uggeetl lay ode S5Il ling ill ogy call Glin 
MUS Upqetl Lay hay [ol aber jenny way Jl alll goey gl AdLadl I 
Ladony dealt ot Vie 

Sip) oman) 3 comold be VIS ay OB the ad aad fea (A) 
Hells pb gh tet, glad aa gb MS GK gl ty Lal Gully {SUS td 
SS ys be fle [ye] Cnrataan) 

GB « Sep VUS all ais Aa oogery JSCall Jslall a Kgl Jey (4) 
GPO pias as Ui poly ee sll Jylall gl Yeo ch 3 pals! 
w Mpeg Yt je pats Vg yull 5 dl ile ble 





i 


OF 8G en sg 


oO 


10 


20 


25 


30 


521 Book Nine, Chapter Three 


(10) If someone were to say, “goodness necessitates this, for good- 
ness bestows what is good,” one would say {in reply]: The good bestows 
what is good, but not by way of intent and quest such that this would be 
the case, for this necessitates imperfection. For, every quest and intent for 
a thing is a quest for a nonexistent whose existence, [proceeding] from 
the agent, is more worthy [of the agent] than its nonexistence. As long as 
it is nonexistent and not intended, it would not be that which is the more 
worthy of the agent. That would be deficiency.” For either [(a)] goodness 
is true, existing without this intention, the existence of this intention 
having nothing to do with its existence, in which case the coming to b: 
or not coming to be of this intention from goodness is one and the sam: 
and, hence, goodness would not necessitate it, nor would the state of 
the rest of the necessary concomitants of goodness that proceed from it 
essentially—not by intention—be the intention of this state; or else 
[(b)] it is by this intention that goodness is completed and subsists, in 
which case the intention would be the cause of the perfection of good- 
ness and of its subsistence, not an effect of it. 

(11) If someone said, “This [intention] is for the sake of imitating the 
First Cause, in that its goodness goes beyond itself, and would be such 
that it is followed by [further] good,” we say: On a superficial [level] this 
is acceptable, but in reality it is to be rejected. For imitation of Him [is the 
imitation of Him] as not intending anything but in being [self-sufficient], 
singular in essence. For He ts of this description, as agreed on by a group 
of the learned. As for acquiring a perfection through intention, this is 
different from the imitation of Him—unless it is said that the first object 
of intention is one thing, while this [latter] is by a second intention and 
by way of being consequential, [in which case] it necessarily follows that 
also in the choice of direction [of the celestial motion] the object intended 
by the first intention is something, and the benefit that has been men- 
tioned is consequential on that object intended. Hence, the goodly direction 
would not be intended in a primary way for the sake of what follows [it]. 
Rather, there must first be a perfection in the essence of the thing from 
which that benefit follows so as to be an imitation of the First. 

(12) [Now,] we do not disallow [the possibility] that motion is intended 
by the first intention as being an imitation of the essence of the First, in 
the way we have stated, and as [being] an imitation by the second inten- 
tion of the essence of the First, inasmuch as existence emanates from 








et ye OLY rv) 


AVIS oP oo bl ob le Cog AS GL fb IB gb (9) 


OB - gat con ae GB Fall 9S ley mad fo le Y Sy I ott 
ley «999 5+ yl Jol! so gey pyaal Clb ob rgd dady lb 


Vay PI SB . pat ally Jolie uM 40 L SG pb apes by Lae 
smaill Vs ayer J Jom Vy saill Ne G99 day ye Reese GS lL LES 
in SSB lool yD ye SS Vy sail Le GS KS cLangeny 
we awa ge nad 6 Y Wily Nes SN ad o5Ly flu Je OS Yy canes 
He alll Ie 3S cpatiy ADI SF Laill Nw OS Gl Ly [AV] ULI 
AP Vole Y yelby Api JULY 

Sop dele Cys ghd INI Aa AU LS Gh sf IB GL, 009) 
£392 MB by Jyde pM lb 3 Woe gh dd ot tee gS 
lal deal ode Je al old ayes gh Cab onan Y gl ba anttll bbb 
Sta St Vogl cay atc ls wail JUS paliel Ll, spall Jal yp delem ys 
ESN Bond PLEA dye ley SU wall Lay cet JS opal gf 
M3) de 8, SOU deal 9 Sy the Jil wall, »paill 6% gl Lal gh 
ST Sb om Sh goa be pid Ul aed pate pb ay D1 ah 5 5 spall 
NG Mets 3S fo Maa all ee ptt ol8 IS 

rly ands I Ae SM ail Sopale SLI 55% gi ek Y joy (\¥) 
Swed ae atom Joly SO etl Ay LB ah 5 JA 


\o 


10 


20 


25 


30 


$22 Book Nine, Chapter Three 


Him, [as long as] the first intention is some other thing in terms of which 
one directs one’s sight upward. [On the other hand,] as for looking 
toward [what is] below and considering it, if it were possible for [this] to 
take place by the first intention with respect to the direction [of motion] 
so as to be an imitation of the First in terms of what is consequential, 
then this would have to be possible in the very choice of motion. Motion 
would then be for the sake of what is beneath, and an existence would 
overflow from it [that is] not in imitation of Him as being the perfect in 
existence and its object of love. This [latter] belongs to Himself only qua 
Himself, [The emanation] of the existence of things from Him has no 
entry at all as regards the ennobling and perfecting of His essenc.. 
Rather, the entry is with respect to His being in His highest perfection 
and [His being] such that the existence of the whole is emitted from 
Him not by quest and intending. Hence, the desire for Him must be by 
way of imitation in this form, not by way of what does not relate to the 
First in terms of perfection. 

(13) If someone said, “Just as it is possible for the celestial body to 
acquire a good and a perfection through motion, motion being an intended 
act of [the celestial body], the case is similar with the rest of [motion’s] 
acts,” the answer is that motion does not acquire perfection and a good— 
otherwise it would cease at [its attainment of them]. Rather, [motion] is 
the very perfection which we have indicated. In reality, it consists in ren- 
dering permanent in act the species of that which can belong to the 
celestial body, since the individual belonging to it cannot be rendered 
permanent.’ This motion, thus, does not resemble the rest of the motions 
that seek a perfection external to them. Rather, this very thing that is 
moved by its essence is perfected by the motion because it is the very 
perpetuation of positions and places successively. In brief, you must 
return to what we have previously explained in detail when we showed 
how this motion is consequent on the imaged representation of the one 
that desires and [that] this motion is akin to permanence. 

(14) If someone said, “This statement disallows the existence of 
providence over generated things and the perfect governance that lies 
therein,” [we say that] we will be mentioning later on that which would 
resolve this problematic point. We will make known the manner of God’s 
providential care of all [things], the manner of the providential care of 
each cause for what succeeds it, and the manner in which the providen- 
tial care of the generated things among us is [undertaken by] the first 
principles and the intermediary causes. 





rest! ole ryy 


capicsly Jen I att Ll, 68 le pay oT pl SM aeill OK gl ow 
iH peel 9 Jae es OS Ge ah IM mail ca gl gle Jb 
Mets ed oars ee falty FL Jo LIS LI LS sD 
fea Vy SASS Som ye ail US LE] Sab tary ogee LT pe tee ew 
pal SUS de al foal b YLSG, ald apts aac LAY oye Jul 
Ge Nett GK 5I cond laady Ub Y SI apy ce a coos 
[TAA]. SUS A Jy) phe Y Le he Y cay grail ove he at 

Wy LY oyleetl py aia gt bem od LS SL 2 JB JB GB (1) 
cred LN Gh ALG  UYLetl $L WI copate al Jad Sly LS 
cy ASL Cal gall JUS ab fp cosce cobat Vy cl ty VIS os 
Ola SY SL cals Gyleadl peal pS GI SG be pg SL ALL 
IR h les LE VS Ms MOLI ple as VSL a ase 
BL Jo gaNly ploy elie ai YY Ml Ngo A acl us Ly 
dd (55 ASE Long ey go Hh Latha be glans glow tlably 
OUD ay LN ony ob yt0 

SAL ol, OY abt dyery ced Jylll Lae G3 $B SB GB (16) 
Bide JIL ce lil agke gi spay Jay Ids ap Le ae Soe bb Sd il 
bose SN USS gly coe Jew gh le Lary Lethe Ske Gly ce fee 
«Manny (SB LUM yey lal cool ye ly lll GS 


\o 


aT 


10 


20 


30 


35 


323 Book Nine, Chapter Three 


(15) It has become clear through what we have explained that it is 
impossible for any of the causes to be perfected essentially [and] not 
accidentally by the effect, and that they do not intend an act for the sake 
of the effect, even though it is satisfied with [the latter] and knows it. 
Rather, just as water cools by its essence in actuality to conserve its 
species [and] not to cool another, though cooling another is a necessary 
concomitant of it; [just as] fire warms by its essence in actuality to con- 
serve its species [and] not to warm another, though warming another is 
a necessary concomitant of it; [just as] the appetitive power desires the 
pleasure of copulation so that the sperm is emitted, completing thereby 
pleasure for itself, [and] not in order that a child will result from it, 
though a child is a necessary concomitant of it; and [just as} health is 
health in its substance and essence [and does] not [exist] in order to 
benefit the sick, though benefitting the sick is its necessary concomitant, 
[so] the case is similar with the prior [celestial] causes—except that [with 
these latter] there is knowledge of what will be, and knowledge of the 
manner of how order and the good in them will be, and [knowledge] that 
[these] will be in the way [they] will be, whereas this [knowledge] is not 
with the [former, mundane causes]. 

(16) If such, then, is the case, the celestial bodies share in the circu- 
lar motion only through the desire of a common object of love and differ 
only because, after that First, their principles that are loved and desired 
would differ. If the manner in which each desire necessitates a move- 
ment in this situation becomes problematic for us, this must not influence 
what we know—[namely,] that the motions differ because of the differ- 
ences in the objects of desire. 

(17) One thing remains for us [to consider]|—namely, that one may 
imagine that the various objects of desire are bodies, not separate intel- 
lects ({where, for example,] the inferior body would imitate the nobler 
body which is prior and nobler), as some novice Islamic philosophers, in 
bringing confusion to philosophy, have believed, since the objective of the 
Ancients was not understood [by them]. 

(18) We say: This is impossible. This is because imitating [the nobler 
body] necessitates a movement [in the imitator that is] similar to the 
movement [of the former]—to its direction and the object it seeks. If 
falling short of [attaining] the rank [of the nobler body] necessitates any- 
thing [at all], it would necessitate a weakness in action, not a difference 10 
action—a difference that would necessitate that this [body] would move 
in this direction, that [body] in another. Nor would it be possible to say 








eles) oo oly vyy 


JS lll 52 SSI aye Vl aons gl Ls ail aby (0) 
J rdeiges 525 Sly Isl Jo 9h ais V Yl, « Goyll Yoh J al 
ably cops dpa gh aj Sy cape dd Vas 5 Lateed fail aildy on ell gl US 
Uh oat I eh Sly Lye IY Yes bind Jal pl ghd 
Fis Sy es SLY iW NY ay ail oad pall fs yt ag 
SA carl is WY Wildy Lyryee devo go [YAN] docally cay Yosh 
ea Weg «3S lela] sea TY] hash all BMS li Web 
IED aly SAY Be aly 9S AS gd Sly olla 
SB BSH alt Lie las le pS BL (94) 
BG AUG yall YoY cats Uy ALE Gytan JI By diya 
ti So Sot Se ny AS all the Cl al ay JN ecls oy Cates 
SBN OSV LA. OL gl je bale Lbulls fy gl cond JULI 
bbel ail SN ob yt ass gl eal gay ce gt tbe a Sy (09) 
PSI pel, ee past ge ol eal Le GG > cd LL Vyde 
p SL Abell sagt J OLA Reali lao pyll BUS ysl al 
eM > ti 
Meee Sp foe oe ay A GY alld {Jl Us gl syle (VA) 
(Gell patel oa ULE Sy oe spall Col gb. es Mab 
SH Ys 5) aby tee MK gl Cog all. all GAL 


fC) 


\o 





10 


20 


30 


40 


324 Book Nine, Chapter Three 


that the cause of this difference is the nature of that body, as though the 
nature of that body opposes its movement from A to B but does not oppose 
its movement from B to A. For this is impossible because body qua body 
does not necessitate this, and the nature inasmuch as it is a nature for the 
body seeks the natural place without a specific position. If it were to seek 
a specific position, then the transfer from it would be compulsory, and 
thus a compulsory meaning would enter [the realm] of celestial motion. 

(19) Moreover, the existence of each and every part of the celestial 
sphere in every [possible] relation is conceivable in terms of the nature 
of the celestial sphere. Thus, in accordance with its simplicity, it is net 
necessary that, if a part is removed from one direction, this would ke 
possible; and, if removed from [another] direction, this would be impos- 
sible—unless there is a nature there that is receptive of a motion in 
[one] direction and thus responds to that direction but would not respond 
to another direction if impeded from its [own] direction. We have said 
that the principle of this motion is not the nature [of the celestial sphere] 
and also that there is not there a nature that necessitates a specific posi- 
tion and diverse directions. Hence, in the substance of the celestial sphere 
there is no nature that prevents the soul’s moving [the sphere] in which- 
ever direction. Moreover, this cannot take place by way of the soul such 
that its nature would inevitably will that direction, unless the purpose of 
the motion is specifically confined to that direction. [This is] because the 
will follows purpose; purpose does not follow will. If this, then, is the case, 
the reason is the diversity in purpose. Thus, other than the diversity of 
purpose, there is no impediment [preventing the soul from moving the 
sphere in whichever way] that comes from the direction of corporeality, 
from the direction of nature, and [from] the direction of the soul— 
compulsion being the most remote from the possibility [of being such an 
impediment]. Hence, if the purpose was the imitation—after [imitating 
the] First—of one of the celestial bodies, then the motion would be of the 
same species as the motion of that body, being neither contrary to it nor 
faster than it in many places. The same holds true if the purpose for the 
mover of this sphere is to imitate the mover of that sphere. 

(20) It had become evident that the purpose in these movements 1s 
not something attainable through motion—otherwise, the cessation [of 
movement] becomes necessary—but something different that is not 
attainable. And now it has become evident that it is not a body. It thus 
remains that the purpose of every sphere is the imitation of something 
other than the substances of the spheres [composed] of their matter and 
their souls. It is impossible that [this imitation is of] the elements and 











PAY BoA S oly ry6 


5) ila ead MS dab gO pd alls Mob WM sab ull gl sla 
BV dhe a gh cb hen pA ec gl ale Yam led pA pd 
pl Ms el tad Le ally Ha V ae gt Ls aad! 
Apdo fell SK Le yasee Lae coll I yy Yepade aioy pb 
[b°"] Spd ow Ud Bo 3 Jos 

A ace B Jere ben Ye alll eel yo oye Sogey cl (08) 
Sao So he Sul ly Ske te ye H5 Sal LoS gl gil Coe geld 
Bt Wadiall Nome WIS Js abd SGI ebL, 
Anco cad BN ae Nae GB ay ae oe Che C6 Gl gel 
AD aye 2 53) pad ML Ole Vy ane hey cos deb she Lal Y, 
ter ON Cdl age aly Cie A ld pid hd ei 
Sh Ob 2 al OSGI Y lee Vahl obs day dl Yee GK fe pail 
OF NKa QO aly sah pv Ls yal od yall at dL Y Va ol Lat 
Gr Yy hada Ne Wy aml age gy Ble Y gale call dls Ct 
al FS SB KY je aoab asl pully 2 ll Gate Yh ptt Agee 
Frply ped is So 65 5p GL AG cay leat ye eo J on Met 
lal Nae SS 2 all 51K 5) US, {eSlall ye ST bae peel lad WE, 
OIC LE Papen 

BAU al poy Le obit Sb yoall tal ob gS asy (6) 
FAB ase ue al SN oley cal Jeo he Ct J pled 6 Vy 
GET Slosey «pail, Lashye ye 2D ale oh (ts 4S lb 0 2 ll 


\o 





GN 


10 


20 


30 


3525 Book Nine, Chapter Three 


what is generated by them. And there are no bodies nor souls other than 
these. It thus remains for each [of the spheres] to have an imitation of a 
separate, intellectual substance that belongs specifically to it; and that 
the [celestial] motions and their states will have differences that belong 
to them because of this, even though we do not know the manner of the 
necessity of this and the reason why it is;> and the First Cause would be 
the object of desire of all, this being in common, 

(21) This, then, is the meaning of the saying of the Ancients that the 
whole has one mover that is the object of love and that each sphere has 
a particular mover and a particular object of love. Therefore, each of the 
spheres would have a soul imparting motion that intellectually appre- 
hends the good. It would, by reason of its body, have imagination—that 
is, an imaged representation of particulars and a willing of particular 
[things]. What the [sphere] had intellectually apprehended of the First 
and what it apprehends of the principle proper and proximate to it become 
the principle of its desire to be in motion. To each sphere there would 
belong a separate intellect whose relation to it is as the relation of the 
active intellect to us. It being a universal, intellectual exemplar of the 
species of its act, [the celestial sphere] imitates it. 

(22) In sum, it is inevitable that each [of the spheres] that moves for 
a rational end should have an intellectual principle that intellectually 
apprehends the First Good and that the essence [of this intellectual prin- 
ciple} is separated [from matter]. For you have known that everything that 
apprehends intellectually is of an essence separate [from the corporeal]. 
[It is also inevitable that each of the spheres should have] a corporeal 
principle—that is, [a principle] continuous with the body. For you have 
known that the celestial motion is psychological, proceeding from a soul 
that has choice, whose acts of choice are [ever] renewed, the parts [of the 
motion] being continuous. 

(23) Thus, the number of the separate intellects after the First Prin- 
ciple would be the same as the number of movements. If, in the case of the 


spheres of the wanderers,® the principle of the movement of the sphere of 


each star therein is a power emanating from the stars, then it would not 
be unlikely that the separate [intellects] would have the same number as 
the number of [these] stars—not the spheres—and their number would 
be ten, after the First. Of these, the first would be the unmoved mover 
that moves the sphere of the outermost body, then the one similar to it 
[that moves] the sphere of the fixed stars, then the one that is like it [that 
moves] the sphere of Saturn, and so on, terminating in the intellect that 








rletll oly ¥YO 


sa ly SS ol Ad abe pb al Yy pol Y, Vor en Orne ree 
W sill OCH! Whol) LI Ey dade Dybis ie pe yen att [pe 
Byte SVN Mall 9 Ky caColy LB gery US ayes VS Gly cells Jo 
ALSYL [6-9] etl 

Cov 1S gly Byte oly Cove Kl gl clad J pas la’ (19) 
cot Wey GB fed Soo pa alld JS 5) 9 SS ade Byers lode 
Gp tin by JN pals WG Ky OLGaWaal pols yal gl Jos ad 
oh Bae Jar Ab IY Soy A eT 8 9 Lae ae Gaal ete oll Lal 
At sPalde yd Me Yb aly cll JI Sled fall i aed 

Bi Jin Bis lae  ie Godlee ee Sb a Vall (19) 
Sood Nae yey LON Byles fiw Le Kgl cule wld 25 Le lb GS, ch 
wb oF oad Lad Aylatl LI gl cake Buell poly di glee 
Npiye Set le ee LEY sound ats 

SEG IL one J LL ae BL Jydsll sre GK (YK) 
SN 5 pad 3d YB SE olS Spe a Lad is cl Pe] 
INI ow ste Leone 3S CAS 520 VST oe SB jlal SS gh aes 
IS ale oo sill dc pail HS SZ, boc Y gout 2 fea yl 
Lal Jo JSUil adh JI ha, Jo IS oj Sab yo ill occult 





oes cAyel ayy 


\o 





Oa 


10 


20 


25 


30 


35 


326 Book Nine, Chapter Four 


emanates on us-—namely, the intellect of the terrestrial world, which we 
call the active intellect. If, however, this is not the case, but each moving 
sphere has a rule governing its own motion and every star, then these 
separate [intellects] would be of a greater number. It would follow, accord- 
ing to the doctrine of the First Teacher, that there would be something 
close to fifty and over, the last being the active intellect. But you have 
known, from what we have said in the Mathematics, what we have 
attained in ascertaining their number. 


Chapter [Four] 


On the ordering of the existence of the intellect, celestial souls, 
and celestial bodies [that proceed] from the First Principle 


(1) It has been correctly established for us in the discourse we have 
presented that that whose existence is in itself necessary is one, that He 
is neither a body nor in a body, and that He is not divisible in any man- 
ner whatsoever. Therefore, the existence of all [other] existents [pro- 
ceeds| from Him. 

(2) It is impossible that there should, in any manner whatsoever, be 
for Him a principle and a cause—neither [the cause] from which [some- 
thing] comes to be, [nor the cause] either in which or by which [something] 
comes to be, nor [the cause} for [the purpose] for which [a thing] is, 
whereby He would be for the sake of something. For this reason it is 
impossible for the existence of all things [proceeding] from Him to be by 
way of intention—like our intention—for forming the whole and for the 


existence of the whole, so that He would be intending for the sake of 


something other than Himself. This part [of our metaphysical doctrine] 
we have established in another place; therein it is most manifest. We have 
endowed [the argument] with the special characteristic of showing the 
impossibility of His intending the existence of the whole [that proceeds] 
from Him, in that this would lead to a multiplicity in His essence. For then 
there would be something in Him by reason of which He intends—namely, 
His [direct] cognizance and knowledge of the necessity of intending, or 
a deference to it, or a goodness therein that necessitates it. Then [there 
would be knowledge in Him] of the intention [itself], then of a benefit 
the intention would bestow on Him, as we have previously clarified—[all] 
this being impossible. 


r 





lett ye obey! vA 


iS FOF AIT Lol Sly «Leal fill gad spdy «aN lll Jie gay 
58 «loos S156 ta SS A, Yun Sm Ke YS oe 
aBy SJL eal Lapel, Wb8 Lb et je Lad J all Gane Ge 

[t-¥]. bose ya Cab de clobyl 2 Lowy cule 


[al jell 
j:23( 9) 


Ja Tah jo dahl ally Aaglandl pm gailly beall opm y i 2 


vat aly csoly lds omg Colt gl yal yaks Ld Wee 8 (9) 
A La yeny Wolo ge sll 5318 coe gl yp ery ponte Wy pene by mao 

GIy case SOY cae Vy ogee gl ge aoe ied SKal joe Vy (v) 
OSES sen Y gh VS Se cal gu, OKa gas 
JY ec 955 SS oy hy IS 5 SS nee ad Jo ye ce 
Shs Meaty «WEL AB lby cob out oy LED oF all ay vont ie 
A2 0K dee wb alld SG Sh Gry al glas Soe, dais | pa 
FPS shahecal gl nal ed ale y Cdyer gy mente Hyd 
Slows Vidy $45 boed gl Le nail ol Leacie 200 «aad oh «ld 


\o 











Oo 


10 


20 


30 


40 


327 Book Nine, Chapter Four 


(3) The coming to be of the whole from Him is not by way of nature 
in that the existence of the whole comes to be from Him with neither 
knowledge nor satisfaction on His part. How can this be true when He is 
a pure intellect that intellectually apprehends Himself? Hence, He must 
intellectually apprehend that the existence from Him of the whole is a 
necessary consequence of Himself, because He apprehends Himself only 
intellectually, as a pure intellect and a first principle. He only intellectually 
apprehends the existence of the whole [proceeding] from Him in being 
its principle. There is in His essence neither an impediment for nor an 
aversion to the proceeding of the whole from Him. His essence knows 
that His perfection and loftiness are such that the good proceeds from 
Him and that this is one of the necessary concomitants of His majesty that 
in itself is the object of His love. Every essence that knows what proceeds 
from it and which is free from some impediment but is [in the state in 
which] we have clearly shown [it to be—such an essence] is satisfied with 
what comes to be from it. Hence, the First is satisfied with the emanation 
of the whole from Him. 

(4) The first and essential act of the First Truth, however, is to intel- 
lectually apprehend His [own] essence, which in itself is the principle of 
the order of the good in existence. He thus intellectually apprehends the 
order of the good in existence and how this ought to be—not [however] 
through an intellectual apprehension that moves from potentiality to 
actuality, nor [through] an intellectual apprehension that moves from one 
intelligible to another (for His essence is free from what is potential in all 
respects, as we have previously made clear), but by one act of intellection. 
It becomes a necessary concomitant of what He intellectually apprehends 
of the order of the good in existence that He apprehends intellectually 
how [this order] is possible and how the best thing to take place is for the 
existence of the whole to come about in accordance with what He intel- 
lectually apprehends. For the reality that is intellectually apprehended 
with Him is itself, as you have known, knowledge, power, and will. As for 
us, we require intention, motion, and will in executing what we conceive 
in order for it to exist. This [however] is neither good nor true with respect 
to Him because of His being free from duality. And, as we have explained 
at great length, His intellection is the cause of existence in accordance 
with what He intellectually apprehends. The existence of what comes to 
exist by Him is by way of a necessity of His existence and a necessary con- 
sequence of His existence—not [however] in [the sense] that His existence 
is for the sake of the existence of something other than Himself. He is 
the enactor of the whole in the sense that He is the existent from whom 





elect oy» oly ry 


ps Ves Si oy 3S oh bal Lo Jo ue SoS dy (1) 
tejh dl Jo gl cond Sls Jin aoe Jie gy be res OS oaee 2, 
SA ayers fiw Uy Yel lay Leones ahi Vail fin Ya ce Sil ayeny 
ALS gh lle wl, Ae J ypu oy gl ble ald B pedy satare ll le ae 
AGI a pth de oil) y ald gly bl ae [O] Gas Cee ose, 
ly bees gl be he OK Lyle AS Yy case prey bal Ob 
1426 Sl ghaw Gal IVb ae OS i el ab 
Vace WB go 4518 iw al lady Jal ald LYM Gh Sy (€) 
YgKal pa Thy copes i pllad Ble yi foye$l pb le 
tay Ob Jinn pine Ge AE Dis Vy « al agll ge Lyle dis 
i Alin Le gily «Laely Mie Ip cfd obnce gl Le le carry Sp agi bs 
fare JI IK be Sail 3K GS Ke GS al Jin serdl FB pls 
coals be le eon oor Wiel ELI yo Wye Gates le Sil age, 
er tably Soy rah Meryl dat Bele gps Ul, vial ly habs ple 
tle BEI Ley KN jp Cd ay Vy bd eon Y ty neg 
C22 273} ea5) oe Ne ae doy Le ayrgy Saline le sp MibaaS 
Seer al sas SN Jo yay cand oe gt syey JeVeagey IY coogers 


\o 














Nn 


10 


20 


30 


528 Book Nine, Chapter Four 


all [other] existence emanates as an emanation that is distinct from His 
essence. [And He is the enactor of the whole] because the existence of what 
comes to be from the First is by way of necessity, since it has been [shown 
to be] true that the Necessary Existent in Himself is necessary of existence 
in all His aspects. We have finished with showing this objective earlier. 

(5) It is, thus, not possible for the first of the existents proceeding 
from Him—namely, the innovated things—to be many, either in number 
or through divisibility into matter and form. [This is] because the neces- 
sity of what [proceeds] necessarily from Him is by reason of His own 
essence, not by reason of something else. The direction and governing rule 
in His essence from which this thing necessarily proceeds is not the direc- 
tion and governing rule in His essence from which necessarily proceeds, 
not this thing, but another. If either two things differing in subsistence 
or two different things from which one thing comes to be-—for example, 
form and matter—proceed necessarily from Him, both would proceed 
necessarily from only two different aspects in His essence. And, if those 
two aspects are not in His essence but are necessary concomitants of His 
essence, the question remains regarding their being necessary concomi- 
tants of [His essence] so that they would be from His essence. His essence 
would then be divisible in meaning. But we have disallowed this earlier, 
showing its falsity. 

(6) It has becomes evident, then, that the first of the existents [pro- 
ceeding] from the First Cause is one in number, its entity and quiddity 
being one, [and is] not in matter. Hence, nothing either of bodies or of 
the forms that are the perfections of bodies is a proximate effect of Him. 
Rather, the first effect is a pure intellect, because it is a form not in mat- 
ter. It is the first of the separated intellects that we have enumerated, 
and it seems to be the principle that moves the outermost sphere by way 
of [being the object of] desire. 

(7) Someone, however, may say, “There is nothing to prevent the thing 
[first] originated by the First Principle from being a material form, but that 
the existence of its matter proceeds necessarily from it.” [To this], we say: 

(8) This necessitates that the things that [come] to be after this form 
and this matter are successively [lower] in the ranks of effects and that 
their existence [comes about] through the mediation of matter. Matter 
would then be a cause for the existence of the forms of the numerous 
bodies in the world and of their powers. But this is impossible, since the 
existence of matter consists in its being a recipient only and [since] it is 





recs yw obey rvA 


ey Li JM FKL GSO, ald Lube Ulad ayny Pace cae gill 
Ley Allee oar ye aed only aly ogee dl aly gl ee Sl pill Jou 
» $3 veya be gh 5 

sol: Ya — lead gay — a6 Sled Isl aS al seer’ (0) 
ably. ole hy CATH ge ace ohh le oy SAY 65) 505 dole ple Vy 
GOD gd all SAL AAI od 6 atl le ace ph gall sl 2 gall SL, 
OC shell SWS Gb eg GB LOE] Sab ttl Ba cae 
BH Ge Shade UB Clee eg ci yyrery Bale Po cde ly ood lye GS Glu 
Aes} Pople ail asd fail SY OS ylotdivtt, is byte. 
soaked bing Jb De Lae ody «ably Aedes wld GS ald ye USS > Gal 

Varo ly Caley aildy «cull rely Jol dlal je lage gl Isl gle’ (4) 
LB Yokes pla LS 0 al small 5 Uy pla ye od pal cial 3 
ANB Joist Iyl gay cisle B Vinge a {ares jis IAI Jyball fp cal 
St Jom Se cat ppd ABI lad oS gl ty Labove 

bre dM Lule coll Soles Val Lana ga $6, (v) 
std « Wgale ayy [pe pil, YS 

PAN Gall ohay dy pall oe ae SM eLAY GSS gl Ley Le gl (A) 
272 9923) oa BLL 9 SCH GFL Leg Lage OK Gly oN all de,3 
Cran y Laid Hy t5 Ugh Las gon, salll 51 Slow Wang «Lal dy alba 5 55 pin 


\o 




















en 


10 


20 


30 


329 Book Nine, Chapter Four 


not a cause for the existence of anything by any way other than reception. 
If, among material [things], there is something which is not like this, 
then it is not “matter” except in an equivocal sense of the term. Thus, if 
it comes about that the thing supposed as permanent does not have the 
description of matter except in the equivocal] sense, then the first effect 
would not be related to it as a form, except in an equivocal sense. If, 
then, this second thing [is such that] in one respect this matter comes to 
be from it and in another respect there comes to be from it form, such that 
[this] other form does not exist except through the mediation of matter, 
then the material form would be performing an act in which matter is not 
needed. The essence of each thing that performs its act without needing 
matter dispenses from the start with matter. Thus, the material form 
would dispense with matter, [which is absurd]. 

(9) In brief, even though the material form is a cause of matter in that 
it actualizes and perfects it, matter also has an influence in its existence— 
namely, in rendering it specific and making it concrete. And, if the principle 
of existence is from [what is] other than matter, as you have known, then 
each of the two is necessarily a cause of the other in one thing, but not in 
one respect. If it were not for this, it would be impossible for the material 
form to have, in any manner whatsoever, a connection with matter. For 
this reason we have previously said that form alone is not sufficient for the 
existence of matter, but, rather, form is part of the cause. If this, then, is 
the case, then it is impossible to make form a cause of matter in all respects, 
[form] being in no need of anything other than itself. It is thus evident 
that it is basically impossible for the first effect to be a material form; for 
it not to be matter is more obvious. Hence, it is necessary for the first effect 
to be basically an immaterial form—indeed, [it must be] an intellect. 

(10) [Now,] you know that we have here numerous separated intellects 
and souls. It is thus impossible that their existence should be acquired 
through the mediation of that which has no existence separate [from 
matter]. But you [also] know that the aggregate of existents proceeding 
from the First includes bodies. Since you have known that every body is 
possible in existence within its own bound and necessary through another, 
and [as] you have known that there is no way for it to proceed from the 
First without mediation, these [bodies] then come into being from Him 





etl 5 oly rv4 


ob hall ge 2 OTOP Seal ee ee LEY yp toed Le 
PE ed GE aya «5G SS NI ALLEL Vso yo Ab SG 
isl Pipe al Je al GSS VIM Il’ uM ALLEL Wasilla 
lem yey cial be ae SF Re op GOI les 5G eV ALYY 
AT da Laas tage ye GEM dl GS So ele bie ues 
qlee gl nb gy dled Jab 62 5G all Dade ton Yb Ja Roll 5, pal 
[4-0] solll ye Rab Moll dy pall SC salll go Ab Yel stad cas 
Sa Mees gl LB tolal de CIE Gly Soll dy peall GB ALLL, (4) 
Nace OE Sls Weis eames pty Larger (9 [dé Lal soll gb «US, 
PEW Me lege soly Slee Vy 9 cade oF Solll pF Ge ayes 
BOUL gle aU by pall 9S gI JELLY UB YJy drely Age ye Ley cet 
Byyall Vaagry go LY doll gl sya ee Gh 03 Mdly coped yp eoey 
ty Fp ball Jat IS ald MIS GO ly alll 50S gel Law 
{Meal dab 5, oo JgMl shall 3 ol yom Val yd «gents Aslan doll te 
Mie bel ob Fi pe IMI Solces lish gSglly 
Lea ey GS Gl Jload SH Lee Legily Vie Ly? ol als caly (1+) 
Ja ge Slap then 3 gh ald UST pli Seed al awe Nts 
Coley cay Come tly Aad pb od SE ee Kgl cule 3) fleluel 
By tenly a6 286 gd Healy pe SIS Ge Sol pe Val 


\o 











10 


20 


30 


40 


330 Book Nine, Chapter Four 


through an intermediary. You have [further} known that the intermediary 
cannot be pure unity, having no duality. For you have known that from 
the one inasmuch as it is one, only one proceeds. Hence, it is only right 
that [the body] proceeds from the first innovated things by reason of a 
duality or a plurality—in whatever form—that must necessarily be in 
them. No plurality is possible in the separated intellects except in the 
manner I state, [which is as follows:] 

(11) The effect in itself is possible of existence and, through the First, 
is necessary of existence. Its necessary existence consists in its being an 
intellect. It apprehends itself intellectually and necessarily apprehend; 
the First intellectually. Hence, there must be in it, by way of plurality, the 
meaning [(a)] of its intellectual apprehension of its essence as being, 
within its own bound, possible of existence; [(b)] of its intellectual appre- 
hension of its necessary existence, through the First, that intellectually 
apprehends itself; and [(c)] of its own intellectual apprehension of the 
First. The plurality it has is not [acquired] from the First. For the possibil- 
ity of its existence is something that belongs to it in itself, not by reason of 
the First. Rather, from the First it has the necessity of its existence. Then 
the plurality, in its intellectually apprehending the First and intellectually 
apprehending itself, is a necessary consequence of its necessary existence 
from the First. We do not disallow that from one thing there should be one 
essence followed thereafter by an additional plurality that was neither in 
its first existence nor included in the principle of its subsistence. Rather, 
it is possible that from the one [only] one proceeds necessarily, and that 
then this [latter] one will have as a necessary consequence either a gov- 
erning rule, a state, an attribute, or an effect which would also be one. 
Then, with the association of this, there would necessarily proceed from 
it something, whereby a plurality follows—all of which is a necessary 
consequence of its essence. It follows necessarily, then, that the likes of 
this plurality is the cause of the possibility of having plurality in [the 
emanated things] from the first effects. If it were not for this plurality, 
it would be impossible for other than the one to proceed from them, and it 
would not be possible for body to proceed from them. [Finally,] there is no 
possibility for plurality there except in this manner alone. 

(12) It has become evident to us from previous [discussions] that the 
separated intellects are numerically many. Therefore, they do not come 
into existence from the first simultaneously; but it must be the case that 
the highest of them is the first existent [proceeding] from Him, followed 
successively by one intellect after another. Because there is beneath each 
intellect a sphere with its matter and its form, which is the soul, and 











electl je oly vw 


vols gt canbe ab Ub Y Rae dy dled Sl SS Gl jyee Vall cake 


13 \all Spill 9 SE Yy ASIN hinge ed 9K gl om, Teel] 
BLL Je Wa et 

wey 2999 2rd oly Sly cope gl SE wy Jabal! gl (19) 
SN yp ad [0-7] SSSI od ayy 2 JM Jing cals Jin sty ir ail 
lb pial IM jp 0059 sey dlieg Layo 9 oye JAKE SI lie ee 
cme Vail dal ao geny OS 5b LV OF SIS coeds SM alte, 
LN SSSI Jamey Syl fiw al IPS oS ogey yey Il eal be cl 
We Bel old oly 5 oe Kia es Y pty JM ge ey oes 
IS OKI jem h als Mage DHS Vy cao gry J pend aalalays 
a Say clgler gl chiro gl «Shey Se anil SAS AS oF coely ace oh 
1B i WES Ne Ge bb WS leg ae oat Lael Lal 
CV gall yc Yd 5S oye, oKY All 2 3 SU aha Cais al 3) oes 
Mes del Kipp cael Y lee ary gl KV gale Vy Jal 
- did a> J Le de Vf sles 55 SLY ee 

#3 94 3] Cold « aus 8 A583 Lal J gall Gl he LL LY gh ody (0) 
iN, Sey fae oh dace INI ap3ll yo Lotel OK gloom dp cSsil oF le 
BOE foe Scod caigs ae y pall ge NaS yyy aisle Ke fee Kes 





\o 


Q 


10 


20 


30 








531 Book Nine, Chapter Four 


[also] an intellect below it, there is beneath each intellect three things in 
existence. It follows necessarily, then, that the possibility of the existence 
of these three from the first intellect with respect to innovative creation 
is due to the [above] mentioned triadic [order]. [Now,] the best follows 
the best in many ways. Thus, there necessarily follows from the first intel- 
lect, inasmuch as it intellectually apprehends the First, the existence of 
an intellect beneath it. Inasmuch as it intellectually apprehends itself, 
[there follows from it] the existence of the form of the outermost sphere 
and its perfection—namely, the soul. Through the nature of the possibility 
of existence that is realized for it, enfolded in [the act of] intellectual'y 
apprehending itself, is the existence of the corporeality of the outermost 
sphere, enfolded in the entity of the outermost sphere, [taken as] a 
species. This [possibility] is the thing that has a sharing in common with 
potentiality. Thus, inasmuch as it intellectually apprehends the First, 
there follows necessarily from it an intellect; and, inasmuch as in one 
respect [its intellection is applied] specifically to itself, there follows nec- 
essarily from it the first multiplicity in its two parts—I mean, matter and 
form—matter [coming to be] either through the mediation of form or 
through its participation, just as the possibility of existence is actualized 
by the actuality that parallels the form of the sphere. This is the state of 
affairs in each successive intellect and each successive sphere, until it 
terminates with the active intellect that governs our selves. It does not 
necessarily follow that this idea should proceed ad infinitum such that 
under each separated [intellect] there would be a separated [intellect]. 
For we say: If the existence of multiplicity proceeds necessarily from the 
intellects, this is due to the multiplicity of meanings in them. This state- 
ment of ours [however] is not convertible whereby every intellect having 
this multiplicity would have to have, as a necessary consequence of its 
multiplicity, these effects.' Nor are these intellects identical in species, so 
that the consequences of their meanings are identical. 

(13) Let us begin with another starting point to show this meaning. 
We thus say: The spheres are numerous, having a greater number than 
that in the first effect with respect to its aforementioned multiplicity; 
particularly if every sphere is separated into its form and its matter. 
Hence, it is not possible for its principle to be one, [this] being its first 
effect. Neither is it possible for each body among them that is prior to be 
the cause of a posterior [body]. This is because body inasmuch as it is 
body cannot be the principle of a body and, inasmuch as it has a psycho- 
logical power, it cannot be the principle of a body having another soul. 
This is because we have shown that each soul belonging to each sphere 








lel ye OLY ry) 
GAY BAM Jil 56 Doe 905 KGS glad capes oo Lal 
Jl 81S OS ole Lal Lai, Seu | oY 
(AB Cll bye 9 ry Ail3 Jw Lity cS Joo ogy Syl fiw kas ah 


29779 MNO) alae (3b Re pool a) doth! 959) gS) ate, cpatll gg WLS 
AL yl gay (A651 ANI USI OD the ie yall pal OBI Le 
WFO Re Ne silly aioe ley Jie we oh Ev] IMI Jaw PLS] agi 
WSS Le shi, pall La ag ioWMy cis ually alll el Meson LMS 
PIPE, iy go gSlou siI Jail Jal Jee oy gl KL I 
Slee rly Ll ys ll all J) ff cl oly «Jie Jas 
POA let UD Glen Glee SSS co aly 2 I call aay 
Fo pS rad IO ky BST ye BS Gla oad sill 5p BS aye 
Ps dais Jail ae Y, SOY pall os a Sp AT oa ad Mee 5, S 
ie pee cite 9K So 

Saal Ob 525 AD 5h 38 ST HL) all he GLI tty (99) 
Sryo Jul © has 8 Legaty i SM Sage 5 JI lll 3 il 
SKI joey bal Vy IM Syl po Lael, ope So 3m ya aialey 
pe eS Kal eee pd gVulb,. sta ae Me ple ee 
Fol ky WY uli, 5) ath og oa le aK gl 597n YL 363 al Ley 
O85 Lab Y is GY « Byhe Lge aly 5 yey WLS gold J el 





Labs 


\o 


10 


15 


20 


30 


3532 Book Nine, Chapter Four 


is its perfection and form and not a separate substance. Otherwise, it 
would be an intellect and not a soul, and it would not at all move by way of 
desiring, and there would not occur [any] change to it from the body’s 
movement, [nor] imagination and estimation from its participation with 
the body. Theoretical reflection had led us, as you know, to affirm these 
states for the souls of the spheres. If such is the case, then, it is not possible 
for the souls of the spheres [to be such] that there would proceed from them 
acts in other bodies except through the mediation of their [own] bodies, 
For the forms and perfections of bodies are of two [alternative] sorts: 

(14) [The first alternative] consists of forms whose subsistence is in 
the materials of the bodies. Thus, just as their subsistence is in the mate- 
rials of their bodies, similarly, that which proceeds from their subsistence 
proceeds through the mediation of these bodies. For this reason, the heat 
of fire does not warm anything that happens to be, but that which is con- 
tiguous with its body, or is of its body in some manner; and the sun does 
not illuminate all things, but only which is opposite its body. 

(15) [The second alternative] consists of forms that subsist in them- 
selves, not in the materials of bodies—as, for example, souls. Every soul 
has been made to belong specifically to a body, because its act is through 
that body and in it. If it were separated in both essence and act from that 
body, it would then be the soul of all things, not the soul of only that body. 
For it has become evident in every respect that the celestial powers that 
are impressed in their [individual] bodies act only through the mediation 
of their bodies. It is impossible to enact a soul through the mediation of 
the body, because the body is not an intermediary between one soul and 
another. If, then, it were to enact a soul without the mediation of the 
body, it would have individual subsistence without the body and a special 
act separated from its essence and the essence of the body. But this is not 
the state of affairs we are mentioning. If, then, it does not enact a soul, 
it does not enact a celestial body, because the soul is prior to the body in 
rank and perfection. 

(16) If one posits for every celestial sphere something within its sphere 
from which there emanates a thing and an influence without the essence 

[of the former] being absorbed in and by the work of that body—its 
essence being, however, separate in subsistence and action from that 
body—[this is something] we do not disallow. [But] this is the thing we 
call pure intellect, making the emanation of what succeeds it from it. 








pliaiiceres 
oe olay rry 


Byline 9 pil phe ye ad Suey GS Spt jaw de THY 
ORCAS PN IPR) deol] Sl Nall Ly wy ars y Jos el 
ple 3 dll Wee panei DY atl 5 Sh 3x cba le SI GOL, 
ree le YL plac ye gb. wLielabliy Y \plucl 2 
cpl MS ols Lgelyd Gt LSS. placed sles Yalgd ype Le] (\¢) 
atl GB Cand Igy placed ali hye tla jes ld Ge jane, be WIS 
dle Yee eal lah Oke SOL Gil atl Yule [eon] sped 
Wet alle SEL boot Seyi punt 
UB pal Spd Sat LM alge YMG ul’ yee Lily (10) 
Sealy lath Lee IT, aby bl lly Me cat pk Reals cae 
JE Sb Ab baad dhs Sas Ve es iS ceed UI laa 
Shorey. pam Mleuly I bas Y « Agelaorl dada dyleudl yal gl (WS oge 9 
SATB adi all Lee GSO Y al GV Lad ul daly bis 
Gale Jal olay abl gd ie lel Yb eal ese in La 
JS ph Led Jal ol Sly 0 3 Gps ill MNF Lay aed lg Wa 
SUSY ENB pb ge tee il Mglase Lye 
Bagh sy sl, (ASB bas jie (Fulb Soy ob (S93) 
Ged poet bal Jails pla Bae Sli Sy cay Lllh os 
Ine Sy. AE ode Le spdne Jaty c ayorll ial aad gill ge Lay. Ine wx Y 


\o 


ie) 


20 


30 


3D 


353 Book Nine, Chapter Four 


This, however, is other than that which is subject to the body’s action, other 
than that which participates with it, [other] than that which becomes a 
form proper to [the body], and [other] than that which comes to be in the 
manner we have talked about when we affirmed the existence of this soul. 
(17) It has thus become evident and clear that the celestial spheres 
have noncorporeal principles which are other than the forms of the bodies 
[of the] spheres, and that each sphere is specifically related to one of 
[these principles], while all have one principle in common. There is no 
doubt that there are here simple intellects that are separable that come 
into existence in time with the coming into existence in time of the bod- 
ies of humans, and that [these intellects] are not corrupted but endure 
[eternally after bodily death]. This has been shown in the natural sciences.” 
These do not proceed [directly] from the First Cause because they are 
numerous, despite their unity in species, and because they are originated 
[in time]. They are, hence, the effects of the First through mediation. 
(18) It is impossible for the efficient causes mediating between the first 
[principles] and [these intellects] to be lower than them in rank whereby 
[these intermediary causes] would [themselves] not be intellects that are 
simple and separate. For, the causes that bestow existence are more per- 
fect in existence, whereas the recipients of existence would be more lowly 
in existence. It follows necessarily, then, that the first effect? must be an 
intellect, one in essence. And it is furthermore impossible that there 
should proceed from it a multiplicity that is identical in species.* This is 
because, if the meanings that became multiple in it and through which 
the existence of multiplicity in it becomes possible are different in their 
realities, then that which each decrees as a consequence would be, in 
species, other than what the other decrees. Thus, what becomes a neces- 
sary concomitant of the one is not a necessary concomitant of the other, 
but would be a different nature. If [on the other hand] these [meanings] 
coincide in their real [natures], then in terms of what do they become 
varied and multiple when there is no divisibility there through matter? 
(19) Therefore, it is impossible for a multiplicity to proceed from the 
first effect unless [it is a multiplicity] that differs in species. These terres- 
trial souls, then, also do not come to be from the first effect without the 
mediation of another existing cause; and, similarly, [nothing comes to be 
without mediation] from every first high effect, until a first effect is reached 
that comes to be with the elements receptive of generation and corrup- 
tion that are multiple in both species and number. Thus, the multiplicity of 








oleks| of oll vey 


i oF Fy cm holt iyo gay cll H,Utll py LI yp Jail pb 
sui ode LSI ge pe ae 

heal 298 ry Rilye pb tools AN gl 7299 Ok a (VV) 
Lye gl ASL Uy. doy he BAR ably lee bie uate eld Sly 
3 ps aby. Fb EY, lll lal gan po oud iB lata Ves 
< cell fay ae 5S YY «Bala 3p iyple Cody Henclal alll} 
dass Sy Myler O31 ge [604] Bole 

daiaee flew SM ell I 5S gl gem Vy (V8) 

Ll lagey JST agg Alani lll 51 15 jlany Was Yois  G 0 5, 
Lael, sie Jil Jl oS 5) SL aed ageey ctl SS aid oon gh alta 
aS lll gY us, ppl Rie BS ace OSS gl Lal syn Vy cently 
daly Sarit bc Glib Aitsee C385] BBS agey Ks yy ca 
tk AV Ohl ee oly Soho poll dS pale Le La ye 

Sala dole path Y, eo SS, CAS BL pb A GIGI, gel 
re cald pI Rie WES oy ee jyey YIM sill ga (04) 
FAS, tage y sili Lash IN Jalal ge A Lal eS ail 
GSU ABI Le Sp GS Yl see Sl yh So SMe Ugh Jaen 6 
daly oe Jo SI Le plan SS 3S. Les svully Fell BSCU « sla 
> Jee oe fis Litls oe. VS hey lau d 929 plaomul de lay oll 


\o 


10 


20 


30 


534 Book Nine, Chapter Five 


the recipient becomes a cause for the multiplicity of the act of a principle 
that is one in essence—this after the completion of the existence of all 
celestial things. Hence, one intellect always follows another necessarily, 
until the lunar sphere comes into being, and then the elements come 
into being and become disposed to receive an influence from the last 
intellect—one species, many in number. For, if the cause {of multiplicity] 
is not in the agent, it must necessarily be in the recipient. Hence, there 
must come into being from each intellect an intellect below it, [the 
process] stopping where it becomes possible for the origination of the 
intellectual substances that are divisible—numerically multiple due to 
the multiplicity of the causes. [The process] ends there. 

(20) It has thus become clear and evident that every [celestial] intel- 
lect that is higher [than another] in rank [is so] because of a meaning 
in it—namely, that, inasmuch as it intellectually apprehends the First, 
there follows necessarily from it the existence of another intellect below 
it; and that, inasmuch as it intellectually apprehends itself, there neces- 
sarily proceeds from it a sphere with its soul and body. The body of the 
sphere comes into being from [the intellect] and is sustained through 
the mediation of the celestial soul. For every form is a cause for its matter 
to be in actuality, because matter itself has no subsistence. 


Chapter [Five] 


On the state of the generation of 
the elements by the first causes 


(1) Once the celestial spheres’ number becomes complete, the exis- 
tence of the elements follows necessarily thereafter. This is because the 
elemental bodies are generable and corruptible. Thus, their proximate 
causes must be things that receive a species of change and motion; and [it 
must also be the case] that that which is a pure intellect is not alone 4 
cause for their existence. This must be verified through principles we have 
repeated [only] too frequently and have finished with establishing. 

(2) Tothese elements belongs matter in which there is participation and 
form in which there is differentiation. It must be, then, that the difference 
in their forms [is something] that is helped by a difference in the states of 
the celestial spheres and that the agreement in their matter is [something] 





eledSl or oll vs 


oF dh Spall vel) JE Id Lely OLN SSS pl SS 
en 8D Type lll Bray cJeldl boll SJ Bla’. eV Jaa 
iar Lal pal dl Sad | Sete Gy 8 fir fir Soe dren gl 
os Dhe GLANS c oudl 3S 

Al pay Ab ab ob ASL S elo fle Sololy pail ty (11) 
denise UD Ace oy Ald Jing Ley cago ST fis ogy aco Com SeSll ies L 
BP ive Fob ASI pel begs fog cae GOI pny anery 
[N+]. pl bY lg doll GY Jal, You GK N de 


[Bl ped] 
jas (2) \: 


SIAN Jbl Ge ladle 9 SS Je Uo 


3g foludlan! ayy Lowe pic Lesae Ayla SIS dsl 5b (1) 

LS Ja Lah yl ole 5G Gl cod daalb R28 da pli GY 

Se ay «Las ged Loe wy ares Ji 2 LY Sly Sly pl 5 
Lays op Lo by ed IST UST pel ye geri gl v0 

BS SI cond ly Bde ppey YS ALY tole OL dea edgy (1) 

iam UE Gol DUEL gly ADV Salo SoC aa pe Uf Ley pe GOMES 


aT 


10 


20 


25 


30 


335 Book Nine, Chapter Five 


that is helped by an agreement in the states of the celestial spheres. [Now,] 
the celestial spheres agree in the nature of what the circular motion entails. 
It follows necessarily, then, that what that nature entails is of aid in the 
existence of matter, and that that in which there is disagreement is the 
principle of the disposition of matter for [the reception] of the varied forms. 

(3) The many things,! however, that share a common species and 
genus are not, by themselves, without participation on the part of one 
[thing] that aids, a cause of an entity? that in itself is uniform and one but 
rendered subsistent by another. Hence, this one [and uniform thing] does 
not come into being through these [many celestial motions] except by a 
conjoinment with one thing that reduces them to one thing. It follows 
necessarily, then, that the separate intellects—rather, the last of them, 
which is close to us, is the one from which there emanates, in participation 
with the celestial movements, something having the configuration of the 
forms of the lower world by way of passive receptivity to action, just as 
there is in that intellect or intellects the configuration of the forms by way 
of enactment. The forms then emanate from it through their being speci- 
fied [by other factors], not singly by its essence—for the one enacts in the 
one, as you have known, [only] one [thing]—but by association with the 
heavenly bodies. Thus, if this thing is specified by one of the celestial influ- 
ences, either without the mediation of an elemental body or through a 
mediation that renders it of a special disposition after the general one that 
had been in its substance, then from the separate [intellect] a specific 
form emanates and is imprinted in this matter. 

(4) And you know that the one does not render [another] one specific, 
inasmuch as each of them is one, by one thing rather than another that 
would belong to it. Rather, there is a need for various things that specify. 
The things that specify matter are the things that prepare it. The preparer 
is that through which there comes to be, in the thing prepared, something 
by virtue of which its appropriateness for [the reception] of a specific 
thing is more appropriate than [the reception of some] other thing. This 
act of preparing renders preponderant the existence in it of the more 
appropriate [form] from the principles that bestow forms. 

(5) If matter [remains] in the first [state of ] preparedness,* then its 
relation to the two contraries would be similar, so that neither one is ren- 
dered preponderant unless in terms of a state in which the things exercising 
the influence differ. [But then] this difference would also be related to all 











Acti je ole Yo 


ord Sy NN SL Lab 8 32 bu, bel Bots 
refi be 3 Hy L Ky toll oyery egw tell ob pace 9 5h 
Ado gall sll 

ylbe h Ley SKY pohly pl Stl, SS (4) 
Ber WS Lay e gare, Uy ire ly ale pad 9 ge SIN Ue cope arly 
gill SS Gl ond cly yl Ul Laay soly BLL Y ge ae Lae gS 
ttt — Ryland OBIS h Le — ace ca ill yo Llp gill Les 23 Lal 
ry Ssaall gl asl) alld 2 gl LS JLB tye le Joe Ua po aan ad 
S19 [O)V] shal Y ears iP rmall ave andi al. fall dg he gl 
sAaylantl pla Sys sb elasly — cule LS soll od jee velgl gb 
Sreit peanre Maly hl A SO jo gS ele nas U5 9 KS 
Waa oe eb arom 3 U5 IS Gill lll ae GelE slacul le alad dlauly 
BOUN ANG came hy Lols 8 gee od Lal 

dels Lage rely Stam ye ols yonaty Yell gl als cil, (4) 
hearny diloe clase She 9S il dict J 4 SR yl aga el 
PM A Cate eat byl dal 9 a5 Saoy Gall ge sally Yglawr doll 
Poes bey SNS YI Ne Gy eT etl lee o Bel en oot 
-appallal gl Sil yd Sy) 

Co Ld poral Ys pL IM 5g le SLI, (0) 


Bop Lal OEY Olds ad Spl a GILES JL Ved learel y. 


10 


20 


30 


336 Book Nine, Chapter Five 


materials in one [and the same] way. Thus, no one [particular] matter 
rather than another would be specified by what [this difference] neces- 
sitates, except also by something that must exist in that matter. This 
is nothing other than complete preparedness, complete preparedness 
being nothing other than the complete appropriateness for a specific 
thing—namely, that for which it is prepared. 

(6) This is similar to water when its warming is made excessive, 
whereby the alien warmth and the watery form combine, [the former] 
being remote in appropriateness from the watery form [but] greatly 
appropriate for the fiery form. If that [warming] is rendered excessivi 
and the appropriateness intense, the preparedness becomes intense. I 
thus becomes aright for the fiery form to emanate and aright for this 
[watery form] to cease. 

(7) Because matter does not remain without form, its being ren- 
dered subsistent is not due to what is attributed to the first principles 
alone,* but to them and to the form. And, because matter existed, sub- 
stantiated without the form that is now rendering it subsistent, its being 
rendered subsistent is not due to form alone, but to [form] and to the 
remaining principles—through the mediation either [of the form] or [of] 
some similar intermediary. For, if it were due to the first principles alone, 
[matter] would have no need of form; and, if it were [due] to form alone, it 
would not have been preceded by [a different] form. Rather, just as there 
[in the celestial realm] that [aspect] of the circular motion in which there 
is agreement is a necessary consequence of a nature rendered subsistent 
by the natures proper to each sphere, similarly, matter here (in conjunc- 
tion with the common nature) is rendered subsistent by that which comes 
about through the special natures—namely, the forms. 

(8) Just as motion there [in the celestial realm] is the lowest of the 
states, similarly, matter here [in the terrestrial realm] is the lowest of 
entities. And, just as motion there follows the nature of that which is in 
potency, similarly, matter here is a companion of that which is in potency: 
And, just as the proper and common nature there are principles or aids 
for the nature of proper and common [things] here, similarly, what nec- 
essarily accompanies the proper and common natures there by way of the 
various changing relations that take place in them by reason of motion 
is a principle for the change of states and their transformation here. 
Similarly, the mixing of their relations there ts either a cause or an aid 











elads| Ba oly vr 


oF Lal AV Yaak ayo abe cogs 255 Sl CoD doo ad yl ae 
eS Ake YLT sel jody fol ola YY) jecly cdolll elle 
ib ale ya dem 6-8 

Bygrally Ryall Salle acend oydl 15] LU he bing (9) 
UBL AyyLel 5, pall Rell sayidy ASL peel Radel Bases ty ASL 
cat QI Syyall Gm Ge shed. slasedll LS chubdl Obl, alld bal 
«has gl ode a> ys 

ts 5 a aes Le Yl pel hype he a Cad alll gM (v) 
SMI aU aie wedi Say yall Ny -Symall [CVV] Gey lee pc lrany Il 
ABU coolly Sly gh rey dypall Go eld puald «Ugg Auld soll KS 
PRAY Laney IM aol ye CI Yh gst alent, gi ble 
PAD GEM GIS Sapyeally ce UL Lanny Bypeall 5e CIB yy ody geal 
kgs Soll ISS «alld lke Rott GLb Yad Reb oil, be syd SLI 
sarall Ay hold Gla 5s GS Le SF dell a lp 

wipe gt ust sold WIS calles Se V yal LI gl USSG (A) 
ST US gl WAidl  Lga dalll LUIS cag, Le dads det Dea SL gl US 
MIG c bye Sally Roth ddd cle gligols the Sally Rod aula 
Cot GS ABI SH ON AL) Coll ye dhe SA, Lol aula pik, L 
i CA ee Slee Ya hal IS « Lge Yousy Se SI a Lae SL 

















Nn 


10 


30 


337 Book Nine, Chapter Five 


for the mixing of the relations of these elements [here]. The celestial 
bodies also have an influence on the bodies of this world through the 
qualities proper to them, some of which flows to this world. Through 
these ideas it becomes known that the nature that governs these bodies 
in terms of perfection and form comes to be from the soul dispersed in 
the heavens, or through its aid. 

(9) Some people among those associated with this [metaphysical] 
science have said, “Because the sphere is circular, it must circulate around 
something stationary in its center. Its friction with it necessitates warmth 
to the extent that it changes into fire. That which is farther away from it 
remains at rest and undergoes cooling and condensation until it becom 2s 
earth. That [part] of it which is close to fire becomes hot, but of lesser 
heat than fire, and that which is closer to the earth becomes condensed, 
but of lesser concentration than the earth. Paucity of heat and paucity of 
condensation necessitates moistening. For dryness is due either to heat 
or to cold. But the moistness close to the earth is colder and the one close 
to the heat hotter. This is the cause of the generation ofthe elements.” 

(10) This is what they have said. It is not one of those [things] whose 
correctness can be ascertained by syllogistic discourse, nor is it [found to 
be] accurate after investigation. It seems that the state of affairs [fol- 
lows] another law and that this matter that comes into being [through] a 
common [celestial cause is something] on which there emanates from the 
celestial bodies—either from four bodies or from several that are restricted 
to four groupings, [but in either case] from each of them—that which 
prepares it for [the reception] of a simple body. When it becomes pre- 
pared, it attains the form from the giver of forms. [Alternatively,] all this 
[preparation] may emanate from one body, there being a cause among 
those causes unknown to us that necessitates a division. For, if you desire 
to know the weakness of what they have said, ponder [the fact] that they 
make it a necessity that existence should belong first to the body without 
its having in itself any of the substantiating forms other than the corpo- 
real form, [making it] acquire the rest of the forms secondarily only 








elec i oly ry 


LST lla tae plod a ye Slglut pee ene catanse 
ogy pllall Lie Gail b Lal te Yast, cbbal Le ol bye Senay « lps 
ill FP B> iy paly UST Lo ong Se oP oll Racal ley lal 
[ENV]. Nagas ol ccllal basta 
pn Sh ad ia Vl tah a Segal 938 Iy (4) 
deg beg UU porn sm pent Al Sloe piled coptn dull oot le 
oKia ly Ugale | aa oe RG, yee ey eres 
USS Jol aS, LS YS au WM Uh Ly Sl shatihiae la ee 
by Bly deg tS obs lay US as, aby eM y 
Lye 31> ASI a silly cond a 2M bill byl $I fay 
otal 6S 
Py ol Bl ISD, comer dl Ke UE ucly LBB Lg Lb (0) 
Mall de GS gh eT as6 le aS ghactyy LEU ace ya 
155 6 Maly pled baa] Ge Le chaglandl pen ell sa SY tad 
BB tases mee taal aha] Le Ng soy Ge hare pul J ipane 
OSs ely pm oe jan UI IS gl gall aly yey gual Saal 
ee yi ghooil glut bebe GI GLY 5. LL peg iuwalls 
Grr] dual dA) pay menoal Yl eM aK gl Os» nl HO cage L 
Sty SLU pall Fle SK Lily cel 5 pall ab kegill gall 





& 
aan “ 
reat a es % 


\o 





























10 


15 


20 


30 


338 Book Nine, Chapter Five 


through motion and rest. We ourselves have shown the impossibility 
of this earlier. We have shown that existence does not become complete 
for the body purely through corporeal form, if no other form is conjoined 
to it. Its form that renders prime matter subsistent does not consist of the 
[spatial] dimensions only. For in their existence the dimensions follow 
other forms that precede the dimensions. If you wish, reflect on the state 
of rarefaction in heat and of condensation in cold. Rather, the body does 
not become body until it becomes such that it follows another in motion, 
becoming thereby hot through its continued following of these successive 
motions (which we have shown to be not compulsory, but natural), where- 
upon its nature would have become complete. It is possible, however, 
that once its nature becomes complete it would retain the best of places 
for conserving it. [This is] because the heat is conserved where there is 
motion, and the cold is conserved where there is rest. Moreover, [these 
people] do not think about [the reason] why it became necessary for 
some of this matter to descend to the center, coldness occurring to it as 
a result, and for some to go above. 

(11) Now, however, the cause of this is known. In the case of univer- 
sals, it is [due to] lightness and heaviness. As for the two parts of one 
element, this is because it is true that the parts of the elements are gener- 
able and that, if one part of it is necessarily generated in a place, then it 
follows necessarily that a surface close to what is above [is such that], if 
{the element] moves upward, then that surface has the priority over the 
other surface for being above. At the beginning of its generation, however, 
one surface of it [turns] upward, [another] surface downward. [This is] 
because it has been necessarily changed by some motion, and the motion 
has necessitated a certain position for it. 

(12) What seems most likely for me is [the view] that we have main- 
tained. And I believe that the one who had stated this about the genera- 
tion of the elements has sought to make the matter easy [to understand] 
for one of the common people who had corresponded with him. [Then] 
some who came after him maintained conclusively that what he said was 
{the doctrine he actually] held [but that] the writer of this discourse 1s 


extremely hesitant and troubled. 





eel Se rvA 


iypall spent a9ey ab JS Yad Gl Legg otha Meal Khe 1 oa by 
bb Li stil Godl Ab 6 ype ody es linge ly Gf pe armed 
if ASS Je PG CL oly le 55 el ype bogey 3 a lal 
Ok eo ae pret oe Le rats V aed doyle BE, 5, 
ccd) BLS SU aa GLI Gl alle ated Se [O00] aS LI 
Prine Cab C3 LOS Gl jen MH cab CEN dab fd 
Se Tetons aly Sie» bin WY Woe Y cali clel 
5 pb Sl Slay glial oli fond Gory lal yy Se Vel gS 
Bil syle gl Aland cidgyI 

BU, «Ja, BAB LT 8 UI pe dd Butta bs (99) 
Pe IS Hilal, GEO poled eel gl ee SB oly pate pe 
sl etl lb SEGA WL GeAl ace cle SK Sl gl ype ay 
Ailey GB Sa cha pes Lib ASE IIB ily. Vi heath hd gh 
Le beey ing yo bee SL Gly cle Syow Jere 8 Dlae Vac jaa 

BSS 3 MS JIB idl gl Bly cad] Lad 2b Le pace YE (19) 
PE op Malle pd cpl yo A je fan 6 SW Ly (ly colle 
ohleelly G53) aad OT lb GI le ws 


\o 








10 


15 


20 


30 


339 Book Nine, Chapter Six 


Chapter [Six] 


On providence, showing the manner of the entry 
of evil in divine predetermination 


(1) It is proper for us, now that we have arrived at this point, to 
ascertain the true statement on divine providence. No doubt that it 
became clear to you, from what we have previously explained, that it is 
not permissible that the exalted causes should perform what they per- 
form for our sake, or that in general they should care about anything 
[relating to us], [or act] motivated by some motive, and [it is likewise not 
permissible] that a preference should occur to them. [At the same time,] 
there is no way for you to deny the wondrous manifestations in the for- 
mation of the world, the parts of the heavens, and the parts of animals 
and plants—[all of] which do not proceed by coincidence but require 
some [kind of ] governance. It must, hence, be known that providence 
consists in the First’s knowing in Himself [the mode] of existence of the 
order of the good in His being, in Himself, a cause of goodness and per- 
fection in terms of what is possible, and in His being satisfied [with the 
order of the good] in the manner that has been mentioned. He would 
thus intellectually apprehend the order of the good in the highest possi- 
ble manner, whereby what He intellectually apprehends in the highest 
possible way as an order and a good would overflow from Him in the 
manner, within the realm of possibility, that is most complete in being 
conducive to order. This, then, is the meaning of providence. 

(2) Know that evil is spoken of in various respects. Thus, “evil” is 


said of what is akin to deficiency [such as] ignorance, weakness, and of 


deformity in physiognomy. “Evil” is [also] said of such [things] as pain 
and distress that consist in an apprehending of something that has a 
cause, not merely in the loss of a cause. For the cause that negates the 
good, impedes the good, and necessitates its nonexistence may be some 
separate thing not apprehended by that which suffers the harm—as 
when, for example, the clouds cast their shadows and prevent the sun’s 
shining on that which needs the sun to perfect itself. If what is in need 
is an apprehender, he will apprehend that he is not benefitting. But, 
inasmuch as he apprehends this, he does not apprehend that the clouds 
have intervened but only inasmuch as he has sight. [Moreover,] it is not 
inasmuch as he has sight that he is harmed, afflicted, or suffers some 








rlestl ye oly rs 


[ wold boll] 
p22 ( 9) 


AM Lal 8 ptt S83 [AS] oly Slell Y 


BAL, taal Y Jed gies geal Ine bak ll ly dey (9) 
Jord Jas L Jas 5G ol pyre VAIL lll gladly Ler Ge Ue all ail 
Bb ee LY, EL WY Lepny plo Lagoa Hd ag abl [610] 5K 
coldly Slt! ely cola elely ltl gS 9 deat ANG oI 
IN Sp lel Sl ly gl Gad Vy gaara, fp « USI 3 nae YL 
IY aoe SU, AW SIN they «SI pls J oe glabe Lead Ule 
Laid SY B AM seg le SI lls Jind SN poatl Jory Lely 
plat! last fi fe Wiad alin, ill gl anh le poy ales Laie 
ball gee ge Lge GS EEY! Cee 
Sel gga gatall 8 SUL taper he Si tl gl lel, (1) 
Le Aa} 3S gall ply WMI le ge Uc Sing ALI a ytclly Gaaly 
Ley Anta) orally «perl alll po) tll Coll OB. bb oi YO 
OI AA ge pant bay a JS BL Lad yy pall Spas Y be 
Soe oy Ayes oly pie pb ail Ayal Sho cB lhe GEE «pete Jee 
pet PY Bly par pte i Je Ob gl alld Aa 














20 


30 


340 Book Nine, Chapter Six 


deficiency by that; but [he is harmed] inasmuch as he is some other thing. 
[The cause opposing the good] may be connected [not a separate thing] 
which an apprehender to whom is denied the state of wholeness appre- 
hends,? as in the case of someone who, because of a rupturing heat, suffers 
the loss of the connectedness of an organ. For, inasmuch as he appre- 
hends the loss of the connectedness by a power in that organ itself, he 
also apprehends the harmful heat. Two apprehensions would thus have 
been combined there: an apprehension, in the manner previously [men- 
tioned], of our apprehending nonexisting things, and an apprehension, in 
the manner previously [mentioned], of our apprehending existing thing:, 

(3) This existing apprehended thing is not evil in itself but in con- 
nection with this thing.? As for [the thing’s] lack of perfection and whole- 
ness, [this] is not an evil simply in relation to [the thing] such that [this 
imperfection} would have an existence that is not an evil for [that thing]. 
Rather, its very existence is nothing but an evil in it, and in the [very] 
manner of its being an evil. For blindness can be only in the eye; and, 
inasmuch as it is in the eye it can only be an evil, having no other aspect 
in terms of which it would not be an evil. As for heat, if, for example, it 
becomes an evil relative to the sufferer from it, it has another aspect in 
terms of which it is not an evil. Thus, evil in essence? is privation, though 
not any [type] of privation but only privation of that to which the nature 
of the thing necessarily leads in terms of the perfections that belong 
permanently to its species and nature. Accidental evil [on the other 
hand] is the nonexistent, or that which keeps perfection away from that 
which deserves it. 

(4) There is no informative statement about absolute privation® but 
only about the utterance [of the term]. Hence, [absolute privation] is not 
a realized evil. If it were to have some realization, it would be a general 
evil. Thus, [in the case of] each thing that exists in its final perfection, 
having nothing in it which is in potency, evil does not attach to it. Evil 
attaches only to that which has what is potential in its nature—this by 
reason of matter. Evil attaches to matter because of a first thing that hap- 
pens to it in itself and because of something that occurs to it thereafter. 

(5) As for the thing [that happens to it] in itself, [this comes about] 
by way of the occurrence to some matter at the first [stage] of its exis- 
tence of some of the external causes of evil, so that a certain disposition 
takes hold of it—that disposition resisting [matter’s] proper prepared- 
ness for the perfection that is [being] afflicted by an opposing evil. An 
example of this is when the matter from which a man or a horse is formed 








etl ye Oley es 


Soa rhely Slyy Sled pte yb clate Nil 
Awe YAP By low p25 Slat glk ls gS Roba pare Aas 
eal 8S. Mal J S3l ya gadh ol al Be Jal gla 
Le fe Alyaly Rael LZ 1,9) Gt tha be os be Ayal yal dhe 
42 9 ay 1,9] Of Alar pu 
We Matty ead [EVN] 1B od pa gel Jal oo) 
NOK So Lill vals bo, AUS pas Lily. «ll 
rn ie ee 
Sly LMG Sel jee Y allo tee gy cpl GOK ATV yee 
SU Arla Loo jbe Wyte JIU, 3 8 WaS ce alige 
pF dh cpre Vy pall preoldll 8b te Wp SS esl aye YB ely 
Fe pyoall go pth pill, Canby 46g) LMS 5 rele atk. 
Marre 5S SLED as LI 
SE sly ole pte gt lh ala yo W lle pre ge pe Vy (t) 
ea poly «ad LS he oo gery tot FR plat ttl gS cL yen a 
silly ill JeV aly cid Las 9 be gal tI Ly pt aie ob agll 
so alle sy « pad Y Gaye Jal pial god 
Leases Jal Uo Leia 26 8 9S ob. lad od cal WIL (0) 
Lastacunl cls Rog Ae collgl ye es Mee SS cde LL tt otal 
WB) eyed gl glu] Me GS A aU en re 


\o 


an 











Oo 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


34] Book Nine, Chapter Six 


encounters one of the random causes that makes it of a worse bodily 
composition and the least malleable in substance, rendering it thereby 
not receptive of designing, shaping, and correct formation. What is gen- 
erated thus becomes deformed, and what is needed for the perfection of 
bodily composition and constitution would not exist—not because the 
agent has been denied [it], but because the patient would not receive [it]. 

(6) As for the external random thing, it is one of two things: either an 
impediment, an obstruction that renders perfection remote, or an arriving 
opposing [entity] that obliterates [the thing’s] perfection. An example of 
the first is the presence of many clouds and their accumulation, and the 
shading by high mountains [that] impede the sun’s influence on fruit for 
[its] perfection. An example of the second is the cold’s freezing of plants, 
afflicting them at the time ripe for their perfection, so that [their] proper 
preparedness and what is consequent on it become corrupted. 

(7) All cause of evil is found only within the sublunar sphere. All that 
is in the sublunar sphere is insignificant in comparison with the rest of 
existence, as you have known. Evil, moreover, afflicts individuals at certain 
moments of time, whereas the species are preserved. Real evil, excepting 
one kind of evil, does not pervade the majority of individuals. 

(8) Know that evil, in the sense of privation, is either [(a)] an evil 
according to a necessary thing or to a beneficial [thing] close to the nec- 
essary; or [(b)] not an evil according to this, but an evil according to 
something that is possible in a minority [of cases] and [which], if it were 
to exist, would be by way of an excess of the perfections [that come] after 
the secondary {perfections] and is not required by the nature of the pos- 
sible thing in which it exists. This division, however, is other than the 
one with which we are involved and is the one we have made the second 
alternative® [above]. [In addition to] this, it is not an evil according to 
species but with respect to a consideration above and beyond what is a 
necessary requirement for the species—as, for example, ignorance of 
philosophy, geometry, or the like. For this is not an evil inasmuch as we 
are humans but an evil [as it affects] the perfection of bringing about 
rectitude that would be pervasive.” You will further know that in truth it 
becomes an evil only if an individual human or his individual soul decrees 
it. [However,] the individual decrees it, not because he is a human or a 
soul, but because the [mistaken] goodness of that [thing] has become 
established for him, and he yearns for it and has become disposed for 











rlecdl oy oll v6) 


Yoder Ji lb Lage gatly aly bay) Yaor baal OLN 5 YW ue 
SV Y Rally ch JUS ye all gtHl soggy ML canytd (pally JA, 
- dal Juell SY Je cpm Jota 

SSA ocay fiey Gl UL ght ebook y wll AIL (9) 
Sho IE ly GST 5S come 6 by INI SE JS Govt Lely alae Lily 
Syl cm gt Jay [ENV] SUSI he Lo eat St ck dal 
acy bey Geb! ola el an, ce aby 9 AILS Call ol 

pil lb ct Le dharny. pill cb oA Lad oy Lil pI eer (V) 
ccligh ay Lolth cay Ll ll cake WS ol fle Sh Lill Geib 
Ly5Dh eS Meet SM oe AB ttl aly cab iow LSM, 

sorly pl oe 12 KT LL cpaall Gane ga gill pal gl alely (4) 
PM eo Ip cll Gee bt SY! Ly etal 5 a8 a 
din, NOMS ye fad ye be ee he gy shy «BM Ge SE ge al 
2h pill Vay a3 2 [GH] Sl ple yd G2 Y, ast LS 
step fill oe Ig ey he lial il pay 4d God gl 
NS Gb lS pb slag yf Meal Ibo Fell only eo atly Le! 
ny paid SDL IST aes ob oe ec os be ye Lt 
Ally Uy Aad ated gl glad] jaded Lat BL |e aL VS Ul al 
dacasly cad] DLE, LS jum oare Gab ad AY bc pal gl glut] AY ase 





as ' 


\o 




















Q 


10 


1h) 


20 


30 


342 Book Nine, Chapter Six 


that [thing] with that disposition which we will be explaining to you later 
on. Before this, however, it is not one of the things toward which a thing 
is impelled in preserving the nature of the species in the [same] manner 
in which it is impelled toward its secondary perfections that succeed the 
primary perfections. If it did not exist, it would have been a privation of 
something that is entailed in the nature [of things]. 

(9) Hence, evil in individual existents is sparse. Even so, the exis- 
tence of evil in things ts a necessity that follows the need for the good. For, 
if these elements were not such that they oppose each other and receive 
the action of [the element] that dominates [over the others], it woulc. 
have been impossible for these noble species to have ensued from them. 
And if fire, among these [elements], were not such that, if the collisions 
occurring in the course of the totality of things did [not] lead it neces- 
sarily to contact the garment of a noble man, [the garment] necessarily 
burning, then fire would not be [something] from which one derives that 
benefit which is a benefit general [to all]. 

(10) It thus follows necessarily that the good that is possible in these 
things is only a good after it has become possible for the likes of this evil 
to ensue from it and with it. Hence, the emanation of the good does not 
necessitate that the prevalent good should be forsaken because of an evil 
whose occurrence is rare and where, consequently, the forsaking of [the 
good] becomes a greater evil than that evil. [This is] because, if the priva- 
tion of that whose existence is possible within the nature of matter con- 
sists of two privations, [this] would be more evil than one evil. For this 
reason, the rational person prefers being burnt by fire, on the condition 
that he escapes from it alive to painless death. If, then, this kind of good 
were to be left out, this would be an evil above the evil that comes to exis- 
tence through it. It would also lie within the requirement of the mind that 
knows the manner of the necessary arrangement [of things] in the order 
of the good to intellectually apprehend the desert by the likes of this pat- 
tern of things of an existence that allows for the evil that by necessity 
occurs with it. Hence, the emanation of [such an] existence is necessary. 

(11) If someone says, “It is possible for the First Governor to bring 


into existence a pure good, free from evil,” we say: 








reilly ole ver 


rll Fale SU ae ONS J Uy ae all epdine LS oN 
Woe iS S03 BB LVI SLI ast SL Aisle ab 
phal 3 tab yp 

dl 299 OP MS ary [eva] CJHS Slogegll polasl ob tsb (4) 
shai Soe SS pl J pobslda gb. BI Jae deb ayo LAN 
ler TS SS od By haps pA oe lee IS gl Ke «lal Ge aes, 
+13 Re Spy pall he IS gem 3 Ra] oleoLall ly Doll bl coon 
pla all ly Lele SUI SG cathe Cony apt Joy 

de Lt 9S Ul LAV ole b Kl DISK sling Cos (1°) 
cll BIAS ol ag VI ROBD cay ae tll bs bees KI 
Wahoo gry Soll pL dS eps GV. tN IB ye 1 53 9K cgay pt 
Me ley GI Leyte GUL GLEN BUI oy L Vy ely pre op It glae oF 
FA a S914 hs OK gS LH ye Lal Lads ball dh eal de Le 
OI Al ls 2 CS oy AK Lal fel be 8 GS coolenl gn 
Bago pill je dae ain a Vy goe Ngeey LLY ye Leal Lhe fh SRL Jee 
. 13399 Jak gl ag 

bet bare | IM pall ae gl ble GIF a: 6B IB gb (9) 


sed c ptll ye 


\o 














10 


20 


30 


343 Book Nine, Chapter Six 


(12) This is not permissible in the likes of this pattern of existence, 
even though it is permissible in absolute existence as being [one] mode of 
absolute existence free [from evil] which, however, is not this mode. [ This 
mode] is among the things that have emanated from the First Governor 
and, hence, [have] come to exist in intellectual, psychological, and celes- 
tial things. This other mode would, then, remain [in the realm] of the 
possible. Refraining from bringing it into existence would not have been 
[the same as in the case of that which exists]? because of what may be 
mixed with it by way of evil [that is such] that, if its principle did not 
exist to begin with, and [if the existence] of this evil is left out, this 
would result in a greater evil than it, so that its existence is the better 
of two evils. Moreover, [if this mode were not confined to the realm of 
possibility,] it would then follow necessarily that the good causes prior to 
the causes leading accidentally to evil would not exist. For the existence 
of [the former causes] renders the others consequential on them." In 
this there would be the greatest fault in the universal order of the good. 

(13) But even if we do not pay attention to this and confine our atten- 
tion to that into which the possible in existence is divided by way of the 
types of existents differing in their states, [we will hypothesize that] the exis- 
tence that is free from evil is realized. There would then remain a pattern 
of existence which is, in this way, [of not being free from evil, but] where 
its nonbeing would constitute a greater evil than its being. [We will then 
find] that the existence [of this latter pattern] must necessarily emanate, 
inasmuch as what is most right emanates from Him—and in the mode 
which has been stated. Indeed, we will start from the beginning and say: 

(14) Evil is spoken of in [various] ways. Thus “evil” is said of the 
blameworthy acts, and “evil” is said of their principles in moral disposi- 
tions. “Evil” is said of pains, distresses, and their like. “Evil” is [also] said 
of the falling short by each thing of its perfection and of its loss of that 
which would naturally belong to it. It [looks] as if pains and distresses— 
even though their meanings are existential, not privative—follow [from] 
privation and deficiency. Evil in acts is also [evil] in relation to the one who 
loses his perfection by its reaching him, as with injustice, or in relation to 








elecs| oy oll yey 


Sie oS dae bal Las fo gb Hisle Kl te (\¥) 
28 Eby yall Lae pad Lee Gall ogee yo ayo al de alla » yng 
Loatl Ne ay cAglanly enclly Aidt pA amgy cSgll pall ye 2b 
abet Ried (a) il tl ye aba 3 Le Lo colon 4s Fos SRM 
EP 8S ISK lp 15 ald GS pill a GK AS bel bey 
AV Leche JS ose a CLM seg V gl cay, Lal 5i5ly ppl 
Jo pach 45 SG Soin aged ae Ul ogy Bayly tI ll eos! 
- AI Si ple Y 

Al pany Le SH [ENN] SLED Upay cb hed oly be (OY) 
invert Criecmerreserpesnt Bleel ye ayogll og 
peel SS Yy cell ode he GS Ll gel ye Lad ay «ham ai tll 6 
cepa 92 Sill agen ll ae ab ee op dgey Gas Sloop AS yl 
ls oy dat £3 gall Leall ley 

Of Wald pt Sey cde godll SLO tS ogey le Sli tll gl (14) 
WS ie gt Sheed pb My cMgents Ly pyatll AW 42 Sly GLEN 
ad a gy pile CI Gly ceils DN GK WGK hale | Le claady 
LLB ga Ly Lal ga SLA Od ga cll stl sGhailly plac act YB blue 
en SUS ye aly Le SL Lh gl lal fos cal] OS J yoy MUS” ally 


\o 











15 


N 
Nn 


30 


3544 Book Nine, Chapter Six 


a perfection necessary in the religious regime, as [when] adultery [takes 
place]. Similarly, moral dispositions are only evil by virtue [of such acts] 
proceeding from them. And they are connected with depriving the soul 
of perfection that ought to belong to it. 

(15) Among acts you will not find anything that is said to be evil but 
[is said] to be a perfection in relation to the cause enacting it. Perhaps it is 
only an evil in relation to the cause receptive of it, or in relation to another 
agent prevented from his act in that matter for which it has a better claim 
than [this preventive] act. Thus, injustice proceeds, for example, from a 
power that is a seeker of subjugation—namely, for example, irascible 
[ power]—and subjugation is its perfection. It is for this reason that it has 
been created inasmuch as it is irascible—that is, it was created to be 
directed toward subjugation, seeking it and rejoicing in it. Thus, this act 
relative to it is a good for it; and, if it becomes feeble [in performing] it, 
[this] becomes, in relation to it, an evil for it. It is only an evil to the 
sufferer of injustice, or to the rational soul whose perfection [includes] 
subduing this power and controlling it. If [the rational soul] is unable to 
do this, [such] would be an evil for it. The case is similar with the cause 
enacting pains and [with] the act of burning as, for example, with fire 
when it burns. For burning is the perfection for fire but is an evil in rela- 
tion to one who is denied health by it through whatever loss he incurs. As 
for the evil whose cause is a deficiency and a shortcoming that occurs in 
one’s inborn natural constitution—not because an agent has enacted it, 
but because an agent did not enact [something perfecting it]—this in 
reality is not a good in relation to something. 

(16) In the case of evils attached to things that are goods, these are 
due to two causes: a cause with respect to matter [in] that it is receptive 
of form and privation, and a cause with respect to the agent. For, since it is 
necessary that material things must come into being through [an agent], 
it being impossible for matter to have [that] existence! that would [both] 
fulfill the role of {its] being matter and perform the act of matter (unless 
such existence is receptive of form and privation, it being [furthermore] 
impossible for it not to be receptive of contraries), and [since] it is impos- 
sible for the active powers to have [distinctive] acts—contrary to other 
acts—whose existence is realized and which yet do not perform their acts 
(for it is impossible [that] the purpose for which fire is intended [should] 
be created but that [the fire] should not burn), and [since] the whole 





Mets» obey ree 


MAE oP yy om ayy oe WOE US. Wye LN 
Wass coe OVS atl plas Kylee by 

Jolie LBL ILS gay WOM pt le Lt EY, (10) 
F SAN SeB Nola shea dl th) ola 48 yo Ly oa 
Ala De 58 ee joey llald . Judd Le 5 Uy Syl ge Sil dolll all 3 abd 
Vl ge apt oo tam Ge 2 ly YS ely cae aly 
MB UM LDL Leal Wy oly Mpls Ra Ne eg SI cle 
Nea ally op laa 8 go Ly Yd Wl rll og cae Cine I 
oll Sy YW Lt gO ae ope OB. Yule LLM, sgl de WLS 
OW MSG A gb oe Cal Ib} UE Say WN Jol 3 fer] 
Am GO pt Ly ad Laila colby de Che ie I Lal ta 
HS ald candy ol Jota GY cAlab el ely ALL 3 a geaby Shai 
et Sola |e aL 

St i ot a Ub colt a eth bet yt uly (99) 
SE SI rey WA. Seti ye je asey cpally fy aa Ugh aall ge 
Jntiy Salli Lb chy sill oye gl agony Ball VG Gl eee Gh cobolll ase 
COMM WE SLY 3 hors 5 «pally dy pall lb 5% of VssU bs 
Lea geny ram ob gst JUAN aolin Jlal alaal yi OK gl Wot 9S 
9 NEN anal oss aie aky be glee gh foc 5p ib «Yd Ja ay 


\e 


\o 























SN 


10 


13 


20 


30 


345 Book Nine, Chapter Six 


is only perfected in that it should include that which is burned and that 
which is warmed, and that it should include that which burns and warms, 
it follows inescapably that the beneficial purpose in the existence of these 
two things has, as its consequences, harmful [things] that accidentally 
occur from [the act of] burning and of being burnt—as, for example, the 
fire’s burning a limb of an ascetic person. 

(17) The thing which occurs for the most part, however, is the reali- 
zation of the good [that is] intended in nature. [This is] also [the case] with 
that which is permanent. As for [that which occurs] in most cases, most 
of the individuals of the species are within the shelter of safety from 
burning. As for the permanent, this is because many species are not per- 
manently conserved except through the existence of a thing like fire, 
being [something] that burns. It is only [in a] very few instances that the 
harmful things that [may] proceed from fire do proceed from it. The 
same applies to the rest of the causes that are similar to this. 

(18) Thus, it would not be good that the benefits that [occur] for the 
most part, and [those] that are permanent, should be relinquished because 
of evil objectives that [form] a minority [of cases]. Hence, the goods that 
are generated by these things have been primarily willed in the manner 
where it would be appropriate to say: “God, exalted be He, wills [all 
things], and evil was also willed” in the way of what is accidental. Since 
He knew that it exists by necessity, He paid it no heed.”!® The good, hence, 
is necessarily required essentially, while evil is necessarily required acci- 
dentally—everything being by predetermination. 

(19) Similarly, it is known, with respect to matter, that it is incapable 
of [certain] things and that in [certain] things perfections fall short of 
[reaching] it. Nonetheless, what is perfect for it is immeasurably greater 
than that which falls short [of reaching it]. If this, then, is the case, it does 
not lie within divine wisdom to relinquish the superior, the permanent, 
and the more numerous goods because of evils in individual nonperma- 
nent things. On the contrary, we say: 

(20) Things in the [faculty of] estimation are either [(a)] things 
which, if [reckoned in the] estimation as existing, cannot but be abso- 
lutely evil; [(b)] things whose existence [consists] in being good, it 
being impossible for them to be evil and deficient; [(c)] things in which 





rat wv oly ¥¢O 


Sb 30K gly (Paty Ope 45 5K Sh ra L] IS ge bey 
KOU pa he 39 8 BU Bal K gl ye a Kel ge 
lat Shed} gar WI Sled PS GeV, Sey 
pall py eda D opaill LI Spam 50 e558 M6 GN) 
ul, Gel LS GS SelM lsh Sst 3 o's Ul Lal 
BSE ol Ne LI Lo oye, Well le bins Ve Lgl 386 ost 
ME fle DMS ces saat NOUN Gh 56 pases bBo By 5 ou 
wll) gl GLAM 
Soph tlie pV LAM ill 5 ol mgs (\A) 
BW all 5} dling! che gill engl Je dI,laal| Lt ede ye S50 ot SI 
GAT ple hc yl eit anal de [ON] Lal pith ayy «oN ony 
i Sy ell pb loli Wah be Le dbiyy yc 
Mee ally «spel 56 jon UGl Lapel iy abe ad aslll gb WIS (V4) 
AS TE. le pais be JIS a Roc be YW copl SoM 
2h Bb agy Jol AM, Rott Ba OLD AS GL QM ASL yp 
Je hb SAail> pF dared 
LE WSS Gl ee doy cans lil al Lead aeMlgl (15) 
bly daly Ly 9K ol ei It OK Gl baagey sol Udy « Srey Je 


\o 












































on 


15 


20 


30 


346 Book Nine, Chapter Six 


goodness predominates if their existence comes to be, anything but this 
being impossible for their natures; [(d)] things in which evilness pre- 
dominates; or [(e)] things in which the two states are equal. 

(21) Regarding that wherein there is no evilness, this has been found 
in the natures [of things]. As for that which is either entirely evil or in 
which evil predominates, or also where it equals [even the good], this 
never exists. As for that in whose existence the good predominates, it is 
the more appropriate [for it] to exist if what is predominant in it Is its 
being good. If [however] it is said, “Why is evilness not prevented from it 
to begin with so that it would be entirely good?” one would then say: 

(22) [If evilness was prevented from it,] then [these things] woul] 
not be what they are, since we have stated that their existence is that 
which cannot be such that no evil occurs from them. If, then, they are 
made to become such that no evil occurs from them, their existence would 
[no longer] be the existence which is theirs, but the existence of other 
things that have come to be which are other than they and which have 
been realized. [By this] I mean what is created in such a way that evil does 
not follow from it primarily. An example of this is [as follows]: 

(23) If, in the case of fire, its existence [consists] in its burning [some- 
thing], and [if] the existence of what burns [is such] that if it touches the 
garment of a poor man, it burns it, and [if] the existence of the poor man’s 
garment [is such] that it is receptive of burning, and [if] the existence of 
each of the two [involves] the occurrence to it of the motions of some- 
thing, and [if] the existence of the various motions in things having this 
description is [a certain] existence where encounter takes place, and [if] 
the existence of the encounter between agent and patient recipient is by 
nature an existence from which action and affection necessarily ensue, 
so that, if the secondary [causes] do not exist, the primary [causes] are 
nonexistent—if all this is the case,] then the whole [is such] that the 
active and passive powers, celestial and terrestrial, natural and psycho- 
logical, have been organized in it in such a way only so that they would 
lead to the universal order—with the impossibility that they [should be] 
what they are without leading to evils. It thus follows necessarily, from the 
states of the world in their relations to each other, that there would occur 
in some soul the form of a bad belief, impiety, or some other evil in the 
soul or body such that, if this were not the case, the universal order would 








lal ye OLY rer 


axl bay «yells ells wh Sy bogey ory Led Yd ls 5 
«Ql glace yg Lily ody tt ye bs 

sheila) uk woul, Splldl pany ab cad ayt YL Ub (19) 
coe Sha: GeV SH eo, FAW gil Ll, og ol’ Lal sgl 
amo Ge Seal as: ay ti finch bo gle pe ail aa CEI of (31 

Soe GK g| fore gill syed aoe SL LB Se a i (11) 
yn 3l Lao eny GSB oD lee eye Vt Ope Bd ee aye 
Le gel Rel aay Ly ty Srey op5] LET ayy OK lp il 
ae Jy Ugh Lyi) ah Vee Ge 

Ul 9 BB oye ISG Bae VS gl Laageny Sb} Lal gh (4) 
29209 Sy GIA J dl EOS opey 3 del aos pu lal 
PLEN] Fa OL apry 0S 4 Od oy gl lye ely 
SEU ope LEI agen y 51S c PLEIN Wb 2 yas Le agony Ainall ode cle Lah 
SS BM SG od AIG IG ph GB SLAM, Jal Aah Iagery all Jail 
aoe Lally Radel Ko Vy dyyleutl dleielly Dhedl gil ab ey Ul 
stark dl go5 Wy ale al de 20K glade - IS lati J oo 
83) ESN Ey pe ald Bare ol jam SLB gan alla Jlol 5 hd 
oc J plat Sol MS Sb tors Garg etl BT 4 I S| 


\o 



































Q 


10 


15 


20 


30 


347 Book Nine, Chapter Seven 


not be preserved. Hence, He gives no heed and pays no attention to the 
bad consequences that occur by necessity.!* It has been said, “I created 
these for the fire and I care not; and I have created these for paradise 
and I care not.”® And it has [also] been said, “Everyone is facilitated to 
follow that for which he has been created.” ® 

(24) If someone said, “Evil is not something rare or numerically the 
lesser but is numerically the greater,” [we answer that] this is not the case. 
Rather, evil is numerous but not the numerically greater; for there is a dif: 
ference between the numerous and the numerically greater. For there are 
many things that are numerous but which are not numerically greater-— 
for example, maladies (for they are numerous but not the numerical.y 
greater). If you reflect on this type of evil we are mentioning, you will find 
it less than the good that is its opposite and which exists in its matter—to 
say nothing [of its proportion] in relation to the rest of the eternal goods. 

(25) Yes, the evils that are deficiencies in terms of the secondary per- 
fections are numerically the greater. But these are not the evils that we 
are discussing. These evils—such as ignorance of geometry, not having 
outstanding beauty, and the like—do not have an effect on primary perfec- 
tions, nor on [those of the] secondary perfections that succeed them whose 
benefits are manifest. These evils are not the result of an agent’s enact- 
ment but [are due] to the agent’s inaction—because the recipient either is 
not prepared or does not move toward receiving [the action]. These evils 
are the privations of goods in the category of superabundance and excess. 


Chapter [Seven] 


Concerning “the return,” [the hereafter] 


(1) It behooves us [now] to ascertain here the states of the human 
souls when they separate from their bodies and to what state they will 
come to be. We say: 

(2) It must be known that, [as regards] “the return,” there is [to 
begin with]! that which is conveyed by the religious law. There is no way 
to establish [this] except by way of the religious law and through belief 
in the report of prophecy. This is [the return] that pertains to the kody 
at the resurrection. Bodily goods and evils are [well] known and have no 
need to be taught.? The true religion which was brought to us by our 





rlettl oy olay rev 


Je Yop CAS: Jy iyypall, yd sll lll cath ay by al 
8 GE pace Fr dy QU, add Vprcdley IMLY, 

Ph sel oe Us Tyo La ah 2 p6 UB SB (re) 
iS Val Ws SB gS My SI an Saag {oN aly 3S ply aS 
Pa DE ASE SUD MATS 5 0 
! Wiad doled roy cals gl I Sil saey pth y 083 2 ops gall 
| aI 85) lL ol lath ass 
igen SAS pO MS othad oo I yy tthe (10) 

GINS crgd fay Rasegh Job oo cy pill oay gd Lad Hy 

Nate yale KE Ath NOY BY, . GMM Ga Foo ge a 
3 Laas ad lal gh Jo Jotsl Jus YW JED Jats cad yy pt odkny 
[EN] sabi, jadlob pects plael yy cl ores «Jord | Ac 


[ abel Jao] 
p22 (5) 


skh Na 





GGL «gla 23,6 BLaLiph aN Sheol bye gies gl edly (4) 
CWE ON Some Ye Exe ater gt Le ala habe gloom (1) 


Bary OAM Oey Ceall 6 Sll SSI yoy Bgl pS yay heyy ae 
































al 


10 


30 


348 Book Nine, Chapter Seven 


Prophet, our lord, and our master, Muhammad (God’s prayers be on him 
and his family), has set down for us the state of happiness and misery 
according to the body. 

(3) Then, [secondly, as regards “the return,”] there is that which is 
apprehended by reason and demonstrative syllogism; this, prophethood 
has confirmed. It consists of the happiness and misery established by 
[syllogistic argument]* and which belong to souls, even though [our] esti- 
mative powers fall short of conceiving them now, due to causes which we 
will be explaining. The metaphysical philosophers’ desire for attaining 
this [latter] happiness is greater than their desire for bodily happiness 
Indeed, it is as though they pay no heed [to bodily happiness,] even if it 
is granted them. They do not deem it great beside this happiness, which 
consists in drawing close to the First Truth and which we will be describ- 
ing shortly. Let us, then, make known the state of this happiness and the 
misery that is its opposite. For [the description of] bodily [happiness and 
misery] has been completely given in the religious law. We thus say: 

(4) You must know that, for every psychological power, there is a 
pleasure and a good proper to it and a harm and an evil proper to it. 
[Thus,] the example of [this] is that the pleasure and the good for the 
appetitive [power] consists in the coming to it of a suitable sensitive 
quality of the five [senses], the pleasure of anger is [that of] vanquishing, 
the pleasure of estimation is hope, the pleasure of memory is remem- 
brance of past agreeable things. The harm of each [of these powers] is the 
opposite of [its pleasure]. They all have a kind of sharing in common that 
consists [in the fact] that the awareness of the agreeability and suitability 
[of what is experienced] constitutes the good and pleasure proper to them, 
while that which agrees with each of them essentially and in reality is the 
attainment of the perfection which, in relation to it, is a perfection in act. 
This is [one] principle. 

(5) Moreover, even though these powers share in these meanings, in 
reality their levels are different. For, with that whose perfection is better 
and more complete, that whose perfection is more abundant, that whose 
perfection 1s more enduring, that whose perfection is more accessible to it 
and more readily realized for it, that which in itself performs its act more 
perfectly [and performs] a better [kind of act],* and that which in itself 18 
more intense in apprehension, [it follows] inevitably that the pleasure it 
has is greater and more abundant. This is [another] principle. 











a a YOA 


Cay Caceny Led Uy UE NAb tlh clan by cal lice Va he 
= Gadd amr Gag lettly doleadl Je all ley abe alll lee none 
ae 9 bel Bae aby slat! lilly Jal Aas ga aug (1) 
SM asoal oF pal kya pla i gly « aaiN QU Lal gt tihaylia, 
oF plasl doled elo) 8 age) Iogll LSA, « Jlall 5 eng U 
Vp pelontinn Vy c asleel gly cell Ng SeLY gh AUaslaoleatl lel 3 
ea OF Wate be de ty «Soll GLI leo il aol dd hese «98 
2 Jged cp ttl Merb yee Rall GB. Wp soLcabl bglatllydolendl de Sle Cs yas 
ate pty ily Npate Loshy 5H) ASL 38 I gl WL gl coe (€) 
By Rael ys Rae he genre LAS pl salle jl Layasty dggetdl aid gl a 
[4N4] Aol ABIL LN yl So6 Lad sly cole tl ang sly « lel all 
With s syattl Gl SpA yp eg WAL tay ool ee wel Sly 
Saar ge Retbly IMG lee roly F gilsey «ly Roth sally SI ya adhe 
«ol igi «ele SUA Lal, ya cil JUST 
Aah 8 Mile Gb pill de BSH Sly esill oe gh Lely (0) 
AS gil p93) AUS gill, SST ALS lly «Aly Jedd ALS” gil ai. 
ABN AD ga silly ually had JST aad ya ily cal Juam ly a] oy) 
sl Kady ene Ydgly hl oa) St ab « &1ha 


\o 


SE 









































ea 


20 


349 Book Nine, Chapter Seven 


(6) Again, actualization in a certain perfection may be such that it is 
known to exist and to be pleasurable; but, as long as it is not [experien- 
tially] realized, its manner is not conceived and its pleasure is not felt. 
For, that which one does not feel one neither desires nor inclines toward. 
An example of this is the sexually impotent [man]. For he realizes full well 
that there is pleasure in sexual intercourse, but he neither desires it nor 
longs for it with the desire and longing proper to it; rather, he has another 
desire, similar to the [desire] of someone who tries [something], even if 
harmful, for the sake of gaining an apprehension.° In brief, he does not 
imagine [sexual pleasure]. The state of the blind with respect to beautiful 
pictures and [of] the deaf with respect to harmonious tunes is similaz. 

(7) For this reason, the rational person ought not to imagine that 
every pleasure is similar {to the pleasure] the donkey has in its belly and 
betwixt its thighs, that the primary principles drawn close to the Lord of 
the worlds are privative of pleasure and exuberance, and that the Lord 
of the worlds does not have within His authority and special property— 
{namely,] the majesty that is His [alone], and His infinite power—some- 
thing which is the ultimate in virtue, in nobility and goodness, which we 
exalt above naming it “pleasure,” while the donkey and the beasts have 
a good and pleasurable state. Nay, indeed, what comparison can there be 
between what belongs to the lofty [pleasure] and this base one? We, how- 
ever, imagine this [latter] and perceive it but do not know that [former] 
by direct awareness, only by analogy. For our state with respect [to the 
celestial pleasures] is similar to the state of the deaf person who had 
never had any hearing® in not imagining musical pleasure while yet being 
certain of its pleasantness. This 1s [another] principle. 

(8) Furthermore, perfection and the suitable thing may be available 
to the apprehending faculty while there is [also yet] an impediment or 4 
distraction for the soul. It thus would hate [this perfection and suitability], 
preferring its opposite. An example [of this] is the aversion of some ill 
persons to sweet taste and their desires for tastes that are in themselves 
bad and hateful. Sometimes there may be no aversion, but [simply] the 
absence of taking pleasure in [the thing], as with someone in the grip © 
fear who encounters victory or pleasure but neither feels nor enjoys them. 
This is [another] principle. 

(9) Also, the apprehending faculty may be afflicted by the opposite 
of what constitutes its perfection, neither feeling nor shunning [this 
opposite], such that, once the impediment ceases to be and it returns to 
its natural state, it is harmed by [what had afflicted it]. An example of 








elas] of oll v64 


Cualy GTA ley aoe LSS Y Jal ey A GK 568 Lely (0) 
Ci ly Al tel A ate alley «fears alle codtTG pats Vy CaS ype Vy 
PSY oped jou Vy Gets Y ASI Gail plone GI gids Alb geall bs foyed 
ae per obese gt lined Sy ome pega QS Gill ody 
ayall 6 SV Je MS, AL So, VAlb ALLL, « U5 SS Gly ALal a frere 
AME GLY ace ely AL! 
candy toler 2 shod LS 45d Fgh lal mae V gl om dy (¥) 
A ed sl oy Gly Hall, Hill deals gla oy ae yl IM cool gly 
aptly thecal AE Od pel RAL pall aby Gill el Cpelty lke 
ii Gly WTA, Rb Mle hdl ley cid) aud gl ge ale Cal 
NS [£0] oye ply oaaltsy Lhe LOS IS, Rd ade ask Uy 
SSE pe Ped ed Gall poll JEST axce Whd . HLall Jp LALYL 
wool Unny « Ugeded ice pny Raoul sal 
sus |) gi sey 1 pall aga yor 8 DU Ply JUS 5B Lady (4) 
portal dines sd ala co yl am Ral Sle cabo osrin $5 AAS « dl 
dey BET cay IY pre GT Ly AIS el Ley -cldll AeS do 
spol Ving. Ladle Vy ly jets 0 a0lll ,} al 
HI 4 Vy WLS yo be ne opt HT lid GSS AL Lely (4) 


wee Y Loyd «yy pakl fe Sa li ARF emmy Bal SI Ib) fe cae 


\o 











ery 


10 


20 


30 


350 Book Nine, Chapter Seven 


this is the bilious [person]. For he may not feel the bitterness in his mouth 
until his humors are set aright and his organs purified. He would then 
become averse to the state that afflicted him. In a similar way, an animal 
may not be desirous of food at all but may hate it, [although food] is 
[normally] the most agreeable thing to it, and may remain [in this state] 
for a long time. Once the impediment disappears, {the animal] returns 
to what is requisite in its nature. Its hunger and appetite for food would 
then become so intense that it cannot withhold itself from it and would 
perish if [the food] is not found. The cause of a great pain, such as burn- 
ing by fire and freezing by frost, might come about, {in which] the senses 
however, are stricken by a malady so that the body is not harmed by ix 
until the malady ceases, when the great pain is then felt. 

(10) If, then, these principles have been established, we must move 
on to the objective we are seeking. We thus say: 

(11) [In the case of] the rational soul, the perfection proper to it con- 
sists in its becoming an intellectual world in which there is impressed 
the form of the whole; the order in the whole that is intellectually appre- 
hended; and the good that emanates on the whole, beginning with the 
Principle of the whole [and] proceeding then to the noble, spiritual, 
absolute substances, then to the spiritual substances—[substances] that 
in some manner are connected to bodies—then to the exalted bodies’ 
with their configurations and powers, and so on until it completes within 
itself {the realization of] the structure of existence in its entirety. It thus 
becomes transformed into an intelligible world that parallels the existing 
world in its entirety, witnessing that which is absolute good, absolute bene- 
ficence, [and] true absolute beauty, becoming united with it, imprinted 
with its example and form, affiliated with it, and becoming of its substance. 

(12) If this is compared with the loved perfections belonging to the 
other faculties [of the soul], it would be found to be of [so high a] rank that 
it would be® repugnant [even] to say that it is better and more complete 
than [these lower perfections]. Indeed, [these latter] have in no respect 
any comparison with it in terms of virtue, completion, abundance, and 
the rest of that with which the pleasures of apprehended things are com- 
pleted, which we have mentioned. 

(13) As for duration, how can eternal duration be compared with the 
duration of the changeable and corruptible? As for the intensity of reach- 
ing [the object of apprehension], how would the state of that whose 
reaching consists of meeting surfaces be compared to [that whose reach- 
ing consists in acquiring that] which flows in the substance of its recipient 








esd ye ley! hi 


ARUN SUN 6 yi Sad corned oy aol charg J] aed 5,3 
A sd Syl pty LYS py atl Adal aoa pF Slab! 9K 33 LUIS, 
Hip tg Ao SN aa dacely Bl ale Bld Shy BB Abia ale ay 
Dhol fo peal IM oe aon by la ae Ollgy ace pos oe eld 
ed NYS Soa iad SB cee LI SIV yet any ll 
sprlaal VY Stn 
Jb Aad SH SI pat ol od pelos oy BB (45) 
tye Ved Lani ye ke Whe pa ly Goh WIS RLU ual gf (19) 
ISD SS hae oo Mae SS Lo all Ly Ip Syl lity 
ocolall be bey BALM Alay Np Xallall Aske y Ji Rays [EV] yal bl 
AS ag eal Dak So UO ly tly All pend 
sly Ball pad ya U isaLte CaS aml lla Ujlys Voae Ule i 
She pilesdny clang AG Ltny cay ocay «lll Gh Sly lll 
ere op Bile, 
BAM Brey gS Vl gylll 195 pall OLY a od BB (9) 
Mrabewe dl oe tea All Wiad Y pe Fly Jail dl Jl gl Nae ln tao 
0b 3 Koa SI og Le Slory ci 9S Ley 
62 Udy Sathya ea ly ti, GS plat Ly (04) 
Pe Bake ole LI cola dpey be Je GK ASS Jo fl 












































OQ 


10 


20 


30 


40 


35] . Book Nine, Chapter Seven 


so to become as though identical with it, without separation—-since the 
intellect, the intellectual apprehender, and the intelligible are one or 
close to being one? As for the [rational] apprehending faculty being more 
perfect [than the other faculties of the soul], [this] is something evident. 
As for its being more intense in apprehension, this is something you will 
also know with minimum reflection and a recalling of what has been pre- 
viously explained. For the rational soul has a greater number of objects 
of apprehension, probes deeper into the object of apprehension, and is 
more intense in denuding it of the additional things that are included 
only accidentally in its meaning. To it [alone] belongs [the prerogative! 
of delving into [both] the internal and external [aspects] of the object of 
apprehension. Indeed, how [can] this [intellectual] apprehension be 
compared with that [lower] apprehension; or how [can] this [intellectual] 
pleasure be compared with the sensuous, animal, and irascible pleasure? 
(14) We, however, in both this, our world, and [in] this, our body, and 
in our immersion in vices, do not sense that [higher] pleasure when some 
of its causes reach us—as we have hinted in some of the principles we have 
presented. For this reason, we neither seek it nor long for it, unless, by 
God, we have cast off of our necks the noose of appetite, anger, and their 
sister [vices] and acquainted ourselves with something of that pleasure. 
For then we may imagine of it a faint, weak image, particularly when prob- 
lems are resolved and questions [that are] sought by the soul become 
clarified. The relation of this, our pleasure, [when we have such a faint 
image] to [what would be] our pleasure in that (higher state] is the rela- 
tion between the sensory pleasure in smelling the odor of delicious foods 
to the pleasure of tasting them—nay, limitlessly more remote than that. 
(15) You know that, if, [while] reflecting on a difficult [problem that 
is] important to you, an [object of sensuous] desire is presented to you and 
you are given a choice of successfully attaining one of the two [objectives], 
you would, if you are of a noble spirit, disdain the [object of sensuous] 
desire. Common souls also forsake intervening appetites, preferring 
penalties and excessive pains for the sake of [avoiding] scandal, shame, 
blame, or defamation. All these are rational states that, with the oppo- 
sites [of the intervening appetite], are preferred to natural influences and 
for whose sake hateful natural things are endured. From this, one knows 
that rational ends are, for the soul, nobler than base things. How [much 
more would this be the case] with majestic, lofty things? The base soul, 
however, perceives what is consequential on base things in terms of good 
and evil but does not perceive what is consequential on majestic things 
with regard to what [we have] said about the excuses [explaining this]. 








rectly» olYy! Yo) 


or ca sh aly Sptally BULy Jal 3] {SLasl ah go ge dS co ab 
Lal id So) wal al ui, dey yb JST oda gl Ul, Suey 
tly Sy ae one SF abel pill 3 ask, Ge W Sig lr gob aay 
PAN Wy apall Wolee Aleit pl sys je lat atl Aral) Lead 
oa els GS NAL YN aby MM laa ols GS p copay all ob 9 
Sa ailly dagdly ALI BAL sl 

15} BAU) AC, aos Y lb Sh Ob Uylasly oe nny le 2 Sy (14) 
My Spe ye olnad gam al} tlegl US clad jo oo base foam 
Lalas ly ily Sogtll ins Lal 3 9S gl Mall «Yell gos Yy lls Y 
Mantle Yh ee Whos ey Send aa EYV] ull Ge Lt ladlby « Likel ye 
Aoey Aedll Sb gllall Le aly OSCE Ded] ae Legaty «lene 
PEE SBI rely Geer odd SII dy US WBN Gi ike USL 
Dgdeee yb Loe LD ye aul be lgaade’y SII 

8 Sty bap Olle Coys y Olay, Large cheb lal obs Cdl, (2) 
Sys WG Lad ala acy | piel SS Shingle CALAN «yy 
ae gl Jot sl cbt oll Wy Obl all sty Ro all cl gp tl 
Arba oll de (La) sacl, 2 $9 Abie Slyol Yoaday ab egg] 
rill ep ST Leal Ul gh as ye glad adel olay SUI Je Y pues 
ME nt Rael isl GI SAL Sl BGS LAV Ohi y 
+ pSball yo JSU ASI MI Gad Le 2 ttl, oh OLB god 


a 















































10 


20 


30 


352 Book Nine, Chapter Seven 


(16) If, however, we are separated from the body—the soul in us 
having had a sudden awareness of its perfection® (which is the object of 
its love) when [still] in the body but having not attained it, being [then] 
naturally desirous of it, since it had intellectually apprehended in actuality 
that it exists (except that [the soul’s] preoccupation with the body, as we 
have said, had made it forget its essence and object of its love in the way 
that disease makes one forget the need for replenishing [bodily] dissolu- 
tion, and the way disease makes one forget the pleasure of what is sweet 
and the desire for it, inclining the sick to desire things that in reality are 
repulsive)—then, because of the loss [of attaining its perfection], pa n 
occurs [to the soul] commensurate with the pleasure [in the herealte |] 
whose existence we have [shown] to be necessary and whose high status 
we have indicated. This, then, would be the misery and punishment which 
are not equaled by the fire’s rupturing of connected [organs] and the 
action of severe frost in changing bodily temperament.'® Our example 
would then be [the case] of the benumbed we have previously pointed 
to—that is, where fire or frost acts on him, but the substance contiguous 
with the surface of the sense prevents feeling [either one] and, hence, he 
is not hurt by it. But, thereafter, once the impediment happens to be 
removed, he would then experience great tribulation. 

(17) If fon the other hand] the rational faculty had brought the soul 
to a degree of perfection by which it is enabled, when it separates from 
the body, to achieve that complete perfection that is [appropriate] for it to 
attain, its example would then be that of the benumbed person made to 
taste the most delicious taste and exposed to the most appetizing state 
but [who] does not feel [this], but [who thereafter] has the numbness 
removed, experiencing [as a result] momentous pleasure all at once. 
This pleasure would not be of the same genus as sensory and animal 
pleasure, but a pleasure that is similar to the good state that belongs to 
the pure, living, [celestial] substances. It is more elevated than every 
[other] pleasure, and more noble. 

(18) This, then, is happiness; and that [former] is misery. That mis- 
ery does not belong to everyone who is deficient, but [only] to those who 
have acquired from the rational faculty the desire for its perfection. This 
[takes place} when it is demonstrated to them that it is a function of the 
soul to apprehend the quiddity of the whole by acquiring knowledge of the 
unknown from what is known and to become complete in actuality. For 
this is not in it [as] a first nature, nor also in the rest of the faculties. 





lal je lg roy 


PUSS jadl po cg le putt IG cQodl ye Leal la} lly (99) 
cope al fal elie SL al] e5U alll ay cule aly gta go il 
Joe ALN eyll os UST Bytary Ug LaLGT Ug Lb US Gath Lat gl 
Bb aut oe Bel dots colt, MLL SII od oe US lend Le 
AN oe Gaye, Le US haa AN Ge Se Y Udo aL b Oly Sh 
Lagan Y Napisy Sy letlh ga old GS. fle plas de Uulay Lasgeny Leong 
GaN abl for em Lhe 5 SS cipal) gel boaty SLaiW [ VA] Lh aut 
toy hyo aed Cage) gl bad oke 8 cil gl LL as} tI 
pal SY td PUI Sh Gl ee el St ba yyatll je dl 
Ia} YS SUS jo Lam atl yo cay AMG gat IL UL, Cy) 
SAN ya fe Ye cass gl Y sill oUHN USN Ess gl pati cay 
SN leg yo ae IS cay ate Y GS Ml Mad yoy st aalall yi 
SUSI caer Ap Ly Kd sll pace ye Vaal ll 9 Sy aby Lael 
yl, 5S oy Jel ony aR AL aly co da JUL 
oly GSS od aylettl LMS, slit oully ssleutl paedg (\A) 
rd pays Lease lay WLS Gy] y2ch) Lad a i VymST yall bc cuadltl 
OB «Jail JUS CAM pala yo Jape AS SS Lab sol pts! GLE. gl 
BIL cyl ST ya fe ccgydl fla Lal Yy «Jail abel Ged el 
(Be age Jy OS idyll RSL coally Gegttl Uy Lu say Gacy 


\o 















































10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


353 Book Nine, Chapter Seven 


Rather, the awareness of most of the faculties of their perfections comes 
to be after [the occurrence of certain] causes. As regards the purely simple 
souls and faculties, they are as though they were prime matter posited as 
a subject that had not acquired this desire at all. [This is] because this 
desire comes into existence as [a new] event and [becomes] imprinted in 
the substance of the soul only if it is demonstrated to the psychological 
faculty that there are things here the knowledge of which is acquired 
through middle terms, as you have known. Before this, however, it does 
not come about, because this desire is consequent on an opinion (since 
every desire is consequent on an opinion), and this opinion does not 
belong to the soul as a primary opinion but as an acquired opinion. 
Thus, if these [individuals] acquire this opinion, then this desire adheres 
necessarily to the soul. If it separates and that with which it attains 
[completion] after complete separation has not been realized, it falls 
into this kind of eternal misery. [This is] because the primary [elements] 
of the positive disposition of knowledge are acquired only by means of 
the body, [and] nothing else—and this [body] is no more. These {indi- 
viduals, moreover,] have either fallen short in striving to acquire the 
highest perfection, or else they are obstinate opponents [of truth], ingrate 
[unbelievers], partisans of corrupt opinions that are opposed to the true 
views. The ingrates are of a worse state because of what they have 
acquired of dispositions opposed to perfection. 

(19) As to [the question of ] how much conception of the intelligibles 
the soul of the human ought to achieve so that, by it, he might transcend 
the bound in which the like of this misery is found and [where], in crossing 
it and going beyond it, this happiness 1s hoped for, [this] is [something] to 
which I cannot testify [with any exactitude], but only by approximation. 
L am of the opinion that this [entails] that the human’s soul [should] 
have a true conception of the separate principles, having belief in them 
that is certain because of their existence for it through demonstration; 
[that the soul] should know the teleological causes of things occurring 10 
universal motions, not the particular infinite ones; that there [should] 
become established for it the structure of the whole [cosmos], the relation 
of its parts to each other, and the order deriving from the First Principle 
[down] to the most remote of the existents that fall within its arrangement, 
that [the soul should] conceive providence and the manner thereof; that 
it should ascertain what proper existence and what proper unity belongs 
to the essence that precedes the whole, and the manner in which [this 
essence] knows (whereby neither multiplicity nor change attaches to It 














el ceed yor 


wattle B play tye dare Ly Dyttl lds GW Gti! be CuI OS 
abe Le Ne ea Sl agad yy pla AK Ly gel Lge ghcLal aya yay Il 
> ade Ul) ado SL UL Spt el GK vba Ys U, 
Bape le gh Kae Lyn al gg LS UL al WL il oy 
Peay [V4] ll Slee se a alia Myre rare aly HB; lay 6S yl tus 
PY 52d SS CU Kall SL yl GY eoMl ele yy pyle 
gigsilns Lily cee LSS AS Ud gaall Ge dapede Le] yay ob ad, 
Ue Neal gurl, dad ol SW aolen tals LY gynass gaol 
JSD salar ole y LT 
Pus anda iG. 
Boland oe oF ojlyery Ad by cBglett ns aii ale 3 gill adh ay jylew 
Ste ah yes gh US Gh bly Cay YI Le ae Gail gh oe Gb 
cObaySh Lace bro ged Lae laaaad ly Garely Lake |p pad 2 Lill ego 
Jig AY SAS AI Gyo USI OBL pLSL gl SASL Ill Sys 
HLA Lidl ye SS platy <a coll Yam obpel cay Silas anus 
Aesth lil gl giacig « GrtSy Mbll yyalhy Ay ALS loge ll call 
ay SS Yak Zo Sy GS Ul past tang aly pede ory al fol 


\o 





























Qa 


10 


20 


30 


355 Book Nine, Chapter Seven 


seeking the perfection belonging to it, from the pleasure of perfection if 
realized for it, and from the feeling of pain when it falls short of attain- 
ing [this perfection]. [This, however, takes place] not in that the soul is 
imprinted or submerged in the body, but [because] the principle of the 
relation existing between the two—which are, namely, [(a)] the soul’s 
inborn desire to manage [the body], to preoccupy itself with its influences, 
and [(b)] what it [itself] brings about by way of its accidents and what- 
ever positive dispositions become established for [the body]—is the body. 
If, then, [the soul’s substance] separates [from the body] and there is in it 
the positive disposition [that is] realized because of its connection [with the 
body], then its state is very similar to its state when in [the body]. To the 
degree that this [disposition] diminishes, [the soul’s] inattention™ to the 
movement of the desire it has for its perfection ceases. What remains 
with it of [the disposition] would be veiled from the pure connection with 
the place of its happiness, and confusing motions would occur that would 
greatly increase its harm. 

(23) Moreover, that bodily state is opposed to [the soul’s] substance— 
[indeed,] harmful to it. What used to divert it from [this opposition] is 
the body and its total immersion in it. Once the soul separates from the 
body, it feels this great opposition and is greatly harmed by it. But this 
harm and pain are not due to something necessary, but to an accidental 
alien thing. The accidental alien thing neither endures nor remains. It 
disappears and ceases with the cessation of the acts that, by their repeti- 
tion, used to confirm this disposition. It follows necessarily, then, that the 
punishment according to this is not eternal but disappears and is erased 
little by little until the soul is purified and attains the happiness that is 
proper to it, 

(24) As for imbecile souls that have not acquired the desire [for their 
perfection], if these separate from the body and have not acquired bad 
dispositions, they come to a comfort'* from the mercy of God, exalted be 
He, and a kind of rest. If, however, [these imbecile souls] had acquired 
bad bodily dispositions, having no other dispositions except these, and no 
meaning that opposes and denies them, they would necessarily be afflicted 
with their desire for what [these bodily states] require. They would thus 
become greatly tormented by the loss of the body and the requirements 
of the body without the object of the desire being attained (because the 
instrument for this has ceased to exist, whereas the temperament of 


attachment to the body remains). 











725 USN lh syns cad ram Gh SUSI ygettl Gey eal Ul JLT 
9662 8 MIS Sy cad iaies gl gal Peden idl gh Y face 
AD yt ey Amy ge ye ale oayg Ley oy hh JLB ores I Addo yt 
wah OTe Sha ay dell I ad yb BB. godt Leja KL 
M5 GMS gl Bye Ge ab 5 ONS je ley Ab a ty le Ge tl 
Daeg Aslan Soak Spall La 5e Ugo GK dee dew chy Ley cL” 
wold! [49 J plan, be Sy OL 5. alles 
Lal ys Neg gS Uy 0) b5. pd dole Basie ylalt gid (1) 
oy ela oball ty cel jas itl 38 1b AB pedal ley ga 
eye uajle AV OY AY a lM ay idl La lakas cosh lp 
SHOT St SLY A co dens Saie < ste Vy po Ycaall ela SI, 
i Je Gall FNS Coy Ni all OSS gl 33 ld. LSS, gl ali 
Neaad NN doleall Alig idl S$ > LB LI easy 
Ky Qatl e5,b Isl Gb byt SS ob aul geal Ly (16) 
Ob AO oe Boy MW Mlle pda Jogle siglo 2 
at sae Vy alld 5 a Lae YY ly Aa Sad oll AK I 
OAT ates Lat UIDs ied LaLa I ay ipl Doe Y 93 bls, 
Gl ly cll 28 ol AT SY cas GCN Joon gh ep gall Slacks 


st 3 adh 


\o 


























eal 


10 


20 


30 


35 


356 Book Nine, Chapter Seven 


(25) It also seems likely that what some scholars have said is true, 
namely: If these [imbecile souls] were pure fof vice] and separated from 
the body when a mode of belief in [consequences] in the hereafter had 
been embedded in them (which, for their like, would be like [something] 
akin to that with which one can address the commonality), and this is 
represented in their souls; and if, then, [these souls] separate from [their] 
bodies, having no meaning attracting them to the direction above them— 
neither a perfection so as to attain that [higher] happiness, nor the desire 
for a perfection that [by dint of remaining unfulfilled] makes them suffer 
that [real] misery—all their bodily dispositions, moreover, being direct: d 
downward, attracted to the body ([at the same time] there being no prol i- 
bition on the part of the celestial materials [for these souls] to be subjects 
for the action of a soul on them), then, [these scholars] say, [their souls] 
will imagine all that they had believed in regarding the states of the 
hereafter. The instrument {these scholars go on to explain] by means of 
which [such souls] are enabled to imagine would be something that 
belongs to the celestial bodies. They thus experience all that they have 
been told in the [terrestrial] world about the states of the grave, the res- 
urrection, and the goods in the hereafter. The bad souls [these scholars 
continue] also witness punishment according to what had been portrayed 
to them in the [terrestrial] world, and they suffer it. For, the forms in the 
imagination are not weaker than the sensible [forms] but are greater in 
influence and clarity, as one sees in sleep. For sometimes what is dreamed 
is, within its category, of greater consequence than what is sensed. The 
[representations] in the hereafter,!® however, are more firmly fixed than 
what exists in dreams, due to the paucity of impediments, the soul’s 
detachment [from the body], and the clarity of the recipient. Neither the 
representation that is seen in sleep nor, indeed, the one sensed in the 
state of being awake are [anything] other than the [representation] 
impressed in the soul, except that one of them originates internally and 
descends on [the recipient], whereas the other has its origin externally and 
ascends to it. If impressed in the soul, then the perceived apprehension 
is complete. In reality, what gives pleasure or harm is this [thing] impressed 
in the soul, not the external existent. Hence, whenever it is impressed in 
the soul, it performs its act, even if not due to an external cause. For the 
essential cause is this thing which is the impressed [thing], the external 
[thing] being either an accidental cause or a cause of the cause. 





eles 04 


IE Nok Gl yay lim ela ae JB Ki Lal ates (10) 
BE PLY 9S NASW (8 oLZEY ye go Ud Gary aby Gall ed; by aS 
UB 13h gb US Ge pel (BONS jyay Wl as GL SI GL 
oo Lyornnd SUSY cose cll al J odle see og Kiply gla 
Seal gos Reps Rael gle qa fp agli oll Lita JUSS SY, 
NP nt Sat BS 90 9S jh yp Ayla Ashlee’, pled idee 
AM (Ky Ay SV Spo 5 Sarel STL ee [OPK] LSS Yb LB 
Wall BY Jol ae wales ayyleatl ee go Cat LSU Wy WK 
lial aals Lal aos ai 9S, ay SV ody Cally pal dhol y 
tema ca al re, Lol 8 og) aed US Canoe 
Ge plac a asLb gO Led pill (3 salt, LS elioy Itt ue slog pad 
come ell bo ge ohh ye Ll atl gy,5M gi le creel ye ail Uo 
AVYs he pd BSF May pall Condy J elinery ad 9 oy ly ts 
SPU sp toate leased gh pail GALS II Y) ccs LS aes Ob at 
Ns Bhs F dll 9 aed! 1B AM ety DEH Gor Sly at] oe 
WIS Le ye opel Yak OB peg MALL cStyy Sb, Lily. aa 
a 5 SIAM ol SB ILE oy at Sid ly aed Jed ntl (9 a! 
sel oe gh ey ae gt cyt «eal 





































































































10 


337 Book Nine, Chapter Seven 


(26) These [two], then, are the base happiness and [the base] misery 
that are in relation to base souls. As for the hallowed souls, they are remote 
from states such as these. They unite with their perfections essentially 
and become immersed in the pleasure that is real. They free themselves 
entirely from looking backward and [from looking] toward the kingdom 
that used to belong to them. If there were to remain in them a trace [of 
the worldly kingdom], whether in belief or moral disposition, they would 
be harmed by it; and, because of it, they would be delayed in [attaining] 
the rank of the exalted [souls] until [such a trace were] detached and 
ceased to exist. 





Lect yo oly Yov 


ceded adi J Lib Gl glaub sy littl, gale poe (VI) 

praty IN EWS patty Sle eo foe Ge oad Wg aeaall ah Ul, 
Fe Wi NL ty yids bi baat se ics, Aad aA 
GF MeV ile, ca ob dle gl galtet UN» go Ga OS By ote 


Ja5iy emis gl Jl gull des 



































10 


20 





BOOK TEN 
Consisting of five chapters 





Chapter [One] 


A brief statement on the beginning and “the return”; 
on inspirations, dreams, and prayers that are answered, 
and celestial punishments; on the state of prophecy 
and of astrological predictions 


(1) When existence commences from the First, every successive exis- 
tent proceeding from Him continues to be of a lower rank than the first 
and continues to degenerate in rank. The first of these is the rank of the 
spiritual angels denuded [of matter] that are called “intellects,” then the 
ranks of the spiritual angels called “souls’—namely, the active angels— 
then the ranks of the celestial bodies (some being nobler than others) 
until the last {of these] is reached. 

(2) Thereafter begins the existence of matter receptive of the gen- 
erable and corruptible forms. [Existence] first of all assumes the forms of 
the elements and then, little by little, [ascends in such a way] that the first 
existence in [matter] is more base and lower in rank than the one that 
comes after it. Thus, the most base [of these] would be [prime] matte, 
then [ona higher level] the elements, then the inanimate compounds, then 
the animate beings. The best [in this ascending, terrestrial order of exiS- 
tence] is the human, then [below the human] the animals, then the plants. 


— 358 — 





8 pola | A Led 


S22 Lamas \dg 


[Js pail 
3(1) 
Halogen olgeally obey GLU dy <Jeome Js obally Lb 
pare Kel Se by cig Seed by cdylatl ob sal 


OF Rip gyal au JE F ded Jal a6 gp LY) Bl oegb [ere] (9) 
md SM bo ell Riley J SOM deo Ulld Jy foleys dee SI Vy ceil 
lye ob Aas SU gg «Legs gees Aleny JI SOU Gil Vie 
| «Lass Sl a gan yl Ugdany daybed 
Ht Jal hd srulidl AKO) gall Ala Lal ao LL 29209 Gorn, Leow (¥) 
SI eA ydly Hel ed ee dh I GSS La beaten? poll ype 
LoL abal] pb dsldl OSU tc pelea of saUll able pl 9 SG coghe 


MAS heads EAS lye ltl pail, lal ot obit ody egal \yuzil, 





763 tas coll tL! 


—YOA_ 





a 


10 


13 


20 


30 


399 Book Ten, Chapter One 


The best of people is the one whose soul is perfected [by becoming] an 
intellect in act and who attains the morals that constitute practical 
virtues. The best of [the latter] is the one ready [to attain] the rank of 
prophethood. This is the one who, in his psychological powers, has three 
distinctive properties which we have mentioned—namely, that he hears 
the speech of God, exalted be He, and sees His angels that have been 
transformed for him into a form he sees. We have shown the manner of 
this.' We have shown that the angels take visible shape for the person who 
receives revelation and that there occurs in his hearing a voice, [coming] 
from the direction of God and His angels. He thus hears it without this 
being speech from people and the terrestrial animal. This is the one to 
whom revelation is given. 

(3) Just as the first of beings [proceeding from the First], from the 
commencement [down] to the rank of the elements, had been intellect 
and then soul and then body, so here [in the terrestrial world] existence 
begins with bodies, then souls coming into being, then intellects. [All] 
these forms necessarily emanate from these [celestial] principles. The 
temporal events that take place in this [terrestrial] world come about [as 
a result] of the collision of the active celestial powers.? The passive ter- 
restrial [powers] follow the collisions of the celestial active powers. 

(4) As for the powers of the terrestrial world, that which occurs 
therein is completed by reason of two things: one is the active powers in 
them, whether natural or voluntary; the second is the passive powers, 
either natural or psychological. As for the celestial powers, their effects 
upon these bodies beneath them take place in three respects. 

(5) One is by themselves, such that there is no causal [action] in any 
manner whatsoever on the part of terrestrial things. [The second? is that 
these effects] are due either [(a)] to the natures of [the celestial] bodies 
and their bodily powers, in accordance with the configurations [they cause] 
jointly with the terrestrial powers and the relations between them, or 
[(b)] to their psychological natures. 

(6) The third* way involves some manner of sharing with the terres- 
trial states and causal activity in the manner I [now] state: It has become 
clear to you that the souls of these celestial bodies have a mode of doing 
things with particular meanings by way of an apprehension which is not 








lect jy oly you 


ipl all yo Mpe Jal, cies Lab 35S JN GES Laseay «ll 
ALS peach ty AE SS Sa atlas SLs lS 3 caill pay Syl 
Wa gl bagy « aS Ly by Ulpdy pe led NE 8 AKL ayy cle 
AS op CK Aaa po tae bb Sotoey SUI A all oy Gl 
ON Sadly lll y lo alls 9% per] Bh pe Gp needs SILI, 
ah) aay 

pe Ladi ob Me OS polis eyo Go} LOY ye SUSE Jyl gl LSS (4) 
whe sad Uy ghee peg ad ob cole ye ope ll Cele ly’ « Lege 
Chokes yy Sod pllal tha PRL Sly cegalbl ull ace ye Mle Y 5 gall 
Aaglendl Daill geil olealal dat Ko Vi aletlly iyylaudl Dla yal 

Spi Lane yl se dove be dye bio Nell lly (¢) 
A aLeatl Lely Antal Ls ASLae Yl g gall Sy aL MI Ly ell Ll \qdallaal 
sage BE de YS AN laude o Lgl lps Succ Ayla goal Ll, 

Sop yp Amy ee YI gS Wo ed Y taoe gilt Ge Lael (0) 
Salle ee abl J OSE) oy Klee dy Yolecel db ye Ll 
Aga pbb ye Lely gag obellly Ae SI 

SA oy Ke NI Spo ae 4 aS PEIN] aeglly (4) 


bye Aaylaall a lt ey! gl cl Pedil 2B A JBI git ag le ogee gl 





boo face clbl “ght 


\o 


























a 


20 


30 


360 Book Ten, Chapter One 


purely intellectual, and that it is for the like of [such celestial souls] to 
arrive at an apprehension of particular events. This is possible by reason 
of apprehending the differences in their realized efficient and receptive 
causes—inasmuch as they are causes—and to what these lead. [It has 
also become clear to you] that these always terminate in a nature or in a 
necessitating will—not a lukewarm will, neither binding nor decisive. 
But they do not end up being compulsory. For the compulsory is either 
compulsion by nature or compulsion by will. At these two, all analysis in 
compulsory things terminates. [Now,] all voluntary [events] come to be 
after not being. They thus have sufficient causes that necessitate them 
No will comes to be through another will; otherwise, this would lead tc 
an infinite regress. Nor does it come about through a nature belonging 
to the willer, otherwise the will becomes necessary as long as the nature 
exists. Rather, wills come about with the coming to be of causes that 
necessitate. Motives depend on both terrestrial and celestial [states] and 
are necessarily necessitating of that will. As for natural [causes], if they are 
permanent, they constitute a principle; and, if coming to be in time, then 
they inevitably also depend on celestial and terrestrial matters. 

(7) All this you have previously known. [You have also known] that 
the crowding of these causes—their collisions and their continuance— 
have an order that is drawn in accordance with the celestial motion. Thus, 
if you know the primary [causes], inasmuch as they are the primary 
[causes], and the way they lead toward the secondary,” you will necessarily 
know the secondary [causes]. From these things we know that the celestial 
souls and those above them have knowledge of particulars. As for those 
above them, their knowledge of particulars is in a universal way; but, as 
for [the celestial souls, their knowledge of particulars] is in a particular 
way, akin to the direct, to that which leads to the direct, or to that which 
is observed by the senses. Hence, [these latter] necessarily know what will 
be. And, in the case of many, they necessarily know, of two possible things, 
the side which is more correct, better, and closer to the absolute good. 

(8) We have shown that the conceptions possessed by these [celestial] 
causes are the principles for the existence of these forms here, [(a)] if 
[these latter] are possible [in themselves] and [(b)] if there were no celes- 
tial causes stronger than these conceptions among the things that are 








esd 5 oly at 


Jesh OL Gly ae ie nb Ala Joe Jo til JUL Spell 
Ally Ae! Wyle pli Allys] ny Ke abd, ASAI ots Ayal I 
tl Nab Al es Lite Wily att gst by Shak po tie 5 thet 
eb Apnill SB pall IN eed Uy agle Vy ile 2 55 sl] od dm ys 
el bnill 3b [loll gs lglly cdsbj] 52 03 lly cde’ se [6¥V] 3 
25 dy Neo AIS hal Yb SG od be ae ITY OLY gl 
Sala SLM Say ayy de ey Alps pF J] odd Vy aalyb sol! 
bal laced selylly leg ge fle Sysoy tad SLM cada 
PEL Gb Rabel Uy so1 Yi Maye hay (Sy olyleny 
ely aglaw ay Ql Lal as Yale ete BCI Gly «el 
Larbely Wpalanly Jlil abe pleoyY gly JS 3 lhe eae cae (9) 
LAI Cany Stel ge Le PM coke Ib cayg laa SB aoe yo Ll 
Bailey Ryletl pill gl Lake LAW ole 0 ayy 1 cule Peis 
Se db lly Ses Jo CULL ald St Ul, colyLh alle 
Ya be yl lowe 9 ol alah 2M oo cestlt gh othe” 
oF ily Chel yo Gilly Grol yo ill anh le Wen 5B plas Ugh dew 
«aL yA ye Gilet 
SIS NaL baa pall ll oad egal Jat ltd SUL pall jl ley aby (A) 
Mey pail go VoL pal ally el oS Haglan ohual es SS oly Ae 


\o 














10 


15 


20 


30 


361 Book Ten, Chapter One 


prior and that belong to one of the two divisions of the three (other than 
this third). If this, then, is the case, then it follows necessarily that that 
possible thing should be realized as existing, not due to any terrestrial 
cause, nor to a natural cause in the heaven, but due to some influence of 
these matters in celestial things. In reality [however] this is not an influ- 
ence; rather, the influence for the principles of the existence of that 
thing belongs to celestial things. For, if they intellectually apprehend the 
primaries, they intellectually apprehend that thing; and, if they intellec- 
tually apprehend that thing, they intellectually apprehend that which 
has the greater priority to be; and, if they apprehend this, then there is 
nothing to impede [its existence] other than the absence of a natural 
terrestrial cause or the existence of a natural terrestrial cause. 

(9) As regards the absence of the natural terrestrial cause, it is, for 
example, that that thing should bring about the existence of warmth [but] 
that there would be no natural terrestrial warming power. That warmth 
would occur to the celestial conception, in a manner where the good lies 
therein, in the same way that [warmth] would come about in the bodies 
of people due to causes of people’s conceptions, and [in the ways] you 
have previously known. As for the example of the second, [this is] where 
the impediment is not only the absence of the cause of warming but the 
existence of that which cools. Thus, the celestial conception of the good, 
[as consisting] in the opposite of what is necessitated by that which cools 
in it, also subdues that which cools in the way that our conception of 
what induces anger subdues the cooling cause, whereby warmth comes 
to be. The kinds of this part would then consist of transformations of 
natural matters, inspirations that connect with the supplicant or some 
other, or combinations of these that individually or altogether lead to 
the useful end. 

(10) The relation of supplication to invoking this power is [similar to] 
the relation of cogitation to the summoning of clarification, all [of which] 
emanates from above. This does not follow the celestial acts of imaged 
representation, but the First Truth knows all this in the manner we have 
said is appropriate to Him, and from Him begins the existence of all 
that comes to be—but [this comes about] through mediation. The same 
[applies to] His knowledge. It is by reason of these things that benefits are 
gained through prayers and offerings, particularly in the matter of the 
seeking of rain and other things. For this reason, [punishments] for evil 











reall ye oly vy 


are Sh cery li A yO bly AIO Lae ye NN ye peel ree 
F peed D are ce 6 My ale ge Viageye Kall Sls 
(sob HOI fc LEb ALY ae aly glad yy 3 yydllalgleary re: 
cis Lily MUS olde iN cee 15] gl Saylol gAl spells Sey 
Yad ele Y GSAS cle aly GS Ob Cor] UAT 2 betie « Ai ats 
ep a8 + All US 9S gl Me RM doa ll all pe Ll, (4) 
Galea pyalll but Bll MS ho | Lb hh 38 BKB iy) 
PW Ob nd Glal ge ld glal 3b a dad igh Wiad DI Samy 
Oe pa Gill oS OS Gb Gt IE LI, GL La chet ley 
Ferd ee be we ogmy dal soll geile. opi dey «lass 
GSE. BIS Lb all oath all gah pe LS oll pels Lal 
J caygin gh graadl Jra’s bell gl Gabe gal CVE! pel He Glee 
Rail ANI deans tha gl lee aely gould 5 Lert | 

call ele i) SG as aydll odke ele atu Sl epetl aeiy (+) 

AB Goer pln GIN Ragland) Olga a Ua uly BS ye as 5S 
‘Bae SN Sy (SL SH galego yey ed al LB gill ane le 
iol il dss a seat, ai Le yy oka Cd aah ulls bey 
Cry rl de SBI Sia gl oe bay tl el oy 


\o 











Q 


10 


20 


30 


362 Book Ten, Chapter One 


are to be feared and recompense for the good is to be expected. For, in 
the establishment of the truth of this is a prevention of evil. The estab- 
lishment of the truth of this is through the manifestation of His signs, 
and His signs consist in the existence of His particular [creations]. This 
state of affairs is intellectually apprehended [by] the principles; hence, it 
must necessarily have existence. If it does not exist, then there is either 
an evil and a cause that we do not apprehend, or some other impeding 
cause. But the [former] has then greater claim to exist than this [latter], 
and the existence of that and this together is impossible. 

(11) If you wish to know that the things intellectually apprehended 
as useful [and] conducive to benefits have been brought into existence in 
nature in the manner of the bringing to existence which you have known 
and ascertained, contemplate the state of the usefulness of the organs in 
animals and plants and how each has been created. There is [for this] no 
natural cause at all, but its principle is necessarily [divine] providence in 
the way you know [it in our previous discussion]. In a similar way, one 
arrives at the true belief in these meanings. For they are dependent on 
providence in the way you have known providence to attach to these. 

(12) Know that most of what the populace confesses, takes refuge in, 
and upholds is true. It is only those who are pseudophilosophers who 
reject it, due to ignorance on their part of its grounds and causes. We 
have written on this subject the Book of Piety and Evil. Reflect on the 
explanation of these things there, and believe what is related about 
divine punishments that fall upon corrupt cities and unjust individuals. 
Perceive how right is rendered victorious. [Moreover, perceive] that the 
cause of supplication on our part, of almsgiving and other things, [and] 
similarly the coming to be of injustice and evil comes only from there. 
For the principles of all these matters terminate in nature, will, and 
coincidence. The principle of nature is from there. The volitions that we 
have, come into being after not being, and everything that comes into 
being after not being has a cause. Hence, every will we have has a cause. 
The cause of this will is not a will that regresses in this ad infinitum, but 
consists of matters that occur from external [sources], terrestrial and 
celestial. The terrestrial terminates in the celestial and the combination 
of all that necessitates the existence of the will. As for coincidence, it comes 
into being due to the collisions of these. When all matters are analyzed, 











ettl ip Ole rw 


ORs Lr 2,5, pl Sippy Moe os Bobo SI be ob 
bKdl cod (GaLN ras A gene SILI ocng ALS omy Pall, Bass agi 
Bp bag -adghe ST gh Sa ey pb se 90) SE r95 Y 
SLE ye ee Ie ogy lS oprgy «le Ge opel 

hall Sharpe Heil [EPR] lis By gi pbs GheLE laly (19) 
Bho Sle Jol cakes Cake gi alone goatl le Relat 3b usegl 03 
Se EN thes ply Gt GST oly Syl, coblsl, oll Lt 3 Lach 
Gre, ISS ball abe Gil gh Jo Rball yy lee Veja fh cack 
AE Gls led cube gill aang Glo etl, MLL gle {lal oka aye 

tain ly Ge a ow Ist all pig onda ga ST gl dey (19) 
NTS GW Le 3 hae By Lend, ally ages Dyer MEAD SpAU eps 
Je AWM ob stall yp Soe Gvey Shae yy Vaagt Jd 
reall 9 coal gl ley § pen GS gh gh aly AL ott, cial gun 
ob dks yo Ul pYly lll Sym Sy WS by Baral by Lill be 
«hea oy jae dedaly GUE, G91 My Medal I gs pyle gar tole 
Wo Wash | By «Ae ab Soll mw GOB « KS le ae EW Sotal. sly 
eps orl belle Jal BALL sh Jodsol Mell dey eile 
eae acl plinly dylan | GLO My tylgio lege 
Cadel YS yy le BB da oboler ye Cole 9p GI Lil, 3h) 





10 


13 


20 


30 


303 Book Ten, Chapter One 


[they are found] to rest on the principles that necessitates them, descend- 
ing from God, exalted be He. The decree from God, exalted be He, is the 
first simple placing [of things]. Predetermination is that toward which 
the decree gradually directs itself, as though necessitating aggregates of 
simple things that are attributed, inasmuch as they are simple, to the 
first divine decree and command. 

(13) If it were possible for some human to know all the temporal 
events on earth and in heaven, and their natures, he would comprehend 
the manner of all that will occur in the future. [But] this astrologer who 
professes astral [predictions]—in addition [to the fact] that his first posit- 
ings and premises are not based on demonstration (although he may 
claim [for them] experiment or inspiration and may attempt poetic and 
rhetorical syllogism to establish them)—depends on [only] one genus of 
evidential indicators of the causes of generated things: namely, those 
that are in heaven. But he cannot guarantee for himself knowledge of all 
the states that are in heaven. And, [even] if he were to guarantee this 
for us and to fulfil [his promise], he would be unable to make us and him- 
self know the existence of all of them in every [moment of] time, even if 
all were known to him with respect to their [kind of] action and nature. 
This is not sufficient for one to know that [something] exists or does not 
exist. This is because, in order to know that [fire] has warmed [a partic- 
ular thing], it is not sufficient for you to know that fire is hot [and that it] 
warms and enacts such and such a thing, as long as you fstill] do not 
know that it is realized [in existence]. What method in calculation would 
yield to us the knowledge of every event and innovation that occurs in 
the [celestial] sphere? 

(14) [But, even] if he were able to make us and himself such as to 
know all of this, it would not suffice to make the transition [to knowledge 
of | the hidden. For things that are absent [but] on the way of coming to 
be are completed only through mixtures between celestial matters (which, 
out of tolerance, [we will grant] that we have achieved knowledge of all 
their numbers); and terrestrial matters, anterior and posterior; that 
which enacts them; and that which receives their action—those that 
are natural and those that are voluntary. [These] do not become com 
plete through celestial [matters] alone. Thus, the one who does not have 














rect oy» OLY wy 


JN ee sl gh Me alll jo eLaal, JL alll ace yo JS Mg egal ol 
ol ey SE yall oe eLaill allaon gy Lge pally [40°] el 
SIN AM Aly hail J Hamas go tm op at Salant yA 
tay 25M 8 SH alg bl Sayan ol yell go Glad} SSI, (04) 
lee ay. Soil 6 ane, Le pone ha gl « patlbey per 
SI ae dbp ght cad aladey IM cloyi gle — GY 
tbe BLS Pallas saya OLAS Syl Ly col gla all led Gon 
th ge eleatl 8 aN ty OUT Shel toy peor Po le Syn Li 
Fy IBY gee gy rll 8 A Sle eee LEY ws y yee 
SS ily by FD eee suey le Ga tape aay Lary, | AS a! 4 
AB dey al ple gl SY U Ady Sonne Legler dacs ald tom 5 lee 
ol Cb Sy Wile b, ee le Lal | pla’ gl LLU Y AY 5, 4 
FR Ball Lam GLb yo yb Gly cham Ugh lad JL code Ugh bl 
Sls Ob dey bom 
rl (OUD aar opery de Gb Looe Aany Llem gl Sl ty (14) 
cll oS Ul byob! gb ob Sal yl gb oball Jl 4 
eas Nee er me en eae ee Coles WS yl yl op 
vtrroy olygledl oS ads tually Gan’ «Yims Yok Ao wly doi 





























Sa 


10 


15 


20 


30 


364 Book Ten, Chapter Two 


knowledge of all that is present of the two states of affairs and [knowl- 
edge of] that which necessitates each of the two—particularly that 
which is connected with the hidden—will be unable to make the transi- 
tion [in knowledge] to the hidden. We thus have no reliance on their 
statements, even if we admit as a concession that all that they give us of 
their philosophical premises are true. 


Chapter [Two] 


On the proof of prophecy; the manner of the Prophet's call 
to God, exalted be He; and the “return” to Him 


(1) We now say: It is known that the human differs from the rest of 
the other animals in that he does not lead a proper life! if isolated as a 
single individual, undertaking the management of his affairs with no 
associate to help him satisfy his basic needs. [It is further known] that 
the human needs to be complemented by another of his species, the 
other, in turn, [being complemented] by him and one like him. Thus, for 
example, this [person] would provide that [person] with vegetables, [and] 
that [person] would bake for him; this [person] would sew for another 
while that [other] would provide him with the needle, so that, associated 
in this way, they become self-sufficient. For this reason, [humans] have 
found it necessary to establish cities and form associations. Whoever 
among them, in the endeavor to establish his city, has no knowledge of 
the requirements necessary [for setting up] a city and who, with his com- 
panions, has [thus] been limited to forming a mere association—[such 
an individual] changes into a genus most dissimilar to people, negating 
the perfections of people. Nevertheless, even the ones like him cannot 
escape forming an association and imitating the citizens of a city. 

(2) If this is obvious, then man’s existence and survival require part- 
nership. Partnership is achieved only through reciprocal transactions, 
just as this is inescapably needed in the various trade practices that 
belong to [man]. Reciprocal transactions must have law and justice, and 
law and justice necessarily require a lawgiver and a dispenser of justice. 
This [lawgiver] must be in a position that enables him to address people 





rlacll ye oly rt 


[ 44) ] isle LSA ag lisie 5 Ulan, be ae Gl ey bal 


[20 edt] 
bed( VU) 


Ad abably «Js all I) lage RAS aya OL 


Go Yoh tll gle Ole SLM gl ala ye al Ty (\) 
Be Mal yd ob seal pal Bo lady Labbe ayl J tne 
MS Ses ye Fb UR gL GS gly wal, WEL Skye 
Udy lg pat lay cel Jang Lhe he GSS copleny ay LI Lal ve 
Le dy «LS asyal SS Lgaatonl La] om «lg bY B85, 3M) SY Late 
BE ade eo blow 95 age OF pd lela, gall aie Il |p eal 
UF Je 8b hi plo! te Lat at joy au oy aby dual Lilt 
Glee oy LAY oy 9b tS aay SI OLS polly Gell ye At ay ace 
“Opal ad yey 
poy ASL Ge wily GLuiYl opny bad cll ba GSB (1) 
Fy SOS SOL le gy alld ob ay VL cables YS LE 


Ma OK gly » Vy Jonny Glo ye Jaally aul ov Vy 6 JOS 9 dae ye Aol 




















a 


10 


20 


30 


365 Book Ten, Chapter Two 


and make them adhere to the law. He must, then, be a human being. He 
must not leave people to their private opinions concerning [the law] so 
that they disagree, each considering as just what others owe them, unjust 
what they owe others. 

(3) Thus, with respect to the survival and actual existence of the 
human species, the need of this person is greater than the need for such 
benefits as the growing of hair on the eyebrows, the concave shaping of 
the arches of the feet, and many others that are not necessary for sur- 
vival but are, at best, useful for it. [Now,] the existence of the righteous 
man to legislate and to dispense justice is possible, as we have previous!’ 
remarked. It becomes impossible, therefore, that divine providence shoulu 
ordain the existence of those [former] benefits and not these [latter], 
which are their bases. Nor [is it possible] that the First Principle and the 
angels after Him should know [the former] but not [the latter]. Nor yet 
[is it possible] that that whose existence (in the order of the good) He 
knows to be [only] possible [in itself and yet] necessary for introducing 
the order of the good should not exist. And how can it not exist, when that 
which depends on its existence, [and is] built on its existence, exists? A 
prophet, therefore, must exist, and he must be a human. He must also 
possess a special characteristic not present in other people so that people 
would recognize in him something they do not have, whereby he is differ- 
entiated from them. Therefore, he will perform the miracles about which 
we have been informed. 

(4) When this man’s existence comes about, he must lay down laws 
about men’s affairs by the permission of God, exalted be He, by His com- 
mand, inspiration, and “the descent of the Holy Spirit” on him [Qur’an 
16:102]. The first principle governing his legislation is to let them know 
that they have a Maker, One and Omnipotent; that “He knows the hidden 
and the manifest” [Qur°an 16:19]; that obedience to His command is His 
due, for “command must belong to Him who creates” [Qur’an 7:54]; that 
He has prepared for those who obey Him an afterlife of bliss, but, for those 
who disobey Him, an afterlife of misery, so that the multitude will hear 
and obey the decrees put in the prophet’s mouth by God and the angels. 

(5) [But] he ought not to involve them with anything [doctrinal] pet- 
taining to the knowledge of God, exalted be He, beyond the knowledge 
that He is One, the Truth, and has nothing similar to Him. To go beyond 
this and obligate them to believe in His existence as being not referred to 





less ye Ly "10 


Spee Vos VIAN seal rai, Ral agetey YU bE GI ppt 
walle ae ey Woe ad be gee Fons GSS 2 erlsly uti 3p ol 

op th aagey perty SLM Bs Ga ol 8 oka Mie Geb (1) 
call ope eat padiy <gpelll Jey LL2yl le atl olil Jaetl 
PNY ST HUE 8 [E61] byypoY D alll gl Lt, 
Sh 5pm WB 08 be Be WS SE Jang gee GY hall GLI apeegy «eli 
Ul SGT Uy « eel oe sleds 28 Y, Stl oli 2 J Madball oS 
Seah cS pl 3 aa, Le Sgt Vy « hon Vy Cl he ore DAL Jo 
by are Vol jee Sf oe Yd ples aged per Sry pall 09 99 
Sl celys (st my SI QL CaLS Sogn vogey SE st rn oe yp 
A oll atin So lll fl onde pat al gS gl colyy HLS, 
Nyy By lapel al gS «ge ay jp ep dere Ly 

JUS Al gah Lee aryl DHL jee Gl Gone sory HSL glad ay (4) 
pe pAb Aaya aos LS SSI LV I Sy the uel eg Malgly Gogg opel 
Scapa sal pl Slain ye gly ADUaly pil lea «Lob Lael, babe 
cpt olall oles gy cand! slallactbl bach adaly. Gila lS gS 
SMS y padly SOW, AY ye Ld fe Jeb Amery aged els o> 

Ge day hiya 9 SUE Al yan oe ots pdt sl al aay (2) 


PAs LE SF gy orgy Lore 5! rie I i! pe ang! Lib Aa Y 














oar 


10 


15 


20 


30 


566 Book Ten, Chapter Two 


in place, as being not subject to verbal classifications, as being neither 
inside nor outside the world, nor anything of this kind [is to ask too 
much]. He will [simply] render their task too great, confuse the religion 
they have, and cause them to fall into something from which deliverance is 
only for one who is [divinely] helped and led to success, [the occurrence 
of ] whose existence is unusual, his coming to be [most] rare. For it is only 
with great strain that they can conceive the true states of such matters 
in their true aspects; it is only the very few among them that can under- 
stand the truth of divine “unity” and divine “transcendence.” [The rest] 
would come to deny the truth of such existence, fall into dissensions, and 
indulge in disputations and analogical arguments that stand in the way 
of their performing their civil [duties]. This might even lead them to adopt 
views contrary to the city’s welfare, opposed to the imperatives of truth. 
Their complaints and doubts will multiply, making it difficult for a human 
to control them. For it is not for everyone that [the acquisition] of divine 
wisdom is facilitated. 

(6) Nor is it proper for any human to reveal that he possesses knowl- 
edge he is hiding from the commonality. Indeed, he must never permit 
any reference to this. Rather, he should let them know of God’s majesty 
and greatness through symbols and similitudes derived from things that, 
for them, are majestic and great, adding this much: that He has neither 
an equal, nor a partner, nor anyone like Him. Similarly, he must instill in 
them the belief in the resurrection in a manner that they can conceive and 
in which their souls find rest. He must tell them about [eternal] bliss and 
misery in parables derived from what they can comprehend and conceive. 
Of the true nature of [the afterlife] he should indicate only something in 
general, that it is something that “no eye has seen and no ear heard” 
and that there are pleasures that are great possessions and miseries that 
are perpetual torture. 

(7) Know that God, exalted be He, knows that the good lies in [such 
a state of affairs]. It follows, then, that that which God knows to be the 
good must exist in the way that [He knows it], as you have known [from 
our preceding discussion]. But there is no harm if the legislator’s words 
contain symbols and signs that might call forth those naturally disposed 


toward theoretical reflection to pursue philosophic investigations. 





reall» oly mn 


288 aol Nae ge Lb Yy calls Yy pl LEY, Sd pede Vy Qh 
BE AY cace aA Lb ggly «pall ppl ip Led Uepty Jat age plas 
Be SNe che Ly yet I op Ke VSB AS sayy oagery ete sill ll gla 
8 cagyllly peng In Mako Nasu’ le QUAI SS Uy IS ee 
Sliglell, OLA UN tI eens PI'S oP lpntyy cg gl Law Ses re 5 Ody 
cHeyphl haa We LTS [EOF] pgadyl Legg lal aglsl Ge panel 
Babel fe AM rey cactll I ONS Gh Cots dake, 
Reg RSL ba) pons ILS «pple 

Sheen dp Mell je YR Rede ae Gl yd ld char gli (0) 
jay Caley JU5 all ade pdye low fe Ub Ut ew Bete 
cal) Nn ce ae ll Aly ary ler pace Ge stl LAY ye atl, 
alall pl eaves sas Gl oe IS ae Vy J byt Uy ad pe all el 
Vel syletsly soled Gydany cers AM dy AS pees doy le 
Sh gy args Leh V) aes nd cg WB US GB GEL UL, gy pag gaps U 
WN ey plas alle go Le sll jp dle oly cane Gal Uy aly ye Ye gt al 
pcs le 0 

pole rey Sl cent Neo bl dey Gl ples Ile alll gl lel, (v) 
CALly bans he ales Jot gl LY, scale bbe seey Ge ls al 
SB col J Pad LY pot dl s os 


\o 




















367 Book Ten, Chapter Three 


Chapter [Three] 


On acts of worship: their benefits 
in this world and the next 


(1) Moreover, this individual who is a prophet is not one whose like 
recurs in every period. For, the matter receptive of a perfection like his 
occurs only in few bodily compositions. It follows necessarily, then, that 
the Prophet (may God’s prayers and peace be upon him) must plan with 
great care to ensure the preservation of what he prescribes and legislate 
in matters pertaining to human welfare. Without doubt, the fundamental 
10 principle in this is that men must continue in their knowledge of God 

and the resurrection and that the cause for forgetting these things with 
the passage of the century succeeding [the mission of] the Prophet (may 
God’s prayers and peace be on him) must be absolutely eliminated. 
Hence, there must be certain acts and works incumbent on people that 
15 the legislator must prescribe to be repeated at proximate intervals, so 
that the time in which [the act] is enacted would be close to the one that 
succeeds it. Thus, the memory of [the act] is renewed and reappears 
before it dies.’ 
(2) These acts must be combined with what brings God and the 
20 afterlife necessarily to mind; otherwise, they are useless. Remembering 
is achieved through words that are uttered, or [by] resolutions made in 
the imagination, and by telling men that these acts bring them closer to 
God, exalted be He, and are richly rewarded. And these acts must in 
reality be of such a nature. An example of these are the acts of worship 
25 imposed on people. In general, these should be reminders. [Now,] 
reminders consist either of motions or the absence of motions that lead 
to [other] motions. An example of motions is prayer; of the absence of 
motion, fasting. For, although the latter is a negative notion, it so greatly 
moves one’s nature that he who fasts is reminded that what he is engaged 
30 in is not a jest. He will thus recall the intention of [his fasting], which is 
to draw him near to God, exalted be He. 


a 





let ole rw 


[tt joa 
cho? ( >) 


BSN, Uall oo Yat olla 3 


By Fp Ale ogy SU pad Coll 0 sill patel heal ad (1) 

A SK gl Mee Y cond SM 5 Lb OD ei aL SIS LS aol gb 0 

Uy ALLAN all sya gb Ae play ony Le ele 9 oF lng ae alll he 

Bball pede He lll jal 2 ul givclil gels Y, pete] . Las 

Ath ee sell gs UI yall Jaya ae AS Sel psy eee pyc alaly 

2a BD pede LISS ens Slay Stal otal le 6S gl ond ply ale 

Sul sgr Sola seca eae ile Ta tle alha Sy ey <4 
. ABLE go eed ol Sy 

Vy {allows Y skal, alll, Sby Ley yee SLAM oe gS gl coe, (1) 

pb Jl Sly SIDI 2 sed Ob sl Ste BW WG SY SHH. _aasbon 

SLAM ME 5 S% gly $0 tL by oe sney «Sle alll loys JL od ol 


bby ltl Je doy yall ololall fo LAM okay dial ode cle Mead yo 


Soh pat OB placl Ly o> Ll oll, ole 0G gl oe 
bese par SE ily Si cenall fod OGL cl Ul ball fo oH LI Lb 


Ve dl My the Ge dl ole aa lad BF dela pow al 


SW all Jol Sl y Age bo SO 


or 


20 


30 


368 Book Ten, Chapter Three 


(3) These states must, if possible, be mixed with other beneficial 
[acts pertaining to] the strengthening and the spreading of the law. To 
perform these will also be [conducive] to people’s worldly benefits, as in 
the case of fighting for the faith and the pilgrimage. Certain areas of 
land must be designated as best suited for worship and as belonging to 
God, exalted be He. Certain acts which people must perform—as, for 
example, sacrificial offerings—must be specified as belonging exclusively 
to God, exalted be He, for these help greatly in this connection. Should 
the place that is of such a benefit contain the legislator’s home and abode, 
this will also be a reminder of him. Remembrance of him in relation tu 
the above mentioned benefits is next [in importance] only to the remem 
brance of God and the angels. [Now,] the one abode cannot be within the 
proximate reach of the entire community. It therefore becomes fitting to 
prescribe a migration and a journey to it. 

(4) The noblest of these acts of worship, from one point of view, 
should be the one in which [the worshipper] considers himself to be 
addressing God (exalted be He), beseeching Him, drawing close to Him, 
and standing in His presence. This is prayer. [The legislator] should 
therefore prescribe for the worshipper in preparation for prayer those 
[postures] people customarily adopt when they present themselves to 
human kings, such as purification and cleanliness (indeed, he must pre- 
scribe fully in these two things). He should [also] prescribe for [the wor- 
shipper] the behavior one customarily requires of himself when meeting 
kings: reverence, calm, the lowering of the eyes, the contracting of the 
hands and feet, the avoidance of turning around or of restiveness. Like- 
wise, he must prescribe for each time of prayer praiseworthy manners and 
customs. These acts will benefit the common people by way of instilling 
in them? remembrance of God and the resurrection. Because of this, their 
adherence to statutes and the laws will continue. For, if they did not have 
such reminders, they would forget all of this with the passing of a century 
or two. It will be also of a great benefit for them in the afterlife inasmuch 
as their souls will be purified in the manner you have known [in our dis- 
cussion].3 As for the elect, the greatest benefit they derive from these 


things pertains to the afterlife. 





ole isl Sa oll YVA 


ted yds 8 Gel cles pol oye LLG gl ST glee (1) 


Sh ge bly ahh fl Sy cS Jats gl La! lll yall lly. Yasey 
Gary « Ji AB Role UGly «Jus all dolad moll che Ugh OUI pe aly ee 
LIT 1 Oo cg EUG Sel al fhe Sle al cold Co Ugly Gell Yoo wy Y bl 


GUST syle Ad Gh ISL deta ode OUI Ne gs nite gil CP aly Saya Bi yan 
Ay SLE all SN AIG 5) SOM dead 0b oh S35 « Lesl a Sy aid ary 
yi St [460] Pld BEN ge Cd GK SI jae gad voll agllly 
-bytany Berle Al 
VAS s Gayle Le gr doy pe bball da pth pS glo (4) 
Sl ond Dall yo Hay cana op Silay al ley ob clea ls al CLL. 
Aandi (sludQl SEN¢6 Boldl ym Le Deal ly sees SU SIM ye eal pa 
new adel, gl 2 eacly Ble, algal ye glusyl UL eld ae 4, 
Poche Ag eld vas ay dents ENG Soll yeh YS ALE pu Gly cAadl 
P4 WS lec, OAS GLE jody pel pats 9K 
Ce ce Rall Up a, LAN oye Sao pares Leger blsTiaball Bgl yo oy 
CEN) Carmela ‘ ” a oae ‘ ee w 
sek ret Getty Guedly SL od ppd compel (gd alably Ihe all $3 
Mal mantis G8 sl OF GelsBl e+ Olld cae Lyall ISM ede fog Sl 
eden SiS ly de be pgeiil ao Lad Radar dais oball 3 
-slall (3 pal LAV 


\o 


10 


20 


30 


3569 Book Ten, Chapter Three 


(5) We have established the true nature of the afterlife and have 
proved that true happiness in the hereafter is achieved through the soul’s 
purification. The soul’s purification removes it away from the acquisition 
of bodily dispositions opposed to the means for happiness. This purifica- 
tion is realized through moral [states] and positive dispositions. Moral 
states and positive dispositions are acquired by acts whose task is to turn 
the soul away from the body and the senses and to make continuous its 
remembrance of its [true] element.‘ For, if the soul continually returns 
to itself, it will not be affected by the bodily states. What will remind [the 
soul] of this and help it [achieve this state] are certain arduous acts tha 
lie outside natural habit; indeed, they are more on the side of a burdenes 
exertion. These tire the body and overcome the [natural] animal desire 
for rest, for laziness, for the rejection of toil, for the quieting of the hot 
humor, and for the avoidance of all exercise except that which is [con- 
ducive] to the acquisition of objectives pertaining to bestial pleasures. 
The soul attempting these [activities]> must be required to recall God 
(exalted be He), the angels, and the world of felicity whether it desires 
[to do this] or refrains [from it]. Because of this, the soul is instilled with 
the propensity to be repelled from the body and its influences and with the 
positive disposition to control the body. Thus, it will not be affected by it. 
Hence, when the soul encounters bodily acts, these will not produce in it 
the propensity and positive disposition that they would normally produce 
when the soul inclines toward them and submits to them in all respects. 
For this reason, the one who speaks the truth® said, “Surely the good deeds 
drive away the bad deeds” [Qur°an 11:114]. If this act persists in man, 
then he will acquire the positive disposition of turning in the direction of 
truth and away from error. He thus becomes extremely well prepared to 
be delivered unto [true] happiness after separation from the body. 

(6) If these acts were performed by someone who did not believe 
them to be an obligation coming from God, exalted be He, and who, 
despite his believing this, adheres in all his actions to remembering God, 
rejecting [all that is] other than Him, [such an individual] would be wor- 
thy of winning some measure of this virtue. How much more worthy will 
be the one who performs these acts, knowing that the prophet comes 
from God, is sent by God, that his being sent is necessitated by divine 
wisdom, that all that [the prophet] legislates is what is necessitated by 
God for him to legislate,’ that all that he legislates comes from God 
(exalted be He)? For the prophet was obligated by God to impose these 





lett ole v4 


Aj Aaa 5S dialed! gt Ky Sahl otal Je by 3 v3, (0) 
\indy -folendl Gl golall Aidt otigl GLAST ye Laney yutll 35 «ul 
yal SN YL ye Seal 2S oy, SEN, oh, Gel Joon age 
AL rd TG Uy gall gan Ly SHE fay Gably gal ge cll 
Bony ae SU Ale nny US LAS Ley Raul Je ye Jaa ol WGls 
eds Aly ssilly Gall God YR ysl KH I eb cabal sale ge 
AL Geely yall Lb LS], elell ab yy LS, SLM yy Bol! 
AI ALE idl de eying Ragdll lalll 5 [649] VLE! OLST 4 YI 
Med lal yb foal ol elt dole ley KUL, Je alll’ $5] GLI 
IB fase Jae I egal Je LL Sy cal tty gall a ge cles La 
7 Wicline iad 2587 Lads Ly he ed FF Jd Sl Ye oye 
Gt Jal lanela 5 MOL pad OLLI gb 2 abl lll JB Wy deny 
shasta ward jlo, Sule abel Hlige shold Le oli! LAN 
A231 lal ae doled! I alec 
10 SS call sas ye hon Ugh azn aly JeU Yad oI JL oday (1) 
or asic Lyte GS cone oe Lepry alll SK gl Jo KB eh ws elec 
A JLo sby JUS ADL ase gl ST ln y+ aaa la] SSS Laay #5 Le 
a) Le ge Led aay Lee aly caller] AagMl AST b Colyy «She 
AU aes Gp ale 8 IBS JU all ae je as Le ae ly carey Gall os 





So ye 63 ce $3. Sy) 


\o 


ea 


10 


15 


20 


30 


370 Book Ten, Chapter Four 


acts of worshipping Him. The benefit of these acts of worship to the wor- 
shippers consists in their perpetuating through them adherence to the 
law and [to the] religion that are the causes for their existence and in 
[the fact] that, by virtue of the goodness they inspire, [these acts] bring 
[the worshippers] closer to God in the hereafter. 

(7) Moreover, this is the man who is fully [endowed with the ability] 
to govern the affairs of people in accordance with what will set in order 
the means of their livelihood [in this world] and of their well-being in 
their life to come. He is a man distinguished from the rest of mankind 


by his godliness. 


Chapter [Four] 


On establishing the city, the household—that is, marriage — 
and the universal laws pertaining to [these matters] 


(1) The legislator’s first objective in laying down the laws and organ- 
izing the city must be [to divide] it into three [groups]:' administrators, 
artisans, and guardians. He must place at the head of each [group]? a 
leader under whom he will place other leaders, under these yet others, 
and so forth until he arrives at the common run of men. Thus, none in the 
city will remain without a proper function and a specific place; each will 
have his use in the city. Idleness and unemployment must be prohibited. 
[The legislator] must leave the way open to no one for acquiring from 
another that share of a livelihood necessary for man while exempting 
himself from any effort in return. Such people he must vigorously 
restrain. If they do not refrain [from such practice], he must then exile 
them from the land. But should the cause here be some physical malady 
or defect, [the legislator] must set aside a [special] place for them and 
those like them, under someone in charge. 

(2) There must exist in the city a common fund, part of it consisting 
of duties imposed on acquired goods and natural profits, such as fruit 
and agricultural produce; part of it imposed as punishment, while 
another part should consist of properties taken from those who resist the 
law—that is, of war booty. Thus, the fund will serve to meet the exigen- 
cies of the common good, to meet the needs of the guardians who are not 








ett 5 oly yi 


da yilly Read gd as ste, La ula ololall blll YS, lobe ya gl 
pt Asal op sil se pe by pry bel a 

bel ay asd Le he HlW Sigel ats «gill 2 GLAM Nags () 
[£4V] gt GAL flee pace hell pty cpnoles clliany pple 


[els ail] 
}8( 9) 


Siveres| Gully (SI Py Sell sy Ayal ree 


Ge Rall Sy Gell poy 3 GLa Jal neill oS Gls (1) 
SL pee ee FG ip ly fala, Peay «cy yall S291 ole 
GSS rll al Gl ol OL epdah Ley pee GE caigh Lag, 2 
Heol 3 aden apie Joly SS GK yc ayaree pli al pad Jlame jai] dnall 
SU bod Ged Sal oe oY Jere Voly «fae, tle gly 
Faron al woe 52 SB RIS eh pd ables Cae 9 Gy cgi an a 
pd oT yl Ly alld 2 Ctl gh yb 2) gp pal Leia al ab -payl 
ob pile OK ppl aa gK bey 
BE 2 p8 Sole yp dae Ate J nergy Rill BOK GI ey (1) 
OF OS Many gis oy cams cll, OI AIT heal ASI CLM 
Aled Kalsy AS yte chad bre LUD Kay Ladd gry eal jpilabl Sly 


\o 





in 


10 


15 


20 


371 Book Ten, Chapter Four 


employed in a craft, and as expenditure on those prevented by maladies 
and chronic diseases from earning their livelihood. Some people have 
held the opinion that those among them whose recovery is not to be 
expected should be killed. But this is bad; for their sustenance will not 
hurt the city. If, [among] the likes of these people, [an individual] has a 
relative enjoying a superfluity of means, then [the legislator] must impose 
fon the relative] the responsibility [for this individual]. 

(3) All fines must not be imposed on the perpetrator of a crime 
[alone]. Some of these must be imposed on the [criminal’s] protectors 
and relatives who fail to restrain and watch over him. But the fines legis- 
lated [as penalties for these] should be mitigated by allowing delay in 
payment. The same should apply to crimes committed inadvertently. 
These must not be ignored, even though they do occur by mistake. 

(4) Just as idleness must be prohibited, so should professions like 
gambling, whereby properties and utilities are transferred without any 
benefit being rendered in exchange. For the gambler takes without render- 
ing any benefit at all. Rather, what one takes must always be a compensa- 
tion given in return for work—cither a compensation that is substance, a 
compensation that is a utility, a compensation that is good remembrance, 
or any other thing reckoned a human good. Similarly, professions that lead 
to the opposite of welfare and usefulness—such as the learning of theft, 
brigandage, pandering, and the like—must be prohibited. Professions 
that allow people to dispense with learning those crafts pertaining to the 
association—professions such as usury—must be prohibited. For [usury] 
seeks excess profit without practicing a craft to achieve it, even though it 
does render a service in return. Also, [those] acts must be prohibited 
which, even if permitted, would be detrimental to the city’s growth—like 
fornication and sodomy, which dispense with the best foundation on 


which the city stands: that is, marriage. 





pCa rv) 


Ply ASE ey oi Jom Gill he Radiy Reker shat Y ill aah 
phi OB «Td eldy pgs dodo Gy rgb f Bb tbl gy obly, 
A op Wl eb SN een LB ye SEY gS BR (dual nt Y 
[4A]. a\6 ale (2,2 

Wyn, et on ec bebe Cole Ge Gc YelLally (1) 
rebe US ye pe by pers Vy yey, V gull aby LY! be 
Layel Sleal boom 98 « Wad pb ble Lb ulld gy lla ag a ied 
. es Wests @ 

Med gs lela a gl Coy ella pn gh Cow dl LS (€) 
pill GB glad alla, bb OSS ler ne oy all gl LY EI 
Gen telic y Gel AN GS Sl om he AN fates aw ge ge el 
$3 gp ye gl chat ge Logs gl gage ge Loge Ll Loge 9S auth & 
lela pt jl op Sy ty LD! Saogane alt US pb gl c hua 
why Lay Ke pally AB pll lad bo cL jl lL slnel Gl seus 5 
a al aia dal Lal ety old 
pty Bae ely CI Sly cubes Be pb 5 Sky Clb YE SUL LI 
OB fe chal yal ly ade be ae gal ats 4S by oh st SLAY La 
Cal sy Real GEG! Jadl oe eb YN joo gill Lil, 


eo 


10 


20 


30 


372 Book Ten, Chapter Four 


(5) The first of the legislator’s acts must pertain to marriage resulting 
sn issue. He must call and urge [people] to it. For [by marriage] is achieved 
the continuity of the species, the permanence of which is proof of the 
existence of God, exalted be He. He must arrange it fin such a way] that 
matrimony takes place as a manifest affair, so that there will be no 
uncertainties concerning progeny causing defects in property transfer of 
inheritances, which are the sources of wealth. (For wealth is indispensable 
for livelihood. [Now,] wealth divides into sources and derivatives. Sources 
consist of wealth inherited, found, or granted. Of these three sources, 
the best is inherited wealth, for it does not come by way of luck or chance 
but is of an order akin to the natural.) Through this—I mean, the con- 
cealment of marriage—defects in other respects occur. For example, 
[they occur] in the necessity that one party should undertake expenditure 
over the other, in rendering mutual assistance, and other matters that 
will not escape the rational person after reflection. 

(6) [The legislator] must also take firm measures to assure the per- 
manence of the union, so that not every quarrel should result in a sepa- 
ration that disrupts the bond between the children and the parents and 
renews the need of marriage for everyone. In this there are many sorts 
of harm. Also, [such permanence Is needful] because what is most con- 
ducive to the general good is love. Love is achieved only through friend- 
ship, friendship through habit, [and] habit is only produced through long 
association. The assurance with respect to the woman consists in not 
placing in her hands the right to make the separation. For, in reality, she is 
of a feeble intellect and is quick to follow passion and anger. But a way of 
separation must be left open and not all doors closed. To prevent separa- 
tion under all circumstances results in all kinds of harmful consequences. 
Of these is [the fact] that some natures cannot adapt themselves to 
others; the more effort is made in bringing them together, the greater 
the resulting evil [and] aversion—and life is rendered loathsome. [Or, 
again,] someone might get an unequal partner; one who is of bad char- 
acter;? or hateful, repulsive to [one’s] nature. This will induce the other 
partner to desire someone else—for desire is natural—and this, in turn, 
may lead to many harmful consequences. It [also] might so happen that 





lat oly rvy 


‘each LS Jl gsill gill ol abytal om ble (2) 
bP por cly «gli All ageny Jo Ljlés Sl pis elisa GB ale ony 
Stal JEN JSD as pb al By 0 Lb ey ul 
any cual dun JUlly Roald dae we YSU GY Soll pel ge [448] 
Saas SO os oy Lyell poly pry sl bogie gl dary pail ‘es 
Eh NSD pn aby ad ae le fy Slay oe ge pd ab 
«fa, JE an Melb pry tony Soo st hoey o Je Lal - OLS otis 
43,6 lll alt Ia] als by «cand jam tiylary 
S3 Be GY Ge dleghvest 3 lal AI Sigil ay (1) 
SF chrat 208 Sly gelng WU eAlLt Jat 28s 1S gop d £338 
ABN doa lel ST My 65,5 yall or isl als ty Regi Cd} gles) 
Sole, Y} rot Vaolal, cdoldl VY) jot Vaal, GWE Yves Yk, 
WG 45 i ae lad lpr OSV Gh al Ree oy frame SEH lang as 
So 3 I NOS gl oy ailly eagldct Jlaysle «fas dal, LAL 
FERS Bly pos lel ne Vey Fuld oe Vly cl 
FMT LS colle Jam ly, We Lda ye gl ge | JLly spall 3 lage 
ECan AP al ley full caatly gall, pt ly age gat 
ASS MAels lls pad dela Ble os ol captall Ud Gall jue Vy 
Se gIFU ST Legg «LM ye ageey HMB gal Leng Aone Bagel sbeops 2 


\o 





wa 


10 


20 


30 


373 Book Ten, Chapter Four 


the married couple do not cooperate for procreation and that they would 
if exchanged for other partners. Hence, some means for separation is 
necessary. But [the law] must be strict about it. 

(7) The means for separation must not be placed in the hands of the 
less rational of the two—the one more prone to disagreement, confusion, 
and change. Instead, this must be relegated to the judges, who will effect 
the separation when they ascertain the woman’s mistreatment by the 
other partner. In the case of man, an indemnity must be imposed on him 
so that he will approach separation only after ascertainment and after 
he finds it to be the right thing for him in every way. 

(8) Nevertheless, [the legislator] must leave the way open for recon- 
ciliation without [however] eagerly directing toward it, lest this encour- 
age thoughtless action. On the contrary, he must make reconciliation 
more difficult than separation. How excellent was that which the great- 
est of legislators commanded*—that man, after thrice pronouncing the 
formula for divorce, is not to remarry the woman until he brings himself 
to drink a cup unsurpassed in bitterness, which is to first let another man 
marry her by a true marriage and have relations with her [see Qur’an 
9:299-30]. If such a prospect awaits a man, he will not approach separa- 
tion recklessly, unless he has already determined that the separation is to 
be permanent or unless he is of a defective character and takes [perverted] 
pleasure in scandal.° But the likes of these fall outside [the pale of people] 
who deserve the seeking of their welfare. 

(9) Since woman by right must be protected, inasmuch as she can 
share her sexual desire with many; [and since she] is much inclined to 
draw attention to herself and, in addition to that, is easily deceived and 
is less inclined to obey reason; and since sexual relations on her part 
[with many men] cause great disdain and shame, which are well-known 
harms—whereas [sexual relations] on the part of man [with other 
women] only arouse jealousy, which one should ignore as it is nothing but 
obedience to the devil—it is important to legislate that the woman should 
be veiled and secluded from men. Thus, unlike the man, she should not be 
a bread-earner. For this reason, it must be legislated that her needs be 
satisfied by the man upon whom must be imposed her expenses. For this 








rest » old rvy 


Baill J 9S, gl Lad) ond gl Gy ST ery) Yar 3 S Jeatl le LLY 
[40+ ].43 bore SS Sl om Sy chee 

Jer He cbighy Wel, WCE! LaaST, tie jpasetll yal LO (Vv) 
7 We ove te Lye IL Se SAI UL pom het oe B 
ae Vale pa VEAL EOS Bagh db Jett age ye Ly 183 ST gil 
ay Fe Aen ld Lely CO 

pd MAS BRIE dey Chall Sigh pee ull ay (A) 
Leach PLAN b Ladet ye abl aaglall 9 pl eke, ye sell det ol 
Uae 18 le and shy gl ow WRI aed JAY Up cys ylasl Lal a, al 
ley pe 7h Versa dl Che ye FT Joy SE pty cd ee Y 
SY SLU 28 a he pal lL Mae Se ar oy OSL AB pe by 
add \ponsal Romntiy Lely 65,1 [56] sles SK gl ALIN ee 
spd Rahal lb Glindal ye ge lt Aye JUL, 

Lae Lelay «get oS WY chal shall z= ge GW (4) 
ial ba SALEM, Ree Jaa Bly LL SS! AST alld ar Cady « end 
Wan Whe ban Y oll BAL My hyp plall Gay « Leder Lley 
Fo Web 2 We Gee ol GAL «Glatt delb ob calledh b wd 
gh cow as. fe LS Jal 5 itl 9 SY gh aa we asl, 
Or an SI om de SAGE Jol ad et Re BS ol ge 





biecace SE, AS,’ 


\o 


wa 


10 


20 


25 


30 


374 Book Ten, Chapter Five 


the man must be compensated. He must own her, but not she him. Thus, 
she cannot be married to another [at the same time]. But, in the case of 
man, this avenue is not closed to him—though he is forbidden from tak- 
ing a number of wives which he cannot satisfy and support. Hence, the 
compensation consists in his ownership of the woman’s genitalia. By the 
ownership of the genitalia I do not mean sexual intercourse—for the 
[pleasure] of sexual intercourse is common to both, and the woman’s share 
in it is even greater, as is her delight with the pleasure in children—[but] 
by this I mean that no other man can make use of them. 

(10) It must be legislated with respect to the child that both parents 
must undertake his proper upbringing—the woman in her special area, 
the man by provision [of its needs]. Likewise, it must be prescribed that 
the child must serve, obey, respect, and honor his parents. For they are the 
cause of his existence and, in addition, have borne his support—some- 


thing on which we need not enlarge, as it is evident. 


Chapter [Five] 


Concerning the caliph and the imam:' 
the necessity of obeying them; remarks on 
politics, transactions, and morals 


(1) Next, the legislator must impose as a duty obedience to whoso- 
ever succeeds him. [He must also prescribe] that the designation of the 
successor can be made only by himself or by a consensus of those who 
have precedence,? on the condition that [the latter] should verify openly 
to the public that the man of their choice can hold sole political authority; 
that he is of independent judgment; that he is endowed with the noble 
qualities of courage, temperance, and good governance; and that he 
knows the religious law to a degree unsurpassed by anyone else. [This 
verification] must be made in a clear manner, [must be] openly pro- 
claimed, and must find unanimous agreement by the entire public. [The 
legislator] must lay down in the law that, should they disagree and quat- 
rel, succumbing to passion and whim, or should they agree to designate 
someone other than the one possessing virtue and who is deserving, then 
they would have committed an act of unbelief in God. Designation of the 
caliph through appointment by testimony is best; it will not lead to parti- 


sanship, quarrels, and dissensions. 








oles ye OLY ¥VE 
Ly one SS gl W G3 [£09 ] SEY gay (Si ail gay « Lege as 
olay le rleyh as Y one jyle abe pm Gly LIT laa pale prow 0 bol 
cpladl Adal eas 26] uty ells eijh abl sy Sshall pall 9S alge 


«Joe odd lane NG gl op ells 


GL athe gall sacl, IS Aya) Wl gaan C8") 

Lagblley Lager ade jun Ling! alll ISG ARIE III Ly «pete bad 

Bale Y pipe Ma ob NS aay cod gey Ga Lage Lagdlerdy LeayIS], 
Lays) Ley 


[eB ped] 
pes (+) 


SEV DLL SLL SLAY, lypsle omy Ml aah, 3 


Of DEL SY gly aide y Rell SLU oye Gl Comal (9) 
Jone il spb sce ADME Gym cy he Halatl Jal ge plan gl cage 
Cpomeg Hilly Relea t yo Rann tll GME case ole « lial fool aily derlundl 
rel aly Aad ly 
Lynn! gle SMly Sad Wye 5TH sl Lb Nal pl wee ey  aabl eo opedl 
DEM, al |p 5 0 cal SURLY, 43 fail ey yp po [£01] le 
HEY CEL Catt Il so, Yb ob opel all 


\0 


a 


10 


15 


20 


30 


375 Book Ten, Chapter Five 


(2) [The legislator] must then decree in his law that, if someone 
secedes and lays claim to the caliphate by virtue of power or wealth, then 
it becomes the duty of every citizen to fight and kill him. If the citizens 
are capable of so doing but refrain from doing so, then they disobey God 
and commit an act of unbelief. The blood of anyone who can fight but 
refrains becomes free for the spilling after this [fact] is verified in the 
assembly of all. The legislator must lay down the law that, next to belief 
in the prophet, nothing brings one closer to God, exalted be He, than the 
killing of such a usurper. 

(3) If the seceder, however, verifies that the one holding the caliphate 
is not fit for it, that he is afflicted with an imperfection, and that this 
imperfection is not found in the seceder, then it is best that the citizens 
go along with [the latter]. The determining factor here is [superiority 
of] intellect and excellence in political management. The one whose 
attainment in the rest of the virtues is moderate—although he must not 
be ignorant of them, nor act contrary to them—but excels in these two is 
more fit than the one who excels in the other virtues but is not foremost in 
these two. Thus, the one who has more knowledge must join and support 
the one with the better mind of the two And the one with the better 
mind, in turn, must accept the former’s support and seek his advice, as 
was done by ‘Umar and “Ali.* 

(4) He must then prescribe certain acts of worship that can be per- 
formed only in the caliph’s presence, in order to extol his importance and 
make them serve his glorification. These are the congregational affairs, 
such as festivals. He must prescribe such public gatherings, for these 
entail calling people to hold fast to solidarity, to the use of the equipage 
of courage, and to competition, It is by competition that virtues are 
achieved. Through congregations, supplications are answered and bless- 
ings are received in the manner discussed in our statements. 

(5) Likewise, among transactions there must be [those] in which the 


imam participates. These are the transactions that lead to the building of 


the city’s foundations, such as marriage and communal activities. He must 
then prescribe, in the transactions involving exchange, laws that prevent 








leds Be oll vo 


She Tig pas COE ook yp gle 3b Soe gl Carl (v) 
£44 phy Al yd Ob ges ly Iyy8 gb fay AS yall Jal yy WET ed 
ey he NS SM ely he eames gos SR gay ldo 2 oy 0? Srey 
LN Ne SOKL oy lash atl Gls Yi oe ILE all ace ASAT jue GI 

Shy «gate Se ly MY Jal pe BLED ISI gl Gayl ee gh (1) 
ade Jyably Aszall pal aastles gl IY «go sthl oo ape ye pe yall ald 
Sh dn, phe Bo Lang SUN lage GO GS ALY guery «al pla 
Bld Co bake Of gl oc laslacl ll ley lll Uo Lye oY 
Sl Lglisl pig corrals «laglicl bts ol Lage! hd ye dhe gS, 
«eg yah Jade Se Sa] poy As ner 

Gh Whey a bas LY SY yl obslall Ob aya gl cond (6) 
Slee bag] Seb SLE dey Nl ag lly vactes 
cAsleetll s26 Jlacel Sy cAebbh hac! I) wll eles Lb gle code fu 
Japy leat lead clea Uy «plied sus AuoLiLy AnoLL! Jl, 
Lagi op 5,6 A Sed le oS 

ty LY a A Colle Srbball (3 9K gl Com LIS (0) 
AT OGL, SES he cdegall ISG Ll Gil goss AI oe 
Jill Fb Gk Lee UasyIly Vl AL dass otelall 3 Lal 2 ya gl Gee 


\o 


a 


10 


20 


376 Book Ten, Chapter Five 


treachery and injustices. [He must] forbid unsound transactions where 
the objects of exchange change before being actually received or paid—as 
with money-changing, postponement in the payment of debts, and the like, 

(6) He must [also] legislate that people must help protect others, 
their properties and lives—without this entailing, however, that the con- 
tributor should penalize himself as a result of his contribution. 

(7) As for enemies and those who oppose the law, [the legislator] 
must decree waging war against them and destroying them—after calling 
on them to accept the truth—and [decree] that their property and women 
must be declared free for the spoil. For, when such property and women 
are not administered according to the constitution of the virtuous city, they 
will not bring about the good for which property and women are sought. 
Rather, these would contribute to corruption and evil. Since it is necessary 
that some people serve others, such people must be forced to serve the just 
city. The same applies to people that are far removed from acquiring 
virtue. For these are slaves by nature—as, for example, the Turks and the 
Negroes and, in general, all those who do not grow up in the noble climes? 
where the conditions, for the most part, are such that nations of good 
temperament [and] of sound innate intelligence and mind abound. 

(8) If a city other than his has praiseworthy laws, the legislator must 
not interfere with it unless the times are such that they require the dec- 
laration that no law is valid save the revealed law. For, when nations and 
cities go astray and laws are prescribed for them, adherence to the law 
must be assured. If the adherence to the law becomes incumbent, it might 
well be the case that to ensure this adherence requires the acceptance of 
the law by the whole world. If the people of the [other] city that has a 
good way of life find that this [new] law is also good and praiseworthy 
and that the adoption of the new law means restoring the conditions of 
corrupt cities to virtue, and yet [they] proceed to proclaim that this law 
ought not to be accepted and [they] reject as false the legislator’s claim 
that this law has come to all cities, then a great weakness will afflict the 
law. Those opposing it could then use as an argument for their rejecting 
it that the people of that [other] city have rejected it. In this case, these 
latter must also be punished and war [must be] waged on them; but this 
war must not be pursued with the same severity as against the people 











ladll yo lg Yl rv 


or Pll IB ele ee oe Ny ye eb SI blll ape oly Gy, 
AS poy Rovclly [C00] dpa Sol, olay 

ov cmpely vl ABog ge ally lal Byles wlll he cp sy (0) 
AS ods Lab ee ppl ne 

Gh ae Aly og hilee pa Gl ond Raa Gilly elas Ly () 
ipa SS o lal cayels SAI LW gb Te ede) dll an sly gh sl lye. 
Ao deme WME ey lly JUN lle, SI deal dutle (SS 9 doll aya at 
aren oe Stel 3 ol Cond tl gyate ol yy al Bly «pally ol 
pee Aad AS Ge Naam ll» GE Gy LUIS Wolall Ayall Jal Gs Jo 
Sh Day IOV pep YL gall LL, Fly AD fe call ae 
sally GL Sogse Reel dene gl ed Ute gl hel 

eB SN OSI Lapin Re Wy hae pF CISTEL, (A) 
Alb dae ple end obo lal ally AI gb Wj A nb aA Gh pall 
pla he Jae gl ASG Corgl Lad «el Col Bly - Mell 5 gl Ce 
Gilg Vidipaoet Ree asl SL sh oe pall Daal ol gS Bly capel 
Ot ped Read ade gh Cape gb Dall JIanb ga SLelislel boot 3 
cA BS ST MW gall fe W5b ledges (o GLY EIS La Gl Yo 
Saal os Jal pal aa, 3 Lyacon gl cpl 9 Ky Rell be fs ee 
J itlers (99 bralee Sy « lyasleny Lal Yys Oo 3 won ded. lee 


\o 


a 


10 


20 


30 


377 Book Ten, Chapter Five 


utterly in error. Or else an indemnity must be imposed on them in lieu 
of their preference. [In any case,] it must be enunciated as a truth that 
they are negators [of the law]. For, how are they not negators when they 
refuse to accept the divine law which God the Exalted has sent down? If 
they are destroyed, they would have met their [just] deserts. For in their 
death there is the destruction of their individual selves, [but there is 
also] a permanent good, particularly when the new law is more complete 
and better. It should also be legislated, with regard to these, that, if 
clemency on condition that they pay ransom and tax is desired, this 
should be done. In general, he must not place them in the same category 
as the other [nonbelievers]. 

(9) The legislator must also impose punishments, penalties, and pro- 
hibitions to prevent disobedience to the divine Law. For not everyone is 
restrained from violating the law because of what he fears of the after- 
life. Most of these [punishments and prohibitions} must pertain to acts 
contrary to the law that are conducive to the corruption of the city’s 
order—for example, adultery, theft, complicity with the enemies of the 
city, and the like. As for the acts that harm the individual himself, the 
law should contain helpful advice and warning and not go beyond the 
prescription of obligatory duties. The law concerning acts of worship, 
marriage, and prohibitions should be moderate—neither severe nor 
lenient. The legislator must relegate many questions, particularly those 
pertaining to transactions, to the exercise of individual judgment [of the 
jurists]. For, different times call for decisions that cannot be predeter- 
mined. As for the further control of the city—involving knowledge of the 
organization of guardians, income and expenditure, preparation of 
armaments, legal rights, border fortifications, and the like—it must be 
placed in the hands of the ruler in his capacity as caliph. The legislator 
must not impose particular prescriptions concerning these. Such an impo- 
sition would be defective, since [conditions] change with time. Moreover, 
it is impossible to make universal judgments that cover every contingency 
in these matters. He must leave this to the body of councilors. 

(10) It is necessary that the legislator should also prescribe laws regard- 
ing morals and customs that advocate justice, which is the mean. The 
mean in morals and customs is sought in two things. As for the one, 
involving the breaking of the dominance of the powers [of the passions], 
this is for the soul’s purification and for enabling it to acquire the power 
of self-mastery so that it can liberate itself from the body untarnished. 








rest OLY rv 


YAS, sla ofl pale Conaiy Aig snle Se Ral E [yeh gl «dpa Sohal 
Ope Shai 5 Sls all pl Tae tl delb Go Iyalal aby cgllee 99K 
teal EIT SL Le peachy «BL Lady pot Iold 6k 3 38. 
Ha Be forte cll ald Mal ah GB Gey [E08] «aly Alana 
laorly Spm Gye egy ome Vi cep abbyy «Jeb ajo 9 
choy vane 35 Bly aad ely bagarry Ohsee aya jl Coy (4) 
BMLEL JL bulls ST Sigh comy EN poltey Wage glell SK ub 
goby top elacl ilbegey a8 py Ui foe caeyall plas 913 I etal Ae 
Y cyst 43 aK ol coded fated pee eld oo GG GLb as 
Y Bate pty olayblly olalall 9 death 95S Gl Cony obey yall je 
AML 8 be ges SoM yp ST esis gl ony Joli Vy yo oats 
das NS ve Ayal bad Uy Lanes gh GY USI ob Si ob. eM 
lB by ygilly GALI LM Cal slacly cbly Jel aang dead! 35 
Ae Sol eb ay UE pee y bil Yl oS sl ae 
WoW ee OL 25) 8M i es Wc bls kos Sob 
Byp2ll Jal shel Jew gl ond es 
A 5608 be olalally DIEM 8 Lal gee SL GGT ony (1+) 
of Wb Le Ub: eee Slalaly GEV ols aL YL abl gl ge Tall 
OK gly ADV Y! alts old jail 65 Job cceydl ale aS 


\o 


10 


20 


20: 


30 


378 Book Ten, Chapter Five 


The other, involving the use of these powers, is for worldly interests. As 
for the use of pleasures, these serve to conserve the body and [allow] pro- 
creation. As for courage, it is for the city’s survival. The vices of excess 
are to be avoided for the harm they inflict in human interests, while the 
vices of deficiency are to be avoided for the harm they cause the city. By 
“wisdom” as a virtue (which is the third of a triad comprising, in addi- 
tion, temperance and courage) is not meant theoretical wisdom—for the 
mean is not demanded in the latter—but, rather, practical wisdom per- 
taining to worldly actions and behavior. For it is deception to concentrate 
on the knowledge of this wisdom, carefully guarding the ingenious ways 
whereby one can attain through it every benefit and avoid every harm to 
the extent that this would result in bringing upon one’s associates the 
opposite of what one seeks for oneself and result in distracting oneself 
from the attainment of other virtues. To cause the hand to be thus fettered 
to the neck [means] the loss of a man’s soul, his whole life, the instrument 
of his well-being, and his survival up to that moment at which he attains 
perfection [see Qur’an 17:29]. 

(11) Since the motivating powers are three—the appetitive, the iras- 
cible, and the practical—the virtues consist of three things: [(a)] mod- 
eration in such appetites as the pleasures of sex, food, clothing, and 
comfort, [as well as} other pleasures of sense and imagination;® [(b)] 
moderation in all the irascible passions, such as fear, anger, depression, 
pride, rancor, jealousy, and the like; [and (c)] moderations in practical 
matters. At the head of these virtues stand temperance, practical wisdom, 
and courage; their sum is justice, which, however, is extraneous to theo- 
retical virtue. [But] whoever combines theoretical wisdom with justice is 
indeed the happy man. And whoever, in addition to this, wins the prophetic 
qualities becomes almost a human god. Worship of him, after the worship 
of God, exalted be He, becomes almost allowed. He is indeed the world’s 


earthly king and God’s deputy in it. 





rlettl ie oly YVA 


Corea Goill ode Seren je {eo Le Ly [£00] . Ld Lalos Gad > pales 
SM, Ryall Lb de beestl Ly cfotly atl elle tall Jlaadel Ly ayyco 
ASBNy dell Bley) Alay ZIl, ASL chal 3 bey) 22 AL 
SY gle ale SGU Wp ge lb Relegtlly Ail LIE ge ST Lal 
OF Asal Sbpelly A ycatl SLA Ob NAL ASU ul Log ys 
Ula y «lg dy Sy osha aos OB Gell Ue edly Yad (3 gle 
1h ths Dire alley Le aL! J yoy al Ce Aes Foy shall oul 
deLiol yo pall Mader Nl ery dahl go gel glad! GLST ye alts 
Mul dy Shatling Ande ly ope y Aud gluidll ys 

Jae Ne A FLAW’ dyad A eby Alyy elgall gy (19) 
Bead ONLI Gy ODS by Key GH pllly pplally CSM fe Ailygttl UB 
idly RAY, pally Cail, Goble Wola b Lust day aagly 
tony das fladl she weydyy Aytll 3 lengli Lay cls poy edly 
Nye canal iy Aaletl AL all yo Rae sLt pty call Igo gaomey chology 
9 WL Ly pats gh yl Yel LU IS a 5b yey cone a ay esl AS 
Ab all dads y a MI dl gle yay < Je alll ow wale Je gl 





Notes to the English Text 


Translator’s Introduction 


1. The Metaphysics constitutes the fourth “part,” or as Avicenna terms it, 
“grouping,” (jumla) of The Healing. The first jumla consists of the Logic with its 
nine treatises, each referred to as a fann (“topic” or “discipline”); the second 
jumla contains the Physics, with its eight treatises; and the third consists of the 
Mathematics, with its four treatises. Avicenna also refers to the Metaphysics as 
being the thirteenth fann of the theoretical sciences, which are comprised of 
the Physics, Mathematics, and Metaphysics. 

2. Isagoge 1.2. For a translation, with commentary, of the entire chapter, see 
Marmura, “Division of the Sciences.” 

3. It is in this context that the expression al-mawujid bi ma huwa mawjiid, 
as it first appears in Metaphysics 1.1 and 2, is translated as “the existent inas- 
much as it is an existent,” rather than “being qua being.” This is partly because 
of the difficulty of finding in Arabic, lacking as it does the copula “is,” an ade- 
quate equivalent to the term “being.” It is also because of the way Avicenna 
tends to put things in his endeavor to define metaphysics as a theoretical 
science in The Healing. A key to this is found in his opening comments for the 
Isagoge of The Healing, 1.2.12: 


The purpose in philosophy is to know the true nature of all things to the 
extent that man is capable of knowing. Things that exist are either existing 
things whose existence is not by choice and action, or else those things that are 
of our choice and action. Knowledge of things of the first division is called theo- 
retical philosophy, and [knowledge] of things of the second division is called prac- 
tical philosophy. ... 

The things existing in external reality whose existence is not by our choice 
and action divide first into two divisions: one consists of things that are mixed 
with motion; the second, of things that do not mix with motion, for example, 
mind and God... . 


- 381 - 


382 Noles to the Translator’s Introduction 


We note that Avicenna is speaking about either “things” that “exist” duc to 
our own actions, or “things” that are not due to our choice and action. Of the 
latter, he is concerned with “things” that have an extramental existence, 
which divide into “things” that are associated with motion and “things” that 


are not. He thus sums up his position as follows: 


The various kinds of sciences, therefore, treat of cither [(a)] the consideration 
of the existents inasmuch as they are in motion, both in cognitive apprehension 
(lasawwuran) and in subsistence and are related to materials of particular specics; 
{(b)] the consideration of the existents inasmuch as they separate from materials 
of a particular species in cognitive apprehension but not in subsistence; or L(c)]} 
the consideration of existents inasmuch as they are separated from matter in 


subsistence and cognitive apprehension (ibid., 14). 


The concern in metaphysics (so far as expressed in the above passage) is with 
the class of the extramental existing things that are immaterial to begin with— 
such as God and mind—and those that become immaterial abstractions when 
considered in themselves. In the Metaphysics, there is a more explicit broadening 
of the term al-mazjiid where it denotes both the mental and the extramental 
existents. In Metaphysics 1.5 Avicenna also distinguishes between aflirmative 
existence (al-wujiid al-ithbati) and proper existence (al-wujid al-khdss), which he 
identifies with quiddity (al-mahiyya). For the most part in the Metaphysics, Avi- 
cenna is using the term wujad to signify “affirmative existence.” Thus, while 
the translation of the expression al-mawujud bi ma huwa mawjid as “being qua 
being” is certainly not illegitimate, its translation as “the existent inasmuch 
as it is an existent,” or for that matter even “the existent inasmuch as it exists” 
is more in tune with Avicenna’s definition of metaphysics as expressed in the 
Arabic of The Healing—the text with which we are concerned. 

4, For the centrality of the concept of God as final cause in Avicenna, sec 
Wisnovsky, Avicenna’s Metaphysics in Context. 

5. Isagoge, 10. 

6. This is how Dimitri Gutas interprets it. See Gutas, Avic 
Aristotelian Tradition, 52. 

7, Although existence is not an inner constituent of the quiddity, 
speak, it is its necessary concomitant. A quiddity must exist cither in the mind, 
externally, or both in the mind and externally. Nonetheless, considered in itself, 
it excludes the idea of existence. Thus, to use Avicenna’s example, “animality” 
exists, true enough, particularized in an individual animal. Nonetheless, “[it] 
itself with another is still itself,” and, considered in itself, “animality” excludes 
the idea of existence. 

8. This is the essential pattern of Avicenna’s proof from contin 
the existence of God. It has a number of versions in his writings. In the Meta- 
physics the pattern is spread out in various parts and has to be assembled 

this reconstruction and for its a priori character, sce 


enna and the 


so to 


gency for 


and reconstructed. For 


Marmura, “Avicenna’s Proof.” 
9. For all of these translations, sce the bibliography, under Avicenna. 








Notes to Book One, Chapter One 3ES 


Book One, Chapter One 


L Inniyya/anniyya: In one of its meanings, the term refers to the essential 
characteristics of 'a thing that identify it as an individual. (See Goichon, Lexigue 
9-12). In his Tsagoge, 1.5 (page 29), Avicenna speaks of aEtnabia ante “ 
shaksiyya——the individual innipya/anniyya of a thing; and in 1.8 (page 46) it is 
explained as the individual essence, distinct from the quiddity (al-mahiyya) of a 
thing which is shared by many of a kind. Thus, he explains, while mahiyya 
refers to what pertains essentially to the question of “what” (ma) a thing is he 
inniyya/anniyya refers essentially to the question of “which” (ayy) thing it is 
This perhaps is the background of the comment of al-Naraqi (d. 1209/1764) en 
the title above—namely, that the “n” in annipya could be read as a “y” as well 
so that if one were to follow al-Naraqi’s suggestion, the term in the title ould 
in effect, be read as ayyiyya (al-Naraqi, 3). 

The term in Avicenna’s writings often refers also to individual existence— 
hence the distinction between essence and existence is expressed as the dis- 
tinction between al-mahiyya and al-inniyya/anniyya. In certain EaHRERtS it is 
best to translate inniyya/anniyya as “existence,” as in paragraph 10, 

Inniyya derives from the emphatic particle inna, and is probably associated 
with the Aristotelian demonstration of the fact—the burhdn inna/anna in Avi- 
cenna’s logic (as distinct from urhdn lima, the demonstration of the reasoned 
fact—literally the demonstration of the “why”). In Kitab al-alfaz aishiusia nate 
fi al-mantiq (The Utterances Used in Logic), al-Farabi, after discussin the 
emphatic particle inna, states that “sometimes the existence (al-wujiid) of the 
thing is called its inniyya, sometimes the essence [or possibly entity] (dhat) of 
the thing is called inniyya, and sometimes, likewise, the substance (jawhar) of a 
thing is called its inniyya” (page 45). 

Scholarly discussion of this term is extensive. The substantial article by 
d’Alverny, “Anniyya-Anitas,” offers a comprehensive critical review of aa 
interpretations of the term by nineteenth and twentieth century scholars. It 
emphasizes its medieval and renaissance Latin translations. Of special vice 
est is the discussion of the use of the term in chapter 4 of Risdla adhawiyya_fi 
amr al-ma‘ad, Avicenna’s treatise on the hereafter for which d’Alverny a 
fine French translation. penne 

Avicenna’s language in this chapter suggests that the term anniyya derives 
for him (at least in this discussion) from the first personal pronoun and, “I,” in 
the same way the term huwiyya, “haccceity,” derives from the third peteanal 
pronoun, Auwa. 

2. Al-“ilm al-suiriyy wa al-tasdigiyy: Knowledge consisting either of concepts 
or of declarative statements open to assent or denial. bi 

3. Literally, “through things that are not that they are (hiya hiya) in being.” 

4, Ra"y: In the medieval Arabic version of Aristotle’s Metaphysics, ra’ a 
given as the translation of the Greek theoria. ca at 

5. Avicenna makes this distinction between theoretical and practical 
knowledge at the beginning of the Shi/a’, in Isagoge, 1.2 (page 12). . 


384 Notes to Book One, Chapter Two 


6. This division of the sciences is also discussed in Isagoge, 1.2 (page 12). 

7, Avicenna, Demonstration, 2.7 (page 166). 

8. Inniyyat Allah: See n. 1 above. ‘ 

9. Wujiid: The term normally used for “existence. 

10. Here, quewa and fi‘l as metaphysical terms translate normally as 
“potency” or “potentiality” and “act” or “actuality.” (In Avicenna s psychologi- 
cal discussions al-quwwa normally translates as “faculty,” but in certain contexts 
also as “potentiality.”) For Avicenna’s discussion of some aspects of the evolution 
of various meanings of the term quwwa, see 4.2.19. 7 . 

11. Avicenna acknowledges that observation of a constant association of 
events does not lead to affirming a causal connection between the associated 
things. Elsewhere—in Demonstration, 1.9 (pages 9), 96); 3.5 (page 223); of 
(pages 249--50)—he argues that, in addition to what is observed, there is a 
hidden syllogism to the effect that if the observed regularity of the past had 
been coincidental or accidental, it would not have continued always or for the 
most part. 

12. Mashhar (not mashshid, as given in text): That is, belonging to the class 
of generally accepted statements that are not necessarily always true. 


Book One, Chapter Two 


1. That is, from having their existence as their subject. 

9, Avicenna speaks in places of the primary intelligibles as the self-evident 
truths received without mediation from the active intellect. The secondary intel- 
ligibles are those arrived at through syllogistic inferences that presuppose — 
and therefore depend on—the primary. But Avicenna also speaks (in the De 
Interpretatione, for example) of the primary intelligibles as those that are ae 
abstracted from what is perceived by the senses and the secondary intelligibles 
as those that are inferred from them. ee 

3. The subject matter of logic is not the status of quiddities in their oe 
to speak, as existents in the mind, but rather “inasmuch as they are en - 
cates, subjects, universals, particulars, and other things that occur to . er 
meanings” (Avicenna, Isagoge, 1.4 [page 22]). When Avicenna speaks of t he 
having an intellectual existence that is either immaterial or attached to ne 
ter, he is speaking of intelligibles having as their object (a) that which is te : 
;mmaterial—as with God and mind; (b) that which is necessarily mixed with 
a specific kind of matter—as with human beings; or (c) mathematical a 
that in external reality always exist with matter (though not always ek 
specific kind of matter) but which, in the mind, are abstracted from any speci : 
kind of matter. In the case of (b), though we have an intellectual concept 0 
man that includes the concept of matter, this is already simply a concept : 
the mind—an intelligible. As a concept, humanity is attached to a specific a 
of matter; but, as a concept, this matter is now noncorporeal. See Jsagoge, }. 
ae a (plural of “drid): That which occurs to something, but not ae 
essarily in a temporal sense of “occur”; used rather than a ‘rad, the plural o 








Notes to Book One, Chapter Three 385 


‘arad (accident). In certain contexts, however, the term carries with it the idea 
that what occurs to something is an accident—as, for example, when Avicenna, 
in Metaphysics, 3.10, speaks of the relative as an accident. 

2. Inniyyatihi: See 1.1 n. 1 above. 

6. Existence is not a genus and hence, strictly speaking, has no species. 

7. ‘Awarid: Here Avicenna is using the term in the sense of accidents. 

8. A‘rad: Meaning “accidents.” Here Avicenna is using the term in a very gen- 
eral sense that includes ‘awdrid, meaning “the occurrences [a thing undergoes].” 

9. Alternatively, “the whole of existence” or “all of existence.” 

10. That is, principles common to all the paths followed by each. 

Il. Jrada: The term usually means “will” or “volition,” but in this context it 
refers to what is wanted or desired. 


Book One, Chapter Three 


1. Martaba: As the context dictates, this is best translated as “order’—-that 
is, the order in which it is studied or learned, rather than its “level” or “rank.” 

2. Avicenna, Demonstration, 2.1 (pages 117-20). 

3. Reading wad‘an, not wasfan, which means, literally, “by position.” 

4. More literally, “demonstration of the ‘that’” and “demonstration of the 
‘why.’” 

5. Ta‘allug: Meaning “dependency” here, rather than “connectedness” or 
“connection.” 

6. The faculty that, for Avicenna, exists in both animals and humans. In 
animals it is the faculty which enables an animal to discern a notion or mean- 
ing (ma‘nd) in another animal, the usual example being the ewe’s discernment 
of enmity in the wolf. In humans, it is a thinking faculty that operates on the 
particular, concrete level and is strictly incapable of abstract thought—that is, 
abstract thought in the purest sense. There is, however, a measure of abstrac- 
tion undertaken by this faculty—namely, separating some quality from the 
matter in which it inheres and making a judgment that is not sound. For 
example, one might see a yellow substance and judge it to be honey and, 
hence, sweet. It also partially abstracts mathematical quantities or figures. 
Thus, in this instance Avicenna holds that, since number can be found in 
natural things, a “mode of” abstract being can occur to such a faculty. See 
Psychology, 2.2 (pages 52-53); 4.1 (pages 147-48); Isagoge, 1.2 (pages 13-14); 
Proof of Prophecies, 56 ff. See also Black, “Estimation in Avicenna.” 


Book One, Chapter Four 


1. Amkana: A more literal translation as “it is possible,” which loses some- 
thing of the nuance of the use of the term in this context, would be as follows: 
“In the case of [an accident] where it is possible to think it to be a substance 
when it is not, we will demonstrate its accidentality.” 

2. Literally, its “accidentality.” 

3, Al-a‘yan al-juz?iyya: That is, particulars existing outside the mind. 


386 Notes to Book One, Chapter Five 


4, Mufariga li al-a‘ydn: In certain contexts, a‘yan can be translated as 
“existents in the concrete,” as long as this does not convey the idea that these 
are only physical existents. The celestial intellects and souls have such an exis- 
tence. The question Avicenna is raising in the above passage is whether the 
universals are Platonic forms having an existence independent of particulars 
both of the soul and external to the soul. For ‘ayn/a‘ydn, see also Goichon, 
Lexique, 257-58. 

5. Literally, “and what follows their course.” re 

6. Al-huwa huwa: Literally, “the he that is he,” or “the it that is it.” The 
term huwwiyya—haecceity—relates to this expression. 


Book One, Chapter Five 


1. Ma‘ani, the plural of ma‘na (the intentio of the medieval Latin transla- 
tions of Avicenna); Translated as “meaning,” “idea,” “notion,” “signification, 
or “concept,” depending on context. a one 

2. Strictly, “for, just as... ,” complemented by “similarly. .. .” This is avery 
lengthy, involved, complex sentence. A translation that follows the original 
structure would read something like this: “For, just as in the category of 
assent, there are primary principles found to be true in themselves, causing 
[in turn] assent to other propositions—[principles of such a nature that,] if the 
expression designating them does not occur to the mind or is not understood, 
it would be impossible to know whatever is known through them—this, | even 
though the informative act striving to bring them to mind or explain os 
expressions designating them is not engaged in an endeavor to impart know ; 
edge not [already] present in the comprehension of what the speaker intends 
or upholds (something that may occur through things which, in themselves, 
are less evident than the things intended to be made known but which for 
some cause or some expression have become better known); similarly, in con- 
ceptual matters, there are things which are the principles of conception that 
are conceived in themselves.” 

3. Fi bab al-tasdig: The category of declarative statements to which the val- 
ues of truth and falsehood are applicable. 

4. The Muttazilite theologian Abii ‘Ali al-Jubba’i (d. ca. 915) argued that 
we can refer to God as a “thing” because “the thing is that about which infor- 
mation is given.” Al-Ash‘ari, Magalat al-Islamiyyin, 519. = 

5. For Avicenna, existence is a necessary concomitant of “the thing but 1S 
not identical with it. It is a necessary concomitant because it would be meanmg- 
less to use the term “thing” if existence—whether mental or extramental—Is 
not necessarily associated with it. This point becomes central La folie 
when Avicenna rejects the Mu‘tazilite notion that “nonexistence “Is “a thing. 

6. This is the esse proprium of the medieval Latin translations. In this se 
ically significant passage and the discussion that follows, Avicenna cages : 
“proper existence” of something with its quiddity, differentiating it from w - 
he calls “affirmative existence.” Entailed in this is the distinction between qui 
dity and “thatness,” al-mahiyya wa al-inniyya—in effect, essence and existence 








Notes to Book One, Chapter Five 587 


(see 1.1 n. | above). In Isagoge, 1.2 (page 15), he states that quiddities exist cither 
in extcrnal reality or in the mind but that they have a consideration in them- 
selves simply in terms of what they are, where the idea of existence—or, to be 
more precise, of affirmative existence—is excluded. Existence is not included as 
a constituent of quiddity. And in Jsagoge, 1.6 (page 34), he also states that “the 
triangle has as a necessary concomitant that the sum of its three angles should 
equal two right angles, not by reason of the two [kinds] of existence [that is, 
mental and extramental] but [simply] because it is a triangle.” 

7, Al-a‘yan: Sce 1.4 nn. 2 and 3 above. 

8. Avicenna is not contradicting what he said earlier. What he denied at 
that point is not the truth of this statement, but the idea that it constitutes a 
definition of “the thing.” 

9. Avicenna views this as an absurd position since, in his estimation, in 
order to speak meaningfully about nonexistence, one must have a “thingness” 
in mind to which there is reference. This discussion of nonexistence is directed 
at a Mu‘ tazilite view, attributed to al-Shahham (d. ca. 845), that nonexistence 
is “a thing”; see al-Ash‘ari, Magalat, 161, 522-23. For an exposition of this 
Mu‘ tazilite doctrine, see al-Ghazali, Incoherence, 216. 

10. This analysis is closely related to Avicenna’s discussion of relations, 
below (3.10), where the no-longer-cxistent past and the not-yet-existing future 
events can nonetheless have their conceptions existing in the mind. 

Il. Here, Avicenna has as his target another Mu‘tazilite doctrine, the doc- 
trine of “states” (al-ahwal) intended as a solution to the problem of affirming 
God’s eternal attributes without infringing on His utter unity—a doctrine 
associated with the Mu‘ tazilite theologian Abi Hashim al-Jubba’t (d. ca. 933). 
According to this doctrine, when one describes God as a knower, for example, 
what is being affirmed is simply a state that differentiates Him from a non- 
knower, This state can only be understood in terms of the divine essence, but 
it is not a positive attribute, an ontological entity. Accordingly, it would be 
improper to speak of it as either existing or nonexisting. 

12. Avicenna, Syllogism, 16 ff. 

13. There are uncertainties about what Avicenna means in this entire argu- 
ment. Commentators have disagrced in interpreting it. See, for example, 
Muhammad Mahdi Naraqi (d. 1764), Sharh al-ilahiyyat min kitab al-shifa’, 
284-94. The argument and what follows it are directed against the Mu‘ tazilite 
explanation of how bodily resurrection takes place. In the statement in the 
preceding paragraph that “the nonexistent can be brought back into existence 
because it is the first thing about which information is given in terms of exis- 
tence,” Avicenna is in all probability referring to the Mu‘tazilite doctrine that 
nonexistence is a “thing” to which existence occurs as a state and that, as such, 
it is the thing about which information concerning its coming into existence 
after nonexistence is first given. The sentence that comes immediately after 
the one just cited, commencing “This is because . .. ,” at first suggests that it is 
Avicenna who is arguing against the first sentence. But on closer scrutiny this 
seems an unlikely interpretation, and the statement is probably better under- 
stood as a continuation of the Mu‘ tazilite argument that what is resurrected is 


388 Notes to Book One, Chapter Six 


not a replica of what had existed, but an actual return of the very same thing. 
(Avicenna, it should be noted, insists that what is supposed to be returned to 
existence can only be a replica. See Mubdhathat, 1131-32). But the Mutazilite 
position is impossible. It means, in effect, that that which at one stage had no 
relation to existence—whether mental or extramental—becomes an existent. 
Avicenna’s position becomes clearer as he goes on to argue that past events, by 
their very definition of being past events, cannot become present events. 

14. More literally, “as having correspondence with an existent by reason of 
some accident or another.” In AL-Ta ‘ligat, 132, Avicenna refers to the Mu‘ tazilite 
doctrine that time is “nothing but an accident.” 


Book One, Chapter Six 


1. In the case of nonexistence, the cause would be the absence of a cause. 

2. This translation follows the vocalization given in the Cairo edition as 
bu “dun. Reading ba “du, “yet,” is also possible. 

3. Literally, “thing.” 

4. This second alternative is given (at the beginning of paragraph 13 below) 
after a serics of conditionals that form part of the first alternative is given. The 
structure becomes complex, and for the sake of clarity I have altered it. A more 
literal translation would be as follows: “This is because the existence of each 
of the two and its true nature would consist either [(a)] in their being with 
[each] other, whereby the existence of [each] in itself would not be necessary, 
becoming thereby possible and, hence, becoming caused (its cause, as we have 
stated, would [then] not be equivalent {to it] in existence [and] as such, its 
cause would be something else; and, hence, [the existent] and its cause would 
not be the cause of the relation between the two, but [the cause would be] that 
other [existent]); or [(b)] it would not [consist] in so being, in which case...” 

5, Al-wujiid al-khass: Sce 1.5 n. 6 above. 


Book One, Chapter Seven 


1. Alternatively, “in itself” 

2. Huwa al-fardu wa ghayryhu zawjun tarkibiyyun: Literally, “He is the odd, 
and [every] other a composite, even.” In this last sentence, fard and zawj are 
the terms for odd and even numbers, respectively. By using such terms, Avi- 
cenna is emphasizing the singularity and simplicity of the Necessary Existent. 


Book One, Chapter Eight 


1. Avicenna, Demonstration, 2.5 (page 155). 

2. To be in itself a syllogism, as the subsequent discussion indicates, means 
to have premises that are themselves true and, hence, a conclusion that is not 
only valid but also true. 

3. Qiyas bi al-qiysds: This is Avicenna’s peculiar wording and there is uncer- 
tainty as to how it should be translated. What Avicenna is referring to 1s an 
argument that has the form of a syllogism but does not meet the requirement 





Notes to Book Tivo, Chapter One 389 


of a true syllogism, where the premises are themselves true and are better 
known than the conclusion, and where the conclusion is valid. As shown in the 
discussion that follows, this type of argument is used in a debate where the one 
being debated admits the truth of the premises (regardless of whether or not 
they are true) and the conclusion drawn from them. 

4. Literally, “that are in themselves true.” This literal rendition may give 
the impression that Avicenna is speaking only of self-evident truths. This is 
not the intention. Rather, he is speaking of premises that “are themselves 
true,” regardless of whether or not they also happen to be self-evident. 

5. Literally, “if it is admitted.” 

6. Admitted, that is, because they are true. 

7. That is, they are admitted because they are themselves true and are 
“prior” in the epistemological sense of being better known than the conclusion. 

8. That is, as opposed to a universal science. 


Book Two, Chapter One 


1. More literally, “The second is the existent that is not, with this descrip- 
tion, in any other thing.” 

2. Hence, Avicenna does not agrce with the kalam doctrine developed carly 
by the Mu‘tazilites that one accident does not inhere in another. 

3. A more literal translation would be “as a whole.” 

4. Avicenna, Categories, 1.4 (page 28ff.). 


Book Two, Chapter Two 


1. Avicenna, Physics, 3.3 (page 184 ff.). For a discussion of Avicenna’s cri- 
tique of atomism, see Marmura, “Avicenna and the Kalam,” 183-94. 

2. Rasm: “Description,” giving the properties of a thing but not, as with 
“definition” (hdadd), its essential nature. See 3.5 n. 2 below. 

3. More literally, “receptive of what we have said [with respect] to hypothe- 
sizing the three dimensions.” 

4. Avicenna, Categories, 3.4 (page 113ff.). 

5. Avicenna is referring here to the atomism of Democritus and his school. 
In Physics, 3.4 (pages 184-85, 186-87), Avicenna points out that Democritus 
and his school, unlike other atomists (those in Islam, for example) who insist 
that an atom by itself is not a body but a constituent thereof, regard the indi- 
vidual atom (which differs in shape from other atoms) as a body. Avicenna 
criticizes and rejects both atomic theories. 

6. Tawahumman (an adverbial form of the verb tawahhama): In Avicenna’s 
technical terminology, this means “to exercise the faculty of estimation”; but 
sometimes it is used less technically to mean, in an ordinary sense, “to imagine.” 
The usage here is in the technical sense and refers to the estimative faculty. 

7. Juz’: “Part”—meaning “the indivisible part” or “the atom,” as distinct 
from gism, meaning “a part [of something].” 

8. Reading fa kullu ittisali bu ‘din, not as vocalized in the Cairo text: fa kullu 
ittisalin bu“dun (every connection is a dimension). 


390 Notes to Book Two, Chapter Three 


9. Avicenna, Categories, 3.4 (page 114 ff.). 

10. Reading fa gad hasala ba‘da akhara, not fa gad hasala bu“dun akharu. 

11. Avicenna, Demonstration, 1.10 (pages 99-105). 

12. Here tawahammnd seems to be used in a general, ordinary sense. See 


n. 6 of this chapter, above. 


Book Two, Chapter Three 


l. That is, prime matter, which for the Aristotelians underlies all material 
things and is known through abstraction but which has no existence by itself 
without form. = 

2. Wujud khass: This is not to be confused with proper existence, which is 
identical with quiddity (see 1.5 n. 5 above). oo 

3. Wujiduhu: The masculine pronoun Au refers to the masculine jawhar 
(substance) in the sentence immediately preceding. 


Book Two, Chapter Four 


|. What follows is a refutation of the second alternative—namely, that “the 
connection between the two is between two things equal in existence.” What is 
denied is that they are the simultancous effects, “equal in existence,” of one 
cause—not that they are both caused by a third thing. But, as the argument 
proceeds, the third thing—the cause of both—causes one directly and causes 
the other through the mediation of the first, so that the two are not “equal in 
existence,” but one is the proximate cause of the other. Avicenna’s language 
could have been clearer, but the argument is not impossible to follow. 

2. See, for example, Demonstration, 1.7 (pages 79-80), where the example 
of two effects of the same cause is given and where, in effect, the denial of one 
effect means the denial of the other. 

3. Implicit here is the idea that the removal of this third thing would in 
turn necessitate the removal of the second. This point becomes explicit as this 
alternative is discussed. 

4, What is denied here is not that their removal is caused by the removal of 
the third thing, which is their cause; what is denied is that their removal follows 
simultaneously from the removal of the cause, not sequentially. (It should be 
emphasized that the sequence here is not temporal but in the order of existence.) 
Thus, A causes both B and C, but A causes C through the mediation of B. TfA is 
removed, then B is also removed; and the removal of B causes the removal of C. 

5. The alternative is false only as explained in the note above. _ 

6. Origination for Avicenna is not ex nihilo but presupposes a preexisting 
substratum. 

7. More literally, “in setting up this matter.” - 

8. Jawhar: Normally rendered as “substance,” but “essence” is more appro- 
priate here. ; F 

9, Reading the verbs vocalized as yulhiquhd (not yalhagaha) and Sus 
(not _yalzamaha), the feminine possessive pronoun Ad referring to the feminine 
noun a‘rad, “accidents.” 





Notes to Book Three, Chapter One 59] 


Book Three, Chapter One 


1, Discussed in both the Isagoge and the Categories of Avicenna. 

2. The term “arid in this context carries with it the connotation that what 
is occurring is an accident. The relative, as discussed by Avicenna in chapter 10 
of this book, is an accident. 

3. Fil: An “act” or “action,” which can mean either the agent’s activity, the 
object, or the action received. Here, the opponent is using it in the sense of the 
reception of action. Avicenna concedes this meaning for the sake of argument 
but argues that it does not make any difference to the point he is making. The 
text has no vowels, and the Arabic for “act” can be read as fal where it refers 
to what is performed, its nuance hence being toward the action received. It is 
doubtful that Avicenna intended it as fa‘l. The ambiguity is essential to the 
brief discussion above. 

4. Al-kumin: The doctrine in medieval Islam associated with the Mu‘ tazilite 
theologian al-Nazzam (d. ca. 840), according to which God creates latent prop- 
erties in things that manifest themselves thereafter without the necessity of 
further divine intervention. 

5. Avicenna does not identify this group. In Physics, 3.3 (page 184), he speaks 
of those atomists who regard the atom as an indivisible line, a doctrine attrib- 
uted to Plato. See Furley, Tivo Studies, 104-8. Whether or not Avicenna identifies 
those who hold the atom to be the indivisible line with those who hold it to be 
the point is not clear. 

6. Literally, “in that thing.” 


Book Three, Chapter Two 


1. Bi al-tashkik: This is not the use of one word that has different meanings 
(as in, for example, ‘ayn meaning both “a spring of water” and “an eye”). 
Rather, it is a word that has the same meaning but diflers in priority and pos- 
teriority, as explained more fully above—in Physics, 1.2 (page 96), for example— 
but also in its essential and accidental usage, as seen from what follows in 
the next paragraph. 

2. Al-bab al-awwal: “The first topic,” “the first section,” “the first chapter.” 
The reference here is not entirely clear; it is doubtful that it means the first 
chapter of book 3, since there is nothing in it to indicate this. The ba may simply 
mean the topics or classifications that Avicenna had just discussed. If so, the 
first of these would be the gencric one, where the division he seems to have in 
mind—and this is not certain—is that of the remote genus that has a parallel 
with the remote species, although they differ. In Jsagoge, 1.12 (page 70), he writes: 


Know that things that in nature are the gencra of genera are more than one and 
finite, as will bccome clear to you, but in themselves are infinite in potency. As 
for the things that are the species of species, those that are retained in nature 
are finite, but in themselves are infinite in potency. For the species of the specics 
of many categories (to which you will be coming later on) are infinite, as in the 
case of the specics of the species of quantity, quality, position, and others. As for 


392 Notes to Book Three, Chapter Three 


individuals, these are finite with respect to generation, priority, and posteriority. 

But the sensible among them that are restricted within a limited time are nec- 

essarily finite. 

3. In this section Avicenna is referring to the particulars in the celestial 
realm, where each particular is the only member of its species. See Demonstra- 
tion, 2.4 (page 144 ff.); Metaphysics, 5.1; but especially Metaphysics, 8.6, where 
Avicenna discusses the question of God’s knowledge of particulars and argues, 
in effect, that the celestial entities, inasmuch as each represents the sole mem- 
ber of its species, are in a sense known individually by God. This knowledge, 
however, is not extended to the particulars in the terrestrial world for the very 
reason that each species in this realm has many instances. In the terrestrial 
realm, according to Avicenna, God knows the species—the universal—but not 
its individual instances. 

4. The text gives infirdj ‘ald zawiya, but the ‘ald suggests that the expression 
could read in “tra ‘ald, “swerving onto an angle.” In either case, what is intended 
is a uniform spherical body, a polygon, or a surface that is not serrated. 

5. Al-kathriyya: Strictly, “being multiplicity.” 

6. Literally, “the nature to which unity occurred.” 

7. Mundsaba. 

8. Idha. 


Book Three, Chapter Three 


1. Badiyyan: “Initially,” “to begin with,” not as a result of sense perception 
or the requirement of a prior intellectual principle—though, as the text gocs 
on to indicate, a prior imaginative principle may possibly be needed. 

2. See the opening section of Metaphysics, 1.5 above. There, oneness 1s not 
included as an example of primary concepts, but it is affirmed as such in this 
chapter. 

3. Literally, “Our making known.” 

4. Tanbihan: For Avicenna, we may know things and yet not be aware that 
we know them. An act of “alerting,” of “directing attention,” of “awakening 
makes us conscious of this knowledge. For a discussion of this aspect of Ave 
cennan epistemology, see Marmura, “Avicenna’s ‘Flying Man’ in Context. 

93. In other words, we do have the concept of unity as an intelligible in the 
mind, but we do not conceive its presence there. The act of defining oneness in 
terms of multiplicity—an act of the imagination that has no rational vanity 
serves to alert us that oneness already exists as an intelligible in our minds, 
“as one of the first principles of conception.” 4 

6. Alternatively, “in [terms of] themselves,” or “in themselves. 

7. This is the case because accidents can only exist inhering in substance. 

8. What Avicenna seems to be saying here is that unity would be, by 
definition, that which is indivisible, and not simply something that does not 
divide. Indivisibility, in other words, would not be merely a necessary concom- 
tant of unity, but its essential defining characteristic. os 

9. Literally, “the reality of unity is an accidental meaning. 








Notes to Book Three, Chapter Four 39S 


Book Three, Chapter Four 


1. Magadir: Determined, measured quantities; sometimes, “amounts.” 

2. See, for example, Categories, 3.4 (page 112ff.). What Avicenna means by 
“body in the sense of form” is body in its general definition as that which is 
receptive of the three dimensions, without reference to any particular body. 
Ibid. (page 113, lines 9-11). 

3. In Metaphysics, 2.3-4 above. 

4. That is, not even in the estimation. 

5. That is, the surveying never terminating. 

6. What Avicenna seems to be saying is that it is a relation by virtue of its 
being measure—a relation, however, in the absolute sense of the term: that is, 
of being related to something, but not in the restricted sense of relation as a 
category. Put in another way, measure falls within the category of quantity and 
not the category of relation, although, as measure, it is also always a relation. 

7. Categories, 4.3 (page 143 ff). 

8. That is, in the sense of being a relation. 

9. Dhdt: In this instance, “entity” rather than “essence.” In Physics, 2.5 
(page 200, lines 10-11), arguing against the atomists, Avicenna states, “We do 
not concede to them that the accident is of a real nature (min hagigatihi), that 
it should have an entity (dhat) equivalent to the entity of the receptacle, spread 
in it, coinciding with it (mufdbiga lahu).” The language here is spatial. 

10. It appears in various places and contexts, often in passing, usually when 
accidents or composite corporeal substances are discussed. See, for example, 
Physics, 1.6 (pages 34, 37, 50), and n. 9 of this chapter, above. 

Il. Al-migdariyya: Literally, “measureness.” 

12. See above, 1.5.24—25. 

13. Tawahhuman. The reference is to the estimative faculty, not the imagi- 
native faculty, 

I4. The fourth being time. 

15. More literally: “For we mean, by the equality and inequality that make 
measure known, this meaning.” 


Book Three, Chapter Five 


1. Awa@’il. One of the concerns of this chapter is the question of what con- 
stitutes the first number: the one or the two. 

2. Rusiim, plural of rasm: “Discourse composed from a thing’s genus and its 
necessary concomitants,” as Avicenna defines it. (See Goichon, Lexique, 143.) 
Although rasm can identify a thing, it is distinct from definition. Thus, “Man is a 
rational animal” is a statement of definition; “Man isa featherless biped” is a rasm. 

3. Wahda: In this context, “oneness” rather than “unity.” 

4. That is, the smallest collection of indivisible odd ones. 

9. The Cairo text has na ‘udduhd, meaning “we enumerate it,” corrected as 

ja‘udduhd. The argument above is that, since the smallest of ones is three, the 
ones cannot be used to enumerate the two. 

6. Literally, “the utmost.” 


394 Notes to Book Three, Chapter Six 


Book Three, Chapter Six 


1. Categories, 2.7 (page 241 ff.). The four kinds of opposition, as mentioned 
on pages 242—43, consist of contradiction (horse and not-horse), negation (Ais 
a horse and A is not a horse), contraries (such as odd and even, blindness and 
sight), and those in the category of relation (fatherhood and sonship). is 

9. More literally, “annuls [the fact] that this unity would come about by it. 

3. Min sha?nihi: Meaning “whose affair,” “whose function,” “whose task,” 
or sometimes, perhaps, “that in whose nature it is to be,” or, in certain contexts, 
“that which has the prerogative of.” A more literal translation in this instance 
would be something like “whose affair/function/task pertains.” 

4. Again, min sha’nihi. See n. 3 immediately above. ; 

5, Malaka: In psychology, habitus, when referring to a certain level or levels 
of being a potential intellect; perhaps best rendered as a “positive disposition. 

6. Again, min sha°nihi. See n. 3 of this chapter, above. ; = 

7. Yaktin: Here Avicenna uses “to be,” rather than the stronger “to exist 
(vtjad). | a 

8. Fa yakiinu innma yu‘galu: In the translation, the fa yakiunu is taken to 
refer to that “whose ‘role’ is to be.” Alternatively, it could refer to privation, in 
which case the sense would be that privation would not be apprehended in 
itself but “in terms of [what has] possession’—that is, privation would be 
apprehended only as the negation of its opposite. 

9. More literally, “to render possession [itself] to be unity and to render 
plurality [itself] to be privation.” 

10. The reference seems to be to what has been just discussed —namely, 
the contradiction in regarding the opposition of the one and the many as an 
opposition of possession and privation. A more literal translation of the sentence 
above would be as follows: “There would then occur, by way of the impossible, 
what would occur in [the manner] we have said [it would occur] ” 

IL. See, for example, Categories, 4.3 (pages 145-46). The quiddity of the 
roof, for example, is not predicated with respect to the wall, even though the 
roof exists by reason of the wall. Roof and wall, however, can have the relation 
of being predicated with respect to each other. This can be as a nisba, a one- 
sided relation, the roof having the relation of resting upon the wall; but a 
roofless wall may not be related in any way to a roof. However, the wall can 
have the relation of being rested upon, so that roof and wall are related, one 
having the relation of resting upon, the other of being rested upon. But, while 
this is the case, this relationship is not the defining characteristic of either. 

12. Bi al-wad‘: The reference here is to some standard unit of measure 
agreed on for practical purposes. — ea sicatan Saal 

13. Qariba ila al-wujiid: What Avicenna secms to have in mind is the defin ; 
tion of the heavenly circular motion as being a continual process of change 
toward actuality-—that is, the process of actualization that is never fulfilled as 
a “stable” actuality, so to speak—such that it is, in this sense, forever close to 
“stable” existence, renewal, and division. 

14. That is, the one conventionally set down; see n. 12 of this chapter, above. 





Notes to Book Three, Chapter Seven 395 


15. See al-Farabi, Kitab al-misiga al-kabir (The great book on music), 260. 
I owe this reference to Dr. George D. Sawa. 

16. Literally, “it is possible that the other... .” 

17. Yakilu kulla shay’in: With the verb in the active, this is clearly a variant 
expression of the dictum “Man is the measure of all things,” associated with 
Protagoras, who seems to be the individual to whom Avicenna is referring. 

18. Mudayifan: “Being related”; not mudafan, which would translate as 
“related.” 

19. Categories, 4.2 (pages 134-43). The main theme of this discussion is that 
measure as such has no contrary. In the case of the relations “greater” and 
“smaller,” a part in cach of the related things must equal a part in the other. 
Without this, one would not be greater or lesser than the other—there could 
be no inequality. Avicenna does not agree, therefore, with those who maintain 
that “it is not necessary that there should be an existing equal between them.” 

20. Reading wa ashya’a, as given by a number of manuscripts, not bi ashya"a, 
as given in the body of the text, where the entire sentence would translate: 
“Its privation in the point, unity, color, and mind is not [a privation] in things 
that have no measurement, but in things that have measurement and quantity.” 
The syntactical structure of this version is laysa... bi ashya’a. 


Book Three, Chapter Seven 


l. More literally, “no doubt about their existence takes place.” 

2. The intricate and lengthy argument that follows has the following form: 
If (A) qualities are substances, then they would have to be either (B) bodies or 
(C) not bodies. It is taken as true that they are not (B) bodies. Avicenna finds 
that there is no need to argue this point. Then, through a series of disjunctive 
proofs (embodying other forms of argument), he argues that C is false. Hence, 
if A, then neither B nor C. A is therefore false. 

3. The preceding verb, yantagil, is in the masculine. Its subject is a singular 
masculine, the hypothesized jawhar of the arguments. 

4. Bi ingilab ‘aynihi: That is, a change in its concrete existence—its exis- 
tence outside the mind—from what it is to something else. 

9. Sihhat wujidihi: Literally, “the correctness/soundness of its existence.” 


6. This is included in Avicenna’s refutation of transmigration. See Psychology, 
5.4 (pages 202-7). 


Book Three, Chapter Eight 


1. Literally, “there is in it a seeming difficulty.” Shubha—literally, “doubt” 
or “suspicion”—has different nuances in different contexts and can translate, 
for example, as “ambiguity” and “sophism.” The general idea is that it is a 
difficulty that can be resolved. 

2. Fi al-ayan: Sometimes translated as “concrete existence,” meaning an 
existence outside the mind and independent of it but not necessarily a physical 
existence. The celestial souls and intellects have such an independent existence, 


396 Notes to Book Three, Chapter Nine 


and so does the human mind itself, as will be seen in the third paragraph below. 
See also 1.4 nn. 3 and 4 above. 

3. Fa al-‘agl aydan min al-a‘yan: See n. 2 immediately above. 

4. That is, if motion is a quiddity that is the perfection of what is potential 
in every place wherein it is found, but it is subsequently found in the soul with- 
out this characteristic, then the reality or true nature of this quiddity would be 
different in these two places. This, however, is not the case, because it is not the 
perfection of what is potential in every place wherein it is found, as is illustrated 
by the example of the magnet that follows. 

5. Fial-a‘yan: Al-a‘yan, in the plural, affects the grammar of the sentence. 
A possible translation of al-a‘yan here would be “in external things,” in which 
case a more literal translation would be as follows: “it would exist in external 
things at one time [as] an accident and at one time [as] a substance, whereby 
in external things it would need some subject and in them (fiha) not need a 
subject at all.” 

6. The feminine ending in bid refers to dhatahd, the essence of the sepa- 
rate celestial entity. 

7. Psychology, 2.2 (pages 50-52) and 5.5 (pages 209-10). 

8. Metaphysics, 5.1 and 5.2. 

9, That is, the separate celestial intelligences. 

10. La dhawataha: Alternatively, “not their entities”; preferable to “not their 
essences,” which is also possible. 

ll. Metaphysics, 7.2 and 7.3. 

12. That is, even if one supposes for the sake of argument that there are 
separable Platonic forms and separable mathematical entities. 

13. That is, the cognitions that we have of the separable celestial principles. 


Book Three, Chapter Nine 


l. The chapter embodies a critique of atomism and complements Avi- 
cenna’s critique of atomism in Physics, 3.3-5. For a discussion of some aspects 
of Avicenna’s criticism of atomism in both the Physics and in this chapter of 
the Metaphysics, see Marmura, “Avicenna and the Kalam,” especially pages 
183-94, for the discussion of atomism. 

9, Muta‘alliga: This may also translate as “connected” or “related,” but the 
connection or relation here is that of dependence. 

3. In addition to the reason that immediately follows for the geometer’s 
inability to demonstrate their existence, there also seems to be the implicit 
notion that demonstrating their existence is not the task of the geometer, but 
of the philosopher, either in physics or (as in this case) in metaphysics. 

4. Literally, “its existence would be true,” or “its existence would be correct.” 
The point here is that the existence of the circle is a necessary condition for the 
existence of the triangle. ; 

5. Literally, “if the circle is correct” or “if the circle is true.” Avicenna 1s 
here speaking of the existence of circles in the physical world. Very much the 
Aristotelian in his philosophy of mathematics, he rejects any idea of Platonic 








Notes to Book Three, Chapter Nine 397 


mathematical entities. (See Avicenna’s criticism of Platonism in Metaphysics, 
72-3). The geometer’s circle is a partial abstraction by the estimative faculty 
of circles that exist in sensible matter. This need not exclude the existence of 
“perfect” circles in material things, a notion rejected by the atomists. Sec 
Avicenna’s Isagoge, 1.2 (pages 12-13); and Marmura, “Avicenna on the Division 
of the Sciences,” 239-5]. 

6. Literally, “the existence of his indivisible part.” 

7. Literally, “to complete.” 

; 8. Avicenna is arguing in terms of the atomists’ premise that the circum- 
ference of the sensible circle (which is not in reality a true circle) consists of 
indivisible parts where, unlike the Aristotelian circle, the circumference is not 
infinitely divisible (in potentiality). Hence, in principle, the operation can be 
repeated with each and every part. 

9. Literally, “those parts”—that is, if I read Avicenna aright, those that 
form the circumference of the circle. 

10. Literally, “from all”; the “all” (in the feminine) must refer to the indi- 
visible parts, not the surface (in the masculine), the intention being, as I read 
Avicenna, “from any,” as I have it in the translation. But the wording leaves 
much to be desired. This whole passage suffers from ambiguity. 

ll. The assumption is that the notches are always subject to being filled. 
According to Avicenna, as will be seen shortly, if one accepts the vacuum of the 
atomists for the sake of argument and hence accepts the existence of empty 
space between atoms, this space can always be filled. 

12. As Tread this, it is in principle divisible, even if, due to physical circum- 
stances (such as its being too hard, or for lack of sufficient force), one is unable 
to divide it. 

13. Literally, “shortest.” 

14. Al-ganiin: “The canon,” “the law,” “the rule.” 

15. See 2.2 n. 5 and 3.9 n. 5 above. This faculty is a thinking faculty that 
operates and judges in terms of the particulars of sense but is bound to err 
when it makes particular judgments on purely abstract and universal matters 
rather than particular ones. It is, however, capable of a measure of abstraction, 
of “partial” abstraction. It is this faculty, for example, that “strips” within the 
mind the circle found in a particular, designated matter from that particular 
matter, forming a concept applicable to circles found in any other kind of matter. 

16. The dihi in the masculine has to refer to the rule, or canon—that is 
the canon of the atomists. Avicenna seems to be reiterating what he had Guia 
earlier (paragraph 5 above)—namely, that, regarding the atomist who denies 
the existence of the real circle, “it would be possible to prove against him the 
existence of the circle from his [own] principles.” Two manuscripts read bihd. 
in the feminine, where the reference would be to the canon of those whe 
uphold the existence of the circle. 

17. That is, the side of the triangle within the circle with the diameter as 
the base. 

18. More literally, “and every line composed of indivisible parts shares what 
is common to every line.” 


0 « 99 66 


398 Notes to Book Three, Chapter Ten 


3] 


19. Literally, “its cut by the straight is the circle,” or “cutting it by the 


straight is the circle.” 

20. That is, the movement of the line or body hinged at one end to the end 
of another line or body so as to become cither contiguous with the latter, par- 
allel to it, or situated in its position. 

21. That is, in terms of contiguity, parallelism, or occupation of the same 
position. 

99, Avicenna refers to those atomists who, in observing the rotating motion 
of a circular device like the millstone, explained what they considered to be the 
paradox of the difference in speed between a part close to the circumference 
and one close to the center by maintaining that the slower, more central parts 
have more “rests” than the parts closer to the circumference. Hence, there is a 
“loosening” of the indivisible parts from cach other to allow some parts to have 
more rests. Avicenna discusses this in Physics, 3.3 (pages 187-88). 

23. Mcaning the argument in paragraph 14 above, where the point is made 
that “it is evident” that there is a natural simple body—namely, the sphere, 
which represents a spatial continuum—that does not allow discrete indivisible 
parts within it. 

94, That is, every point above the point in contact with the surface on 
which the erect body rests. 

25. Avicenna is speaking of the inclination of the top-heavy erect body, in 
which each point would follow a (circular) path where each point traversed 
would be equidistant from the hypothesized center. 

26. This is because, in the hypothetical case of the top-heavy body on the 
surface, the point at the surface is not fixed, so that the weight at the top, in 
inclining to follow a curved course, would neither bend it nor break it but 
would cause it to move upward, in the opposite direction from the path the 
heavier part would take. 

97, That is, if the end of the lower, lighter part of the body is fixed, the rota- 
tion caused by removing the support that kept the body erect and steady on the 
surface exhibits the existence of the circle more clearly (see alternative (a), 
paragraph 18 above). The fixed point would represent the center of the circular 
motion, and the erect body rotating to form the circle would represent a radius. 


Book Three, Chapter Ten 


1. The use of the terms “the relative” and “relation” sometimes overlaps. 
Avicenna refers to a distinction between the two in his Categories, 4.3 (page 
144): “It is easier for the mind to know relatives (al-muda@fat) than to know pure 
relations (al-idafat) that constitute the category.” The distinction which becomes 
apparent in the discussion that follows parallels that of ordinary English— 
namely, the distinction between a related thing, like “brother,” and the relation 
itself, “brotherhood.” sas 

9. Avicenna’s extensive discussion of the relative in the Logic of the Shifa 
(Categories, 4.3—-5), to a large extent an expansion on Aristotle’s treatment in his 
Categories, overlaps with the metaphysical discussions above. But the intention 














Notes to Book Three, Chapter Ten 399 


is different. Thus, as Avicenna puts it (Categories, 4.3 [page 143]), “It is not for 
the logician to prove the existence of the relative and explain its state in exis- 
tence and conception. Whoever undertakes this, undertakes, inasmuch as he is 
a logician, that which is of no concern of his and which is not his special task.” 
The primary concern in the Categories is linguistic and logical; in the Meta- 
physics, it is ontological. For a discussion of this and other matters, see an carlier 
version of the translation of this chapter with commentary and notes: Marmura, 
“Avicenna’s Chapter ‘On the Relative,” 

3. The reference is to existence. 

4. Hay’a: Translated here in its most general meaning as “state,” the term 
also translates as “gestalt,” “shape,” “appearance,” “configuration, 
“form,” or “disposition,” depending on context. 

5. Mungdsan ila al-akhar: “Compared with the other” is a more literal trans- 
lation, but such a phrase is not applicable to all relations. Mungdas can also 
mean “to be measured”—again, not applicable to all relations. 

6. See n. 4 of this chapter, above. 

7. See Aristotle, Metaphysics, 5.15.1021°30 ff. 

8. More literally, “considerations.” 

9. Bi al-giyds ila al-akhar: Alternatively, “with reference to the other.” To 
translate giyds in this context (and, subsequently, in the absolute definition of 
the relative in paragraph 15) as “comparison” (see n. 5 above) can be mislead- 
ing. Throughout this chapter, I have adopted the phrase “with respect” as the 
translation of 67 al-giyds or its derivatives. 

10. Literally, “that differ in relation.” Avicenna is speaking about nonsym- 
metrical relations. 

Hl. Alternatively, “extramentally.” 

12. This relates to Avicenna’s discussion of the three modes of existence of 
quiddities in Isagoge, 1.2 (page 15), where he writes: “The quiddities of things 
may exist in the real instances of things or in conception. They will thus have 
three aspects: [(a)] a consideration of the quiddity inasmuch as it is that quid- 
dity, without being related to either of the two [kinds] of existence, and what 
attaches to it inasmuch as it is such; [(b)] a consideration thereof inasmuch as 
it is in external reality, where there will then attach to it accidents proper to 
this existence it has; [(c)] a consideration thereof inasmuch as it is in concep- 
tion, where there will then attach to it accidents proper to its existence—for 
example, being a subject, predication, universality and particularity in predi- 
cation, essentiality and accidentalness in predication, and other things you will 
learn [in this book].” 

13. The point of the argument is that, regardless of which of the three 
alternatives is true, the positing of relations as existing in the concrete would 
still lead to the infinite regress of such relations. 

14. See 3.8 n. | above. 

15. In Categories, 4.3 (page 144), Avicenna writes: “Things belonging to the 
relative are those whose quiddities are predicated with respect to other 
[things], either absolutely or through some other mode of connection (nisba).” 
Those predicated absolutely, he explains, are those whose names denote their 


29 66 


structure,” 


400 Notes to Book Four, Chapter One 


full meaning—as, for example, “brother.” Those predicated through some other 
mode of relation are terms which in themselves are not relatives but become 
relatives through a linguistic connection. For example, power and knowledge 
are in themselves qualities, not relations, but become relations when attributed 
(through the use of a particle) to one who has power or knowledge. 

16. If A is a relative with respect to another, B, then B is a relative with 
respect to A, which is other than it. 

17. Alternatively, “for its essence.” 

18. Proper existence as distinct from affirmative existence, which is identi- 
cal with the quiddity considered as such, in abstraction. See 1.4 n. 4 above. The 
meaning of this sentence is not too clear. The paragraph that follows, however, 
indicates that when Avicenna speaks of “existence when it is intellectually 
apprehended,” he is speaking of the mind’s apprehension of what presently 
exists. It also indicates that “the intelligible that does not derive from proper 
existence” means, in part (but only in part), that which at the present has no 
“instantiation” in extramental existence—for example, the quiddity “the resur- 
rection.” A variant reading, given by three manuscripts, reads laysa ma ‘khiidhan 
min al-wujid al-hadir (does not derive from existence that is present). The 
reading al-wujud al-khass, given by most manuscripts and adopted in this edi- 
tion, should, however, stand. Accordingly, the point Avicenna wishes to make is 
that the relation is not between the concept of what presently exists and the 
abstract quiddity of proper existence (that is, the quiddity considered strictly 
for what it is, which does not include the notion of affirmative existence). As 
such, it would have no reference to time. Hence, it would be meaningless to 
speak of it as either temporally prior or temporally posterior. This finds sup- 
port in Categories, 4.4 (page 154), where Avicenna writes: 


As for knowledge of the resurrection, it belongs to the category (hukm) of [what] 
will be. For knowledge that [the resurrection] will be is [(a)] knowledge of its 
state existing in the mind together with [(b)] knowledge that it will be—that is, 
knowledge existing in the mind, not when it comes into being but prior to that, 
when it is nonexistent in the concrete, existing in the soul. As for conceiving the 
quiddity of the resurrection in abstraction, it is not, inasmuch as it is conception, 
related to anything in existence. 


The key term is “in abstraction’—that is, the quiddity conccived in itself, 
simply as quiddity. 


Book Four, Chapter One 


1. Al-hudith: For Avicenna, “origination” is the coming into existence of 


something after nonexistence. He differentiates between essential origination 
(al-hudiith al-dhatiyy) and temporal origination (al-hudith al-zamaniyy). In both 
cases, the cause that “originates” the effect coexists with it in time. In both cases, 
the existence of what is originated is, in itself, only possible: its existence 
becomes necessary “after” it receives this existence from its necessitating 
cause. The “after,” however, is not temporal, as far as the cause is concerned. 
God is prior to the world in the essential sense only, since the world as a whole 





Notes to Book Four, Chapter One 401 


is preeternal and is not preceded by time. Temporal origination refers to the 
temporal events within the world. Such events are preceded by temporal non- 
existence, but the cause that originates them coexists with them. The priority 
of such an essential cause remains nontemporal. In this chapter, Avicenna is 
concerned with the essential cause operative in the two types of origination. 
This has to be differentiated from the accidental, preparatory cause that tem- 
porally precedes the potential effect, preparing it to become actualized by its 
essential, coexisting cause. 

2. Strictly speaking, existence as such, which is the proper subject matter 
of metaphysics, has neither genus nor species nor any other of the modes of 
being classified under Porphyry’s predicables. The things that stand as though 
they are species in relation to existence and unity are substance, quantity, and 
quality. See 1.2.13. Substance, quantity, and quality are discussed in 1.1—3, 3.4, 
and 3.7, respectively. 

For a discussion of this chapter and an earlier translation, see Marmura, 
“Avicenna on Causal Priority.” The chapter takes its cue from Aristotle’s Categories, 
10.2, and Metaphysics, 5.2, but is largely devoted to the question of the priority of 
the essential cause to its effect, where the analysis goes beyond Aristotle. 

3. ‘Ald sabil al-tashkik: Literally, “by way of ambiguity.” See 3.2 n. 1 above. 
The concept of tashkik develops further in the history of Islamic metaphysical 
thought, where, according to F. Rahman, it became, with Mulla Sadra (d. 1641), 
a principle of “systematic ambiguity.” Sec Rahman, Philosophy of Mulla Sadra, 
35. See also, for example, its use by Avicenna in Syllogism, 9.2 (page 432); and 
see Goichon’s Lexique, 162, where bi al-tashkik is interpreted as “in analogical 
manner.” 

4. See Aristotle, Metaphysics, 5.11.1018°20, 

5. See ibid., 5.11.1018" 14. 

6. More literally: “They thus made the thing that has existence first, even 
though not [yet] belonging to the second ({where] the second would have pos- 
session of it only when the first has had existence), prior to the other.” 

7. Sce Aristotle, Categories, 12.14° 29-35. 

8. As in the case of the Necessary Existent, God. 

9. Literally, “it is not remote.” 

10. Alternatively, “its essence.” 

ll. More literally, “There is not, in the state made distinct by its being ([as 
opposed to] its non-being), the distinction . . .” 

12. Dhat: Here, “entity,” rather than “essence.” 

13. A similar argument is used by the Ash‘arite theologian al-Baqillani 
(d. 1013) against those who held that the world is the product of the four eter- 
nal natures and is, hence, eternal. Referring to such a nature, he asks: “If the 
nature is pre-eternal and post-eternal and the thing generated by it is likewise 
pre-eternal and post-eternal, then why is it more proper for one of the two to 
necessitate and cause the other than it is for the effect to be the cause and 
ground?” (Al-Baqillani, Kitab al-Tamhid, 48). 

14. That is, what this argument implics regarding the concept of a cause 
necessitating its effect and coexisting with it. 


402 Notes to Book Four, Chapter Two 


15. That is, in extramental existence. Likewise, the expression “in exis- 
tence” through the remainder of this paragraph refers to extramental existence. 

16. Literally, “what has passed”—that is, what has been stated to the effect 
that the occurrence of the effect is necessitated by the cause. 

17. Since the mind may be inferring the existence of the cause from the 
effect, the effect may be prior to the cause (in the mind), not only in time but 
“logically.” For the effect would then constitute the premise of the argument, 
and the cause, its conclusion. 


Book Four, Chapter Two 


1. Ma‘nda: “Intention” seems to be the most appropriate translation here of 
this term, which normally translates as “meaning” or “idea.” The temptation 
is to use such a term as “characteristic,” “quality,” “attribute,” or “cause,” sug- 
gested by some of the kaldm uses of the term. “Intention,” however, seems more 
consonant with Avicenna’s language. 

2. The pronoun refers to hayawan, or “animal,” which is in the masculine; 
and, since hayawdan includes insan, or “human,” which is also in the masculine, 
the pronoun has been left in the masculine. 

3. More literally, “in terms of which it would be for him to act or not to act.” 

4. Literally, “according to will, and the absence of will.” 

5. See Aristotle, Metaphysics, 5.12.1019715-22. 

6. The example is also used by Avicenna in his Physics, 1.10 (pages 48-49) 
to argue that cause and effect are never identical, even in the case of the physi- 
* clan treating himself. 

7. Min sha?nihi: Literally, “that whose affair it is,” sometimes translated as 
“that whose function it is,” “one given to be or act in a certain way,” or “one 
whose nature, state, or circumstances it is to be or act in a certain way,” depend- 
ing on the context. See 3.6 n. 3 above. 

8. Again, min sha°nihi an yaf‘al: See note immediately above. 

9. Avicenna’s statement is enigmatic. What he seems to be saying is that 
the ontology of this will—whether “it so happens” (and this seems to be the 
force of widjiidan ittifagiyyan) that it is an attribute of the willer coexisting with 
him or whether it is related to the willer essentially, so that its nonexistence 
with him is impossible—is not the issue. As long as the agent is perpetually 
willing, regardless of whether this will is an essential attribute or happens to 
be a perpetual concomitant, such an agent has power. 

10. Istithna’: For a discussion of this term in conditional syllogisms, see 
Geyke, “The Term Jstithna’ in Arabic Logic.” 

ll. Tawahhama: Here, in the sense of “to imagine.” 

12. That is, without the decisive will. 

13. The Arabic of this sentence is convoluted and is not without redundancy. 
What Avicenna seems to be saying is that if these powers exist with the prospec- 
tive recipient of their action but without the decisive will conjoining them, 
their effect will not proceed. The power becomes a sufficient cause, necessitating 
the effect, only when conjoined with the decisive will. By itself, the power, though 
a necessary condition for the production of the effect, is not sufficient. 





Notes to Book Four, Chapter Tivo 403 


An alternative translation of “when these are still a power” is “when these 
are still [in] potency,” meaning that these powers, without the decisive will, 
remain potentially necessitating causes and become actually necessitating 
causes once conjoined with it. 

14, Al-amr: “The state of affairs,” or “the matter”—namely, the action of 
the power. 

15. Possibly a corruption of al-Maghdrigiyyin, the “Megarians.” See Anawati, 
1:362. 

16. Avicenna may be referring to the Ash‘arite doctrine that the power 
God creates in the human does not precede the act that God also creates for 
such a human. This is the act that God creates and the human “acquires.” For 
the Ash‘arites, the created power is simultaneous with the created “acquired” 
act. It never precedes it. 

17. The argument is reductio ad impossibile. 

18. Wijidihi: The form is in the masculine, but the sense dictates that the 
reference is to al-nafs, meaning “the soul,” which is feminine. Syntactically, the 
clause in the translation beginning with “at which point the possibility of exis- 
tence” also translates as “at which point the possibility of its existence in that 
[body] would be subsisting in it.” But this would mean that the soul has the 
possibility of existing “in” the body, which doctrine Avicenna denies; he insists 
that the soul exists “with” the body and is not imprinted “in” it. 

19. Literally, “because this is evident.” 

20. Literally, “in the proceeding of that act from it.” 

21. Hence, this alternative is false. 

22. The “it” seems to be referring to the potency, not the act. But this is 
not clear. 

23. Akthariyya: Otherwise translated as “majority,” or “for the most part,” 
this term is rendered here and after as “prevalent” in order to avoid gram- 
matical confusion. 

24. Strictly, “and that which is prevalently.” Avicenna’s sentence is com- 
plex. A close following of its structure would read as follows: 


If it [renders it to occur] prevalently—and that which is prevalent, as you have 
learned in the Physics, is identical with that which is necessitated, except that it 
has an impediment, because its having the property of having the matter [occur] 
prevalently is due to an inclination in its nature in the direction of what [pro- 
ceeds] from it so that, if [that which would procced from it} does not exist, this is 
due to an impediment—then that which is prevalent is also in itself necessitated 
when there is no impediment, the necessitated being that to which the affair 
comes safely, free from an impediment. 


25. Falta: Medieval Islamic critics of the above theory caricatured falta as 
“the passing of wind.” The theory Avicenna is criticizing is that of the physician- 
philosopher Abi Bakr al-Razi (Raziz) (d. 926). 

26. Literally, “He did not perform the managing well and did not become 
perfect for a good endowing with form.” 

27. This is possibly an allusion to Plato’s theory of creation in the Timaeus. 


404 Notes to Book Four, Chapter Three 


28. See paragraph 27 of this chapter. The doctrine that potency is prior to 
act in an absolute sense, held by a majority of the Ancients, is the view Avicenna 
rejects. What he is saying in this paragraph is that the doctrine of the absolute 
priority of potency to act has been shown to be not true. 


Book Four, Chapter Three 


1. Reading ‘urrifa. It is possible to read the word as ‘urifa, meaning “to be 
known” or “to be recognized.” An alternative translation would read some- 
thing as follows: “The complete, [when] first recognized, was recognized in 
things possessing number...” 

2. Literally, “things possessing number.” 

3. Literally, “in tenness and nineness.” 

4, Literally, “threeness.” 

5. Literally, “the perfections to which must belong one thing after another 
thing, not combining all at once.” 

6. The reference is to the motions of the celestial spheres. 

7. Lahu: “For it.” Grammatically, this could refer to al-kudl (the whole); but 
this sentence goes back to the statement that “it is not...a condition of ‘com- 
pleteness’ that it should encompass a plurality, either in potency or in act.” 


Book Five, Chapter One 


1. That is, particular. 

2. That is, any other alternative affirmative statement. ; 

3. What Avicenna scems to be saying here is that, in the case of the first 
two affirmative statements, they are exhaustive but need not be mutually 
exclusive, whereas those that “have the potentiality of two contradictories” are 
two affirmative statements that exclude other alternatives and are, in addition, 
mutually exclusive. 

4. Strictly, “If it is said,” followed by the lengthy statement, to which some- 
one then asks about a possible response, followed by Avicenna’s corrective to 
such a possible response. 

5. Literally, “Is it, then, like this?” 

6. The distinction is between humanity inasmuch as it is humanity not 
being A, and humanity being A, but not inasmuch as it is humanity. 

7. What Avicenna seems to be saying is that, in the question about humanity 
as such, if, out of tolerance, we negate the terms in both senses—that is, By 
saying both that (1) humanity inasmuch as it is humanity is not B and (2) 
humanity is B, but not inasmuch as it is humanity—then it does not follow 
that humanity is either one or many, or that it refers to itself as a designated 
humanity or to some other thing designated by it, even though ultimately, as 
the passage that follows indicates, it must refer either to itself as a designated 
humanity or to some other thing designated by it. aes 

8. Literally, “ic is prior in existence to the animal, which is particular with 
its accidents or universal, existential, or intellectual.” 

9. The reference here is to “proper existence.” See above, 1.5 n. 6. 





Notes to Book Five, Chapter Tivo 405 


10. Here Avicenna is speaking of “affirmative existence,” whether extra- 
mentally or mentally. See, again, 1.5 n. 6. 

Il. See paragraph 18 above. 

12. Bi ma‘nd al-‘udil: “in the sense of equipollence,” that is, in the above, 
rendering the negated term into a positive equivalent. The reference is to al- 
ma ‘dilat, those statements where what is negated is not the statement as a 
whole, but only a term, usually the predicate—for example, X is not-Y, where 
Y is treated as a positive term and for which a positive equivalent can some- 
times be found. Thus, “Zayd is not seeing,” translates into “Zayd is blind.” See 
Avicenna, Ishdrat, 239-40; Najat, 54-55; and Remarks and Admonitions (S. Inati’s 
translation of Isharat, part one), 83 ff. 

In the above passage Avicenna is denying that “not particular” translates 
into “being general.” Thus, as he puts it, “animality is neither particular nor 
non-particular which is general.” 

For a discussion of ‘udal and its antecedents in Greek philosophy (more 
specifically in Theophrastus), see Zimmermann, Al-Farabi’s Commentary, Ixxxi 
and n. 1, where ‘udal is translated as “metathetic,” and page 98 n. |. Sec also 
Inati, “Ibn Sina on Single Expressions,” 154 ff. 

13. Literally, “for this meaning.” 

14. Fi al-a‘ydn: This quite often refers to concrete reality in the particular, 
sensible things, but not in this context, where Avicenna is rejecting the Platonic 
theory of ideas. 

15. Literally, “for this meaning.” 

16. That is, the form as an individual existent in the soul would itself have 
a higher universal form that is predicable not only on its individual counter- 
parts in other souls, but also on itself. 


Book Five, Chapter Two 


I. The reference in particular is to Jsagoge, 1.12, pp. 65-66. For a study and 
translation of the entire chapter, see Marmura, “Avicenna’s Chapter on Uni- 
versals in the Isagoge of His Shifa’.” Humanity in its concrete instances out- 
side the soul, when abstracted and considered in itself, is neither one nor many 
but relates to the instances wherein it is individuated. It is this external cir- 
cumstance that allows its being predicated of many in the mind. 

2. The reference is to the celestial souls and intelligences. 

- See Psychology, 5.5 (pages 208-11). 

. See above, 5.1.2-3. 

. See Psychology, 5.5 (pages 209-10). 

. That is, the form is a universal as it is predicated of other mental enti- 
ties of the same kind, but, viewed in terms of its being an entity existing in the 
soul, it is an individual. See 5.2.6 above. 


oo 


Dn 


Book Five, Chapter Three 


1. Strictly, “in our art.” 
2. That is, the term “genus” refers to one of the five predicables, but also 
to a subject of which something else is predicated. 


406 Notes to Book Five, Chapter Four 


3. That is, genus, species, difference, property, and general accident. See 
Avicenna’s chapter devoted to universals in his [sagoge, 1.12 (page 65 ff.). 

4, This is the beginning of a lengthy, complex conditional statement that 
should not be broken if one is to retain its sense. The structure is as follows: 
If...we take body as a substance ..., then the thing taken [in this manner] 


would be the body that is genus. 

5. Alternatively, “its corporeality belongs.” 

6. Wa suwariht appears in the masculine, which would refer it to alf ma ‘na 
(a thousand meanings). But sense dictates that it refers to substantiality. 

7. The reference seems to be to the “thousand meanings” mentioned earlier. 


Book Five, Chapter Four 


1, An alternative translation, “in the [above] mentioned manner,” is possi- 
ble. But previous references to whiteness in relation to bodies relates to onto- 
logical matters not directly bearing on the question of whether whiteness, in 
being contained in a body, renders the latter a species. 

2. The method of division enunciated in Plato’s Sophist (219a ff.) that is 
commented on critically in Aristotle’s Prior Analytics, 1.31.46", mentioned in the 
Posterior Analytics, 92.13.9625. Avicenna foliows Aristotle in commenting on it 
in his Sydlogism; see, for example, 10.5 (pages 457-58). 

3. That is, neither white, black, nor any other color. 


Book Five, Chapter Six 
1. See Avicenna’s Isagoge, 1.13 (page 82), where he writes: 


Know that differentia, which is onc of the five [universal predicables], is “the 
rational” that is predicated absolutely of the species, not “rationality” that is 
predicated of the species through derivation. This is because these five are the 
parts of one thing, namely the universal utterance. The form of the universal 
utterance, in all its [aspects], is that it is predicable on its individual [instances]. 
What is common to [the form of the universal utterance] is that it gives [the 
individual instances] its name and definition, whereas “rationality” does not give 
any of the individuals its name or definition. If it is said of it, “differentia,” this 
would be “differentia” in a sense different from that one we are discussing. Sim- 
ilarly, understand the state of affairs with respect to property and accident. For 
the predication of these five ought to be analogous to the predication of the 
genus and species, inasmuch as it is predication, even if it is not with respect to 
essentiality and accidentalness. 

2. Literally, “is what I say.” 

3. For example, man and horse both participate in the genus animal. Being 
rational is the differentia that separates man from horse, but being rational is 
not something other than the essence and quiddity of man. Hence, there is no 
need for any further differentiae that would lead to an infinite regress. 

4. “Ind al-aq! wa al-dhihn: The distinction here is not clear. Al-‘agl, more 
frequently used to mean “intellect” or “intelligence,” is the more inclusive 
term, as it applies to the human mind as well as to the celestial. Dhihn, on the 


Notes to Book Five, Chapter Seven 407 


other hand, is used to refer only to the human mind. But this distinction is 
not very helpful here. Al-‘agl, which for convenience has been translated as 
“intellect,” has other nuances and meanings; the closest in this context is 
probably “reason.” Hence, when Avicenna speaks of fi al-‘agl, he is probably 
referring to something being according to the principles of reason as regarded 
in itself, irrespective of the question of its existence. Fi al-dhihn, on the other 
hand, seems to refer to existence in the mind. If this is Avicenna’s intention 
then the relevance of this to the argument is not clear. 

5. Again, “definition” seems to refer to the content of what is defined, not to 
the existence of definition in the mind. The general thrust of the use of these 
terms—where one is tempted to think of them (mistakenly) more or less as 
synonyms, simply for the sake of emphasis—is clear. What is less clear is the 
more specific intention in the choice of these terms. See the preceding note. 


Book Five, Chapter Seven 


1. Ka anna: Possibly a corruption in the manuscripts of /i anna (because). 

2. The thrust of the argument is that what is being discussed is a specific 
animal, not the quiddity animal in itself, which, as has been explained earlier 
(see, for example, 5.1.4 ff.), excludes the idea of existence. Quiddities must 
exist either mentally or extramentally, but their existence is an extrancous 
necessary concomitant. 

3. Mubham: “Unclear,” “obscure,” “vague,” “ambiguous.” 

4. More literally, “but in that the very line is that, or that that very surface 
is that.” 

5. That is, it exists in itself, for example, as cither a line, a surface, or a depth. 


Book Five, Chapter Eight 


1. Faya‘rid min dhalika an takin: What Avicenna intends by this is not entirely 
clear. Perhaps this should be translated as, “From this it occurs that they come 
to be [defined].” 

2. See Aristotle, Metaphysics, 7.5.1030°29, 

3. The renowned ninth-century man of letters and Mu‘tazilite theologian, 
master of Arabic prose, noted for his wit and encyclopedic knowledge (d. 869), 

4. That is, even in the case of a composite, the descriptions may not be 
confined to that composite but may refer to many other things. 

5. Lagab: In this context, an agnomen identifying one specific person. 

6. Avicenna is speaking of the eternal celestial entities, whether intellects, 
souls, or corporeal spheres, each of which represents the only member of its 
species. This relates to Avicenna’s theory of God’s knowledge of particulars in 


8.6 below. 
Book Five, Chapter Nine 


|. The reference being to both the right angle and the circle. If read as 
referring to the circle alone, then it would translate as “its matter.” 


408 Notes to Book Six, Chapter One 


2. Lakinnaha: The the feminine pronoun Adé refers to al-hddda (the acute 
angle). The wording of the entire complex sentence that follows is awkward 
and problematic. 

3, Reading waga’at fihi al-idafa as a relative clause, not the predicate of a 
nominal sentence. 

4. Bayan: “Explanation,” rather than “manifestation” or “appearance.” 

5. Fi idkhali idafa fi al-fi‘l: Literally, “in bringing a relation in actuality.” 
What seems to be the sense is perhaps conveyed by the following paraphrase: 
“it indicates the potentiality of bringing in a relation in actuality.” But this is 
not certain; the wording remains problematic. 

6. One that is not actually existing, as what follows also shows. 


Book Six, Chapter One 


1. Where the agent, the giver of existence, is also the teleological cause. 

2. Strictly, “... the imparting of motion (tahrik) in one of the forms of 
imparting motion.” 

3. Sayrura, strictly, “coming to be.” 

4. That is, neither can matter separate from the cause (namely, the form), 
nor can the composite of form and matter separate from the cause (again, the 
form). 

3. That is, the existence belonging to the latter. 

6. Presumably, “through it,” the reference being to the form. As I understand 
this, the giver of existence, the celestial intellectual principle, bestows existence 
on matter through the form. The form itself does not bestow existence. 

7, That is, its having the characteristic of coming into existence after non- 
existence does not derive from the agent. 

8. Avicenna is speaking of all existents other than God. In the case of the 
celestial existents—the celestial intellects, souls, and bodies—nonexistence is 
prior to their existence ontologically, not temporally. See below, 6.2.8 ff. 

9. Namely, the absence of a cause. 

10. The wording of this last sentence, beginning with “unless,” is ambiguous. 
What Avicenna seems to be doing is directing attention to the one exceptional 
case where nonexistence does not precede existence. This would be the existence 
of God. All other caused existents have nonexistence as a priority—whether 
this priority is essential, temporal, or both (see 6.2, paragraphs 9-12 below). 
God alone—the ever-cternal, uncaused cxistent—does not have nonexistence 
as an ontological priority. 

Il. Literally, “unless it is said.” 

12. That is, the three kinds of conditions just mentioned (“originated, {or] 
one of the attributes of the quiddity, or something different”). 

13. What is coincidental is not the thing’s coming to existence, but the fact 
that it comes into existence after nonexistence. 

14. Li nafs al-oujud: Literally, “for existence itself,” or “for the sake of exis- 
tence itself.” The intention, as the context indicates, is that the giver of existence 





Notes to Book Six, Chapter Tivo 409 


bestows only existence itself; it does not bring about the state of its being an 
effect preceded by nonexistence. The cause, in other words, is the cause of exis- 
tence, not of the circumstance of “existence ... after privation” (6.1.15), 


Book Six, Chapter Two 


1. More literally, “confusion occurring with respect to the cause in [its] reality.” 

2. Literally, “not prior in existence in a way that it would cease to exist with 
the coming into being of the effect.” 

3. Tawahhamnd: Alternatively, “esteem [it].” 


Book Six, Chapter Three 


1. If we read Avicenna correctly here, the point he is making is that the 
second would be equal to the first (whose existence is prior) only if one con- 
siders the latter’s existence, without the idea of its priority. For then, as he 
goes on to argue, they would be equal in their respective definitions, where 
neither of them would be cither the cause or the effect. 

2. That is, of the cause and the effect. 

3. Al-musta “id: Literally, “[the thing] disposed,” “[the thing] prepared.” 

4. “Aynan wahidan: as we read it, “ayn indicates that which exists extramen- 
tally. The reference is to the celestial intelligences, each one of which repre- 
sents the only instance of its species. 

5. That is, cause and effect, agent and paticnt, action and affection of 
action can only be on a par when the ontological relation between them is acci- 
dental, not essential. If the priority of the cause to the effect is essential, they 
cannot be equal. 

6. Akkam (plural of hukm): Often translatable as “governing rulc,” some- 
times as “value” or “status.” 


Book Six, Chapter Four 


1. Literally, “for he diminishes.” 

2. In the Psychology of the Shifa’, Avicenna states that the presence of the 
middle terms of the syllogism in the soul prepare it for the reception of the 
conclusion from the Active Intellect, See Psychology, 5.5 (page 208). 

3. That is, it does not need anything additional to the bearer—such as a 
motion or something lacking in this bearer. 

4, Alternatively, “[the bearer] needs an additional thing: either only a 
motion—whether locomotion, qualitative motion, [or] quantitative motion 
(positional or substantial) —or the loss of something else from its substance by 
way of quantity, quality, or the like.” ; 

5. Literally, “because they are the most intense in universality and in being 
genera.” 

6. That is, worthier than the genera and differentiae. 


410 Notes to Book Six, Chapter Five 


Book Six, Chapter Five 


lL. ‘Abath: The term is difficult to translate, as it ordinarily carries different 
nuances of meaning, depending on context. “Trivial” is perhaps as close as one 
can get for a general meaning. The term can mean an impulsive act; a purpose- 
less act or sometimes one that may be purposeful but is futile; sometimes an act 
that is child’s play; an act that is not serious in intent; an act performed for 
sheer amusement; or sometimes an act that is automatic and unconscious, a man 
stroking his beard while conversing being an example mentioned in this chapter 
(see paragraph 15 below). Avicenna, however, defines “abath (see paragraph 10 
below) as an act motivated by the imagination alone, without any cogitation, 
For the mutakallimiin and the philosophers, divine action is never “abath. See 
Qur’an 24:15. 

2. That is, for every beginning in time. 

3. Physics, 1.13. -_ 

4. Ijma‘a: Here, “resolve” or “decision,” as in ajma‘a ‘ald. This is clear in 
the discussion of the various animal faculties in Psychology, 4.4 (page 172 ff). 
See also Metaphysics, 4.2.10 above. ; 

5. Psychology, 4.4. Avicenna speaks most of the time of desire in relation to 
the imagination, but he does speak of the healing activity of the physician and 
the activity of the carpenter in making the bed, where cogitation is implied. 

6. One should note here that Avicenna is speaking of imagination as the 
principle of desire, not as “the desired end,” of paragraph 10 above. That is, he 
is speaking of imagination as causing a desire which causes an act, without the 
accompanying imagined purpose. 

7. That is, the statement that triviality is the act that is devoid of a purpose 
that is good or imagined to be good. bie 

8. La tudbat: It is not clear whether what cannot be precisely ascertained is 
the number of such causes or something else. 

9. That is, the objection that subscribing to teleological causes would result 
in an infinity of ends. See paragraph 2 above. 

10. Physics, 1.13. 

11. A more literal translation would make very awkward English, if English 
at all: “But the essential ends are, for example, that there would exist the sub- 
stance which is man, horse, or palm. . . .” 

12. Avicenna is speaking about the individuals or particulars in the world 
of generation and corruption. Each member of the species Js transient, but 
the process of one transient individual being succeeded by another is eternal. 
The purpose of the universal nature—the nature of the species horse, for 
example—is to preserve the individual member of the species, without singling 
out any one specific individual. 

13. Bi ‘aynihi: Literally, “in itself” 

14. ALkawn: Here, the whole of the cosmos (which includes the world of 
generation and corruption) is meant. See nn. 18 and 19 below. 

15. More literally, “an act that begins anew from which proceeds a desert 


that it be called one that has a resumed agent.” 








Notes to Book Six, Chapter Five 411 


16. See paragraph 2 above, regarding the priority of the final causes: “Why 
has [the teleological cause] been made the prior cause when it is the effect of 
[the other] causes?” 

17. See 1.5.8-]H above. Avicenna accepts the Mu‘tazilite statement that 
the thing is that about which true information is given. However, for Avicenna, 
a thing must have existence—if not extramentally, then at least in the mind. 
Existence is a thing’s necessary concomitant. 

18. Avicenna (as suggested by paragraph 31 of this chapter) is discussing 
the final causes in the realm of the generated world—that is, of all existents 
that emanate from God. 

For discussions of the concept of “thingness” in Avicenna, see Druart, “Res 
as Concomitant Being”; Jolivet, “Aux origins de lontologie d’Ibn Sina”; and 
Wisnovski, “Notes on Avicenna’s Concept of Thingness.” 

19. Fi al-kawn: While this certainly refers to the world of generation and 
corruption, as the teleology discussed in terms of the human soul indicates, on 
our reading the reference is not confined to this terrestrial world. It refers to 
the entire emanative world as it proceeds from God. In the celestial realm, the 
cmanations proceed in the form of triads. Each triad consists of an intellect, 
a soul, and a body (the celestial sphere). Within each sphere, the soul desires 
the intellect and in doing so moves the sphere. The analysis of “thingness” in 
relation to final causality seems to apply here. The soul desires the intellect 
in its “thingness,” rendering it thereby a final cause “in existence.” Accordingly, 
when Avicenna states that the final cause “is not within [the realm] of gener- 
ated being, but its existence is higher than this realm,” the reference would 
clearly be only to God. And when he states that this “will become clear . . . in its 
proper place,” the reference would be to the discussion of the divine attributes 
in book 8, chapter 7, where God is above perfection and is not affected by any- 
thing extraneous to His essence. 

20. Li annaha dhat kawn: More literally, “because it possesses kawn.” As 
we read it, kazn in this instance is to be taken simply as “being” and seems to 
refer to the “thingness” of the final cause within the world as a whole. The 
sense one gets here is that it is not in its role as a final cause that it is not 
caused by the other causes, but that it is not caused by them in being “a thing.” 

21. If, as suggested in the note above, the reference is to the “thingness” of 
the final cause, then without this “thingness” its existence as a final cause can- 
not take place. 

22. More literally, “it is caused from the direction of [the realm of] gener- 
ated being.” 

23. Regarding the question of “whether purpose and the good are one and 
[the] same or different.” See paragraph 2 above. 

24. The reference is to (a) in paragraph 33 above. 

25. The reference is to (b) in paragraph 33 above. 

26. Strictly, “something,” but as the argument proceeds it is clear that Avi- 
cenna is speaking of persons, not things. 

27. This last distinction is not explicitly stated at this point; but, as 
becomes clear from the last sentence of the paragraph, it is implied. 


412 Notes to Book Seven, Chapter One 


28. Reading mugdbilhi, not mugabalatin. The giver of preponderance isa 
cause that tips the balance, so to speak, in favor of one of otherwise similar or 
equivalent alternatives. Without such a cause, the alternatives remain possible, 
not actualized. 

29, This disjunction is not explicitly stated. 

30, That is, admit for the sake of argument. 

31. Munna: “Power,” “strength.” It is not the task of the natural philosopher 
qua natural philosopher to demonstrate them. This is outside his province, so 
to speak. See n. 32 below. 

32. In the sense of demonstrating them. The natural philosopher is con- 
cerned with the operation of these causes, not the demonstration of them. 
Physics does not demonstrate its own principles; these principles are demon- 
strated in metaphysics. See 1.3 above. 


Book Seven, Chapter One 


1. More literally, “It is that which it is.” 

2. Sha’n: See 3.6 n. 3 above. 

3. That this is the referent of /ahu becomes clear from the example of sight 
that immediately follows. 

4, See 3.6.19-21 above, especially 21: “Vhe equal, then, is opposed only to 
its privation—namely, inequality.” , 

5. That is, Aristotle. See Nichomachean Ethics 2.8, 11081. 

6. That is, if the term “lukewarm” did not exist, there would still be a real 
mean—namely, the not-hot and the not-cold. 


Book Seven, Chapter Two 


1. See Aristotle, Metaphysics 6.2.1025°26-1026"5. 

2. That is, the previous group, discussed in paragraph 5, above. Paragraph 
7 resumes discussion of the view of the same group—a view suggestive of 
Speusippus (who abandoned the Platonic forms for mathematical entities) and 
his followers. . 

3. This suggests thinking in the tradition of Xenocrates, who identified the 
Platonic forms with numbers. sath 

4, Literally, “in a manner devoid of the attention to its associate. 

5. That is, the mind apprehends only that portion of the complex to which 
it gives attention and which, hence, has a scparate existence. 

6. Reading ghayru mufarigin; but it is possible to read it as ghayrun mufariqun, 
which would form the predicate of Auwa huwa in the compound nominal 
sentence. It would then translate, “For that which is mixed [with another] . 
inasmuch as it is ‘an other’ is [in]separable from [its concomitant] by way of 
negation, not by way of equipolence, in terms of which separation in subsis- 
tence is understood.” 

7, For equipollence see 5.1 n. 12. As we read the nase senitence in our trans- 
lation, namely, ghayru mufariqin, the “by way of negation” can be expressed 





Notes to Book Seven, Chapter Three 413 


as “A is not separable from B,” while negation by equipollence would be the 
negation of the predicate, “not separable from B,” so that we would have “A is 
not not separable from B,” that is, A is separable from B. 

In the above passage, one reading in the apparatus criticus (from the British 
Muscum manuscript) gives al-mugarin, “the connected with,” instead of al- 
mafarig, which comes immediately after ghayr; it then adds cryptically: 

Some among them have understood it thus. For it is not separable (/aysa bi 
mufarigin) [in the sense] that it is said that it is other than separate (innahu ghayru 
mufarigin [sic]). For al-‘udil is an expression of the privation of an existing quality/ 
attribute where its privation is a branch of its existence. Privation thus requires 
existence, unlike absolute negation. 


The comment is not entirely clear, but indicates that the commentator 
found this passage problematic. 

8. Underlying this example is Avicenna’s concept of the quiddity consid- 
cred in itself. As such, it does not include such concomitants of existence as 
the one and the many. If fatherhood refers to one father in relation to many 
sons, then multiplicity is not excluded from the relational essence fatherhood. 
Fatherhood, considered strictly in itself, is neither one nor many and is some- 
thing “akin” to speaking about fathers in relation to various sons, where neither 
fathers nor sons are particularized. 

9. In Categories, 4.5 (page 163), Avicenna differentiates between a relation 
that is particular (the fatherhood of this particular man) and one that relates to 
the species (the fatherhood of a just man and of an unjust man, where being just 
or unjust is extraneous to the quiddity fatherhood). This is one other place where 
the concept of fatherhood in the context of the one and the many is discussed. 

When Avicenna speaks of having “discussed this fully in other places,” this 
need not refer to the example of fatherhood as such, but rather to the concept 
underlying it—-namely, that of the quiddity considered in itself. He has dis- 
cussed this, for example, in Jsagoge, 1.12 and in Metaphysics, 5.1 and 2. 

10. See Psychology, 5.5 (pages 209-10). 

Il. Avicenna scems to be referring to the celestial intelligence, particularly 
the active intellect, wa@hib al-suwar, “the bestower of forms,” from which the 
forms of the sublunar sphere emanate. 

12. Sce Isagoge, 1.1 (page 12, line 14—page 13, line 4). The objects of mathe- 
matical knowledge must relate to matter, but are not confined to one specific 
kind of matter. For a translation of the Isagoge chapter with commentary, sec 
Marmura, “Avicenna on the Divisions of the Sciences.” 


Book Seven, Chapter Three 


1. Hence, leading to an infinite regress. 

2. Laha: “It,” in the feminine, referring to matter (madda) in the feminine. 

3. Shakl: “Figure,” “shape,” also “form,” which in the above context scems 
to me the appropriate translation. 

4. More literally, “that has no realization [coming] to it.” 


414 Notes to Book Fight, Chapter One 


5, For Avicenna’s argument regarding the impossibility of the actual infinite, 
sce Physics, 3.8 (page 212 ff). 
pene oe ba ba‘da marratin: The referent of takiina is unity. 
Although the sentence could be translated as “unless there would be ene suc: 
cession after another,” the expression marratan ba‘da marratin would ordinarily 
translate “one time after another.” But this translation assumes the temporal 
priority of unity to its repeated existence, when this is only one of the two pos- 
sible priorities, the other being in essence, not time. - 

7. The hyle which causes the hyle would in turn require another hyle to 


cause it, and so on ad infinitum. 


Book Eight, Chapter One 


1. Particularly in 6.2 above. ar 
9. Yahsul: As given in the text. Although the term may have been originally 


juhsé, meaning “to be enumerated,” none of the manuscripts give this possible 
alternative. The extreme that is not realized in this hypothetical situation 
would have to be the last effect in the causal chain. . 

3. Physics, 3.8 (page 212): “It is impossible that a measure or a es 
among numbered things has an order by nature or by convention that is real- 
ized, that exists in actuality, that is infinite.” has 

4, Ashaddu ta’akhkhuran: Literally, “more intense in posteriority. 

5. That is, since the actual infinite has already been shown to be impossible, 
there is no need to show that an infinity of material causes is impossible and that 
the sequence of such material causes must come to an end with prime Eanes 

6. More literally, “it is as though the two are two equivalents in existence. 


Book Eight, Chapter Two 


|. Reading Fa inna ma kana, rather than Fa in ma kana, which is also possible, 
rendering what follows a complex conditional statement. The thrust of what is 


being said would be the same. a 
9. Wa amma qawl hadha al-qail: “As for the statement of this one who says. 

Avicenna may have in mind a particular critic or commentator. Stes 
3. More literally, “Tt is not the case that, if it had the meaning of after’ in 

whatever manner, then the generation we are seeking would not be. 


Book Eight, Chapter Three 


1. More literally, “In reflecting on this much, there is sufficiency and the 


is i 4 - els tion.” 
dispensing with lengthy elabora _ ree 
9. See the discussion of essential priority and posteriority In 6.2.9 ff. 


Book Eight, Chapter Four 


1, Nisba: Strictly, a one-sided relation (see 3.6 n. 1] above); sometiines, a 


more gencral sense of relation. 








Notes to Book Eight, Chapter Five 415 


2. See 3.10.15-18. 

3. Inniyya: See 1.1 n. 1 above. 

4. See 1.5.10. Here, however, Avicenna is probably referring to the begin- 
ning of the Shifa’ as a whole—that is, to the Isagoge of the Logic. 

5. When the discussion of “necessary existent” is of the generic concept, it 
is not capitalized. 

6. This is merely an illustrative example. Avicenna is not suggesting that a 
human is a necessary existent in himself. 

7. The distinction here is between God’s pure existence (confined to God, 
which involves negating (a) nonexistence and (b) all attributes additional to the 
divine essence) and absolute existence shared by God and all other existents. 
Absolute existence, since it is not confined to God, does not have the condition 
of negating attributes; and since God shares in it, it does not have as a condi- 
tion that it must relate only to things that have positive attributes. 

8. That is, the condition that there must be addition. 

9. A more literal translation would read, “For this reason, the universal is 
predicated of everything, whereas that is not predicated of all that has addition.” 

10. Avicenna is speaking about burhdn lima, or demonstration of the rea- 
soned fact. See n. 11 below. 

Il. Burhan lima: Literally, “demonstration of the ‘why’”—that is, demon- 
stration of the reasoned fact, where the inference is from the cause to the effect. 
Since God is not caused, there can be no demonstration of Him and of His act 
in this type of demonstration. Avicenna, however, is noted for his proof for 
God’s existence, which is a proof based on an examination of the concept of 
existence. It involves a causal argument, but in the final analysis, the demon- 
stration in this causal argument is a demonstration of the fact (burhan inna), 
not of the reasoned fact, where the inference is from the effect to the cause. This 
comes about indirectly in Avicenna’s reference to the impossibility of an infinite 
chain of essential causes and effects. See Marmura, “Avicenna’s Proof.” 

12. Literally, “a reality other than ‘A-ness.’” 


Book Eight, Chapter Five 


1. ‘Ald sabil al-intaj: The term intd has the nuance of drawing a conclusion 
from a syllogistic argument. 

2. Literally, “is that in terms of which He Himself is Himself.” 

3. Al-lawnipya: Literally, “colorness.” 

4. See 8.4 n. I above. 

93. Avicenna sums up his position on the proof of God’s existence in the 
Isharat (page 482): 


Reflect on how our proof for the existence and oneness of the First and [of] His 
being free from attributes did not require reflection on anything except existence 
itself, and how it did not require any consideration of His creation and acting, even 
though [these] latter [provide] evidential proof (dalil) for Him. This mode, however, 
is more reliable and noble. That is, when we consider the state of existence, we 
find that existence inasmuch as it is existence bears witness to Him, while He 
thereafter bears witness to all that comes after Him in existence. 


416 Notes to Book Fight, Chapter Six 


Book Eight, Chapter Six 


1. More literally, but less clearly: Nothing of the genus of his existence, 
extrancous to His existence, exists in another, as it exists extrancously in 
another, as in the case of the human. 

9. Alternatively, “with its permanence being to itself, not to another.” 

3. Li dhatihi: Meaning, throughout this part of this discussion, as the con- 
text shows, “for itself”—that is, as an object of knowledge for itself or, when 
used as li shay’, “for some thing.” The bi dhatihi in the sentence that follows is 
first used to mean “in itself” and subsequently “by itself.” 

4. Huwa: The reference is to that which is denuded from matter under dis- 
cussion. What Avicennais, in effect, saying is that the intelligible is, by definition, 
something denuded from matter and an object of intellectual knowledge. This 
definition applies to any intelligible and is not restricted to any specific knower. 

5, Huwa: Literally, “it.” 

6. That is, the reciprocal relation between two things. 

7. Nisba: See 8.4 n. 1 above; normally, the relation of one thing to another, 
usually without mention of reciprocity. This is implicit in Avicenna’s use of the 
term (rendered above as “relating”) as the attribution of something to 
another, rendering it as being related to it—as, for example, wing to the pos- 
sessor of a wing. See Avicenna’s discussion in Categories 4.3 (page 144) and its 
source in Aristotle’s Categories 7.7°. 

8. The actual infinite being impossible. 

9, Avicenna is primarily concerned here with God and the immaterial quid- 
dities in the celestial realm, which include the celestial intelligences. (The fact 
that, for Avicenna, the divine quiddity is God’s very existence does not affect the 
argument.) The main thrust of his argument is that self-knowledge does not 
necessitate multiplicity in the knower. This is a necessary premise for his argu- 
ment that divine self-knowledge-—which has as its consequence the existence 
of the world and, hence, divine knowledge thereof—does not imply multiplicity 
in the divine essence. His insistence that things are related in themselves and 
not by another relation (which, in turn, would require another relation, so 
leading to an infinite regress) is relevant to this discussion. See 3.10.14-17. 

10. That is, the eternal celestial entities, whether intellects, souls, or bodies. 

ll. See Psychology, 5.2 (page 187ff.). 

12. The language of this sentence is Qur’anic; see Qur’an 10:61. 

13. That is, the circumstance, like the particular, will not be known as a 
particular. 

14. Rasm, or “description.” See 3.5 n. 2. 

15. One notes here that the reference is to celestial bodics. Hence, intel- 
lectual knowledge of the particular is not confined to the celestial souls and 
intelligences but also extends to the celestial bodies. The criterion for such 
knowledge is that the object of knowledge is the only member of its species. 
See Michael E. Marmura, “Some Aspects of Avicenna’s Theory of God’s 
Knowledge of Particulars.” 

16. See 5.1.2-3. 


17. Literally, “if a preventer.” 


Notes to Book Eight, Chapter Seven 417 


Book Eight, Chapter Seven 


1. Psychology, 5.6 (particularly pages 215-16). 

2. The Tehran manuscript adds, after “essence,” min ghayri an tatakaththar 
suratuha fi hagigati dhatihi bi suwariha (and without its form becoming multiple 
in the reality of His essence through their forms). 

3. La al-nafsaniyya: Literally, “not psychological.” 

4, God, in other words, would only know that He is the principle or cause of 
the existent that previously did not exist only when it came into existence. 

5. This seems to be the sense of this awkwardly worded sentence. A more lit- 
eral translation would yield a closely related but slightly different meaning: 
“Thus, among the assemblage of these intelligibles, there would be that where 
what is intellectually apprehended of it is [the fact] that He is a principle of it 
without an intermediary, its existence, rather, emanating from Him first; and 
there would be that where what is intellectually apprehended of it is [the fact] 
that He is a principle of it through mediation, emanating from Him secondarily.” 

6. Wa huwa: Strictly, “when it is.” 

7. Annahu innun wa mawjid: More literally, “consists in that He is ‘a that’ 
and an existent.” For the closely related term inniyya, sce 1.1 n. 1. 

8. Al-mujarrad: That is, the being denuded [of matter]. 

9. Tasawiwur: Strictly, “intellectually apprehends.” Conception is a form of 
intellectual apprehension. 


Book Nine, Chapter One 


1. More literally, “not formed in a temporal way.” The idea here is that the 
circular heavenly motion did not have a beginning in time. 

2. Literally, “at first.” 

3. Ifa cause is created, then another cause is needed to explain its creation, 
and if this other cause is created, then another is necded, and so on ad infinitum. 
If an effect E is delayed after the cause, then another cause must be posited to 
explain the delay, requiring in turn a cause to explain its existence, and so on 
ad infinitum. 

4. Alternatively, “both of an existing essence.” This is alternative (b) in 
paragraph 3 above. 

5. This is alternative (c) in paragraph 3 above. 

6. This is alternative (d) in paragraph 3 above. 

7. The reference is to the Mu‘ tazilite theologians. 

8. The allusion here is to the Ash‘arite criticism of the Mu‘ tazilite doctrine 
that the divine will is created. The Ash‘arite criticism is that the creation of 
the will requires another will to create it, the latter requiring another will to 
create it, and so on ad infinitum. 

9. Those who uphold the doctrine of the world’s temporal creation ex nihilo. 

10. Namely, time, as the argument that follows endeavors to show. 

11. This is how it is worded in the text. The intention, however, is not 
difficult to follow: If one is to opt for the possibility of its being created with it, 
this would lead to an impossible consequence. 


418 Notes to Book Nine, Chapter Tivo 


12. That is, the nonexistence of the world prior to its creation, for those 
who uphold the doctrine of the world’s creation in time. 
13. Hal, can also mean “time,” or “moment of time.” 


Book Nine, Chapter Two 


1. Manuscripts h and s begin as follows: “We have shown in the Physies 
that every motion has a mover; hence, this motion has a mover [such that] it 
is not possible for the mover of this to be a natural power. For we have shown 
in the Physics...” 

9. Literally, “by compulsion” as, for example, when fire is placed under it. 

3. Dhubiilan maradiyyan: Literally, “a diseased withering”—presumably, as 
distinct from the natural process of aging. 

4. Taskhir: The term used in the Qur’an where the movements of the heav- 
ens, the clouds, and the winds are said to be compelled by God. This suggests 
that Avicenna is speaking of natural action being compelled by something. 
Thus, natural action has no choice either because it is compelled by something 
else or because it acts necessarily by its essence. 

5. That is, the prior motion no longer exists and the posterior motion 
would not as yet have come into existence. 

6. Literally, “would be a ‘necessitator’ of an existence.” 

7. Yutawahham: In this context, “thought by the estimative faculty.” The 
meaning “imagined” would not be accurate in terms of Avicennan psychology. 

8. The reference here is to events in the celestial realm, such as eclipses 
and the individual movements of the heavenly bodies, but not to particular 
events in the world of generation and corruption. 

9. Reading ba “du not, bu “dun. 

10. That is, rather than intellectual and universal. 

ll. Literally, “its estimations.” 

12. That is, the celestial sphere. 

13. If the good is attained through motion, there would be no need for 
motion; hence, motion would cease. 

14. Alternatively, “Hence, eternal endurance in the most perfect [way] 
belonging to a thing’s substance, in its states and necessary concomitants, 
necessitates a perfection for that [which imitates it].” — 

15. The beginning of the emanative process from God, a beginning which 
is not temporal—the reference being to the celestial intellect (as distinct from 
the celestial soul and the celestial body) that emanates from God and imitates 
Him in being eternally changeless, immobile. ro oe 

16. Meaning, presumably being numerically one and devoid of multiplicity. 

17. Literally, “according to possibility.” 

18. In the triadic emanative scheme, the celestial soul, which moves the 
body, moves it by desiring the intellect in the triad; this is its first intention. 
The intellect in the triad desires a higher intellect, ultimately God. 

19. That is, this new desire has the same high objective but 1s itself of a 


lower rank. 








Notes to Book Nine, Chapter Three 419 


20. Min hadhihi al-jumla: More literally, “from this assemblage [of state- 
ments].” 

21. That is, the pure celestial intellects and the celestial souls in the Avi- 
cennan triadic emanative scheme. 


Book Nine, Chapter Three 


|. That is, as opposed to the direction of the motion; thus, if this is allowed 
as regards the direction of motion, it should be allowed with respect to whether 
there is motion or no motion. 

2. What Avicenna seems to be saying is that, if the good is dependent on 
the “quest and intent for a thing,” so that bringing about the existence of the 
thing sought is more worthy of the agent, this would constitute deficiency. The 
deficiency is this dependence on the intent and the quest, not the fact that the 
bringing about of the existence of the thing sought would not be more worthy 
of the agent. 

3. For Avicenna, (b) is clearly not true; hence, (a) is true. 

4. That is, any individual part of the motion. 

3. Limmiyyatahu: Literally, “its why-ness.” 

6. That is, the spheres of the planets—the spheres whose astral bodies in 
their mobility do not maintain a constant distance from each other, as distinct 
from the sphere of the fixed stars, where the distances between them remain 
constant. See Astronomy, 7.1 (page 437). 


Book Nine, Chapter Four 


1. That is, numerically identical effects. 

2. Psychology, 5.4 (page 202 ff.). 

3. That is, the first intellect emanating from God. 

4. Every celestial entity that proceeds through a series of emanations from 
the first intellect is of a species different from the ones that precede and suc- 
ceed it. In the triads, each member of the triad is the only member of its species. 


Book Nine, Chapter Five 


1. Umur: “Things,” “matters,” or “states of affairs.” The reference is to the 
various movements of the spheres that share the circular nature of their 
motion in common, 

2. The reference here is to prime matter. 

3. That is, the general—as distinct from the specific—state of preparcd- 
ness referred to in paragraph 3 above. 

4. That is, the celestial circular motions. 

9. Alternatively, though less likely: “Some who came after him maintained 
conclusively that what he said was [the doctrine he actually] held. The [former] 
who wrote these words, is, however, extremely hesitant and troubled.” 


420 Notes to Book Nine, Chapler Six 


Book Nine, Chapter Six 


1. See above, 9.1.15 and 9.4.3. . 

9. Reading yudrikhu mudrikun ‘udima al-salama. It could be read _yudrikuhu 
mudriku ‘adami al-salama, which would translate, “which an apprehender of the 
absence of wholeness apprehends.” 

3. That is, in the example given in the preceding paragraph, the heat in 
itself is evil only in that it has resulted in the lost connectedness of the organ. 

4. That is, essential evil, as distinct from accidental evil. 

5. See 1.5.11-17. 

6. Istathnaynahu: Rather than “made an exception.” 

7. Literally, “in that it becomes pervasive.” 

8. This suggests that “the collisions occurring in the course of the totality 
of things” are not haphazard but occur within a system of necessary causes 
and effects. 

9, This interpolation is implicit. Without it, this oblique, convoluted sen- 
tence would make little sense. 

10. That is, the good causes are a sufficient condition for the accidental 
causes of evil, so that, if the existence of the latter is denied, the existence of 
the former is denied. : 

11. Literally, “for matter to have the existence of the existence. 

12. M reads yazid: “He adds.” The Najat reads yurid: “He wills.” 

13. Alternatively, “Since it is known that it exists by necessity, one pays It 
no heed.” se, 

14, Alternatively, “Hence, no heed and no attention is given to the bad con- 
sequences that occur by necessity.” 

15, A version of a prophetic tradition (hadith) reported as number 17207 in 
the Musnad of Ibn Hanbal. 

16. An oft repeated tradition—for example, see Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, nos. 
13846 and 16194; and al-Bukhari, Sahih, nos. 4949 and 7551. 


Book Nine, Chapter Seven 


1. Literally, “there is of it.” 

9. Reading tu‘allam rather than tu “lam, meaning “to be known.” 

3. Literally, “by syllogism.” 

4. The statement in the original is very condensed and translates more 
literally, “that which in itself is of a more perfect and a better act.” But “a 
better” act can easily be read as an enforcement of the “more perfect act.” The 
statement, however, is making two related but distinct assertions: (a) a more 
perfect execution of an act, and (b) the enactment of an act of a different and 
better kind. 

5. More literally, “rather, he has another desire, in the way [that] someone 
who tries [something]—even if harmful—for the sake of gaining apprehen- 
sion desires.” 

6. Literally, “who has never heard at all.” 





Notes to Book Ten, Chapter One 42] 


7. The references, after the First Principle, are to the celestial intellects, 
the celestial souls, and the celestial bodies, respectively. 

8. More literally, “it would be found to be of the rank which is such that, 
with it, it would be repugnant to say...” 

9. More literally, “when the soul in us had, in the body, been aware of its 
perfection.” 

10. More literally, “in causing exchanges in bodily temperament.” 

\1. Ray: Here, “opinion,” rather than theoria, since the desire consequent 
on ra’y need not be limited to the rational faculty. 

12. The reference is to Aristotle. 

13. Strictly, “the inattention of [the substance (jawhar) of the soul],” as the 
subsequent pronoun referring to it is in the masculine. 

14. Sa‘a: Alternatively, “a wideness,” which calls to mind the verse in the 
nineteenth-century English hymn by Frederick William Faber: “There’s a 
wideness in God’s mercy, like the wideness of the sea.” 

15. Literally, “the otherworldly.” 


Book Ten, Chapter One 


|. Psychology, 4.2 (pages 151-52). 

2. These “collisions” are not haphazard or accidental. Sce above, 9.6.9 n. 8. 

3. This is implicit. In the Najat it is explicitly stated, where it reads “wa al- 
thani imma “an...” See Avicenna, Kitab al-Najat, 333 line 3. 

4. As given in B, H, D, and T, and in the Najat ibid., 335 line 8. 

5. Wa hay’at injirdrihr ila al-thawani: More literally, “the disposition, or 
state, or manner of their being drawn to the secondary.” 


Book Ten, Chapter Two 


1. Literally, “make good his life.” 
2. See above, 10.1.2 n. 1. 
3. A “sacred” tradition. 


Book Ten, Chapter Three 


1. More literally, “Thus, the memory [of the act] returns; and, before [its] 
severance, the succeeding [renewed memory] follows.” 
. Alternatively, “in their souls.” 
. See above, 9.7.14 ff. 
. Literally, “of the element that belongs to it.” 
Literally, “motions.” 
The reference is to God. 
Wajaba min “ind al-allah an yassunnahu: The language here is ontological, 
although “an obligation [demanded of him] by God to legislate” seems a legiti- 
mate alternative. 


Be Ow ND 


Ons 


422 Notes to Book Ten, Chapter Four 


Book Ten, Chapter Four 


1. Literally, “must consist in three parts.” 

2. Literally, “genus.” , 

3. More literally, “bad in the ways he associates [with others]. 

4. The reference is to the prophet Muhammad. : 
5. Literally, “and sees no harm in scandal accompanied by pleasure. 


Book Ten, Chapter Five 


1. Imam: The leader of prayer in the community, and often the leader of 
the community. The term is interchangeable with “caliph,” although in Shiite 
Islam it is restricted to descendants of the fourth caliph, “Ali (d. 661). 

9. Al-Séabiga: In early Islam, those who were first to become converts to the 
new religion. : ees 

3. A‘agalahuma: Alternative translations might be “the more rationa of 
the two,” “the greater intellect of the two,” “the more sagacious of the two, 
“the more sober of the two.” 7 

4. ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab (d. 644) and ‘Ali ibn Aba Talib (d. 661). 

5, That is, temperate climes. . a 

6. Wahmiyya: Here, translated more appropriately as “imagination,” rather 
than “estimation.” 





























Bibliography 


Alverny, Marie Thérése d’. “Anniyya-Anitas.” In Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval 
Studies, Mélanges offerts a Etienne Gilson, de l’Académie francaise, 59~91. Paris: 
Librarie philosophique J. Vrin, 1959. 

Al-Ash‘ari, Abt al-Hasan ‘Ali ibn Isma‘il. Magalat al-Islamiyyin wa't-ikhtilaf al- 
musallin. Edited by Hellmut Ritter. Istanbul: Devlet Matbaasi, 1930. 

Avicenna. Kitab al-isharat wa al-tanbihat. Edited by Jaques Forget. Leiden: E. J. 
Brill, 1892. 

. Kitab al-najat. Edited by Majid Fakhry. Beirut: Dar al-Afaq al-Jadida, 

1985. 

. Liber de philosophia prima, sive, Scienta divina; édition critique de la traduc- 

tion latine médiévale par S. van Riet; introduction doctrinale par G. Verbeke. 3 vols. 

Louvain: Peeters, 1977-1983. 

. Metafisika: Le scienza delle cose divine [Arabic text and Italian translation]. 

Edited by Olga Lizzini and Pasquale Porro. Milan: Bompiani il pensiero 

occidentale, 2002. 

. Die Metaphysik Avicennas enthaltend die Metaphysik, Theologie, Kosmologie 

und Ethik. Edited by Max J. H. Horten. New York: R. Haupt, 1907. 

. La Métaphysique du “Shifa.” 2 vols (vol. 1, Livres I a V: vol. 2, Livres VI 

a X). Translated by Georges C. Anawati. Paris: J. Vrin, 1978, 1985. 

. Al-Mubahathat. Edited by Muhsin Bidarfar. Qom: Intisharat Bidar, 1992. 

- Proof of Prophecies. Fi ithbat al-nubuwwat. Edited by Michael E. Marmura. 

Beirut: Dar al-Nahar, 1968; reprinted, 1991. 

. Remarks and Admonitions [Kitab al-isharat wa al-tanbihat]: Part One: 

Logic. Translated by Shams C. Inati. Toronto: The Pontifical Institute of 

Mediaeval Studies, 1984. 

. Al-Shifa’ [Healing]: Al-Ilahiyyat [Metaphysics]. Edited by Georges C. 

Anawati, et al. 2 vols. Cairo: Al-Hay’a al-"Amma li-Shu°an al-Mutabi’ al- 

Amiriya, 1960. 

. Al-Shifa” [Healing]: Al-Mantig [Logic] |: Al-Madkhal (Isagoge]. Edited 

by Ahmad Fu’ad al-Ahwani, Georges C. Anawati, and Mahmaid Muhammad 

al-Khudayri. Cairo: Al-Matba‘ah al-Amiriyah, 1952. 








— 423 — 


424 Bibliography 





_ ALShifa’ [Healing]: Al-Mantig [Logic] 2: Al-Magalat [Categories]. 

Edited by Georges C. Anawati, Ahmad Fu’ad al-Ahwani, Mahmid Muham- 

mad al-Khudayri, and Sa‘id Zayid. Cairo: Al-Matba‘ah al-Amiriyah, 1959. 

_ AL-Shifa’ [Healing]: Al-Mantig [Logic] 3: Al-“Ibara [De interpreta- 

tione]. Edited by Mahmiid Muhammad al-Khudayri. Cairo: Al-Matba‘ah 

al-Amiriya, 1970. 

_ Al-Shifa’ [Healing]: Al-Mantig [Logic] 4: Al-Qiyas [Syllogism]. Edited 

by Sa°id Zayid. Cairo: Al-Matba‘ah al-Amiriya, 1964. 

_ Al-Shifa’ [Healing]: Al Mantiq [Logic] 5: A-Burhan [Demonstration]. 

Edited by Aba al-‘Ila Affifi. Revised by Ibrahim Madkur. Cairo: Al-Matba‘ah 

al-Amiriya, 1956. 

_ Al-Shifa’ [Healing]: Al-Riyddiyat [Mathematics] 4: “Ilm al-hay’ah 

[Astronomy]. Edited by Muhammad Rida Mudawwar and Imam Ibrahim 

Ahmad. Cairo: Al-Hay’ah al-Misriyah al--Amma lil-Kitab, 1980. 

_ Al-Shifa’ [Healing]: Al-Tabi ‘iyyat [Physics]. Edited by Ibrahim Mad- 

kiir and Sa‘id Zayid. Cairo: Al-Hay°ah al-Misriyah al-‘Amma [il-Kitab, 

1965-1983. 

_ Al-Shifa [Healing]: AL-Tabi iyyat 6: Al-Nafs [Psychology]. Edited by 

George C. Anawati and Sa‘id Zayid. Cairo: Al-Matba‘ah al-Amiriya, 1975. 

_ Al-Ta‘ligat. Edited by “Abd al-Rahman Badawi. Cairo: Al-Hay’a al- 
Misriya al-“Amma lil-Kitab, 1973. 

Al-Bagillani, Muhammad ibn al-Tayyib. Kitab al-tamhid. Edited by Richard J. 
McCarthy. Beirut: Al-Maktaba al-Sharqiyya, 1957. 

Black, Deborah L. “Estimation (Wahm) in Avicenna: The Logical and Psycho- 
logical Dimensions.” Dialogue 32 (1993): 219-58. 

ALBukhari, Muhammad ibn Isma‘il. Sahih. Beirut: Dar al-Fikr, 1992. 

Druart, Thérese-Ann. “Res as Concomitant of Being.” In Documenta et Studi 
Tradizione Filosofica Medievale 12 (2001): 125-42. 

ALFarabi. Kitab al-alfaz al-musta‘mala fi al-mantig. Edited by Muhsin S. Mahdi. 
Beirut: Dar al-Mashriq, 1970. 

. Kitab al-masiga al-kabir. Edited by Ghattas ‘Abd al-Malik Khashaba. 
Cairo: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi lil-Tiba‘a wa al-Nashr, 1967. 

Furley, David J. Tivo Studies in the Greek Atomists. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1967. 

Geyke, Kwame. “The Term Jstithna’ in Arabic Logic.” Journal of the American 
Oriental Society 27, no. | (1972): 88-92. 

Al-Ghazali. The Incoherence of the Philosophers. Translated by Michael E. Marmura. 
Ind ed. Provo, UT: Brigham Young University Press, 2000. 

Goichon, Amélie Marie. Lexique de la langue philosophique d'Ibn Sina (Avicenne). 
Paris: Desclée de Brouwer, 1938, 

Gutas, Dimitry. Avicenna and the Aristotelian Tradition. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1988. 

Ibn Hanbal, Ahmad ibn Muhammad. Al-Musnad. Beirut: Dar al-Fikr, 1991. 

Inati, Shams C. “Ibn Sina on Single Expressions.” In Islamic Theology and Philos- 
ophy, edited by Michael E. Marmura, 148—59. Albany: SUNY Press, 1984. 

Jolivet, Jean. “Aux origens de Pontologie d’Ibn Sina.” In Etudes sur Avicenne, edited 
by Jean Jolivet and Roshdi Rashed, 11-28. Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1984. 


























Bibliography 425 


Al-Kindi. Rasa?il al-Kindi al-falsafiyah. Edited by Muhammad ‘Abd al-Hadi 
Abii Rida. Cairo: Dar al-Fikr al-‘Arabi, 1950. . 
Marmura, Michael E. “Avicenna and the Kalam.” Zeitschrift fiir Geschichte der 

Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften 7 (1991): 172-206. 

= “Avicenna on Causal Priority.” In Islamic Philosophy and Mysticism 

edited by Parviz Morewedge. New York: Delmar, 1981. , 

. “Avicenna on the Division of the Sciences in the Jsa is Shifa’.” 

goge of His Shifa’. 

Journal for the History of Arabic Science 4 (1980): 240-51. a 

. “Avicenna’s Chapter, ‘On the Relative,’ in the Metaphysics of the Shifa’.” 

In Essays on Islamic Philosophy and Science, edited by George F. Hourani. 

Albany: State of University of New York Press, 1975. : 

. “Avicenna’s Chapter on Universals in the Jsa f Hi ifa°.” 

goge of His Shifa’.” In 

A. Welch and P. Cachia, eds., Islam: Post Influence and Present Challenge. Edin- 

burgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1979. 

rrr a ‘Flying Man’ in Context.” The Monist 69, no. 3 (1986): 

: “Avicenna’s Proof from Contingency for God’s Existence in the Meta- 

physics of the Shifa’.” Mediaeval Studies 42 (1980): 337~52. 

: “Some Aspects of Avicenna’s Theory of God’s Knowledge of Particu- 
a Journal of the American Oriental Society 82, no. 3 (July-September 1962): 

312. . 

Mulla Sadra. See Sadr al-Din Shirazi, Muhammad ibn Ibrahim. 

Naraqi, Muhammad Mahdi. Sharh al-ildhiyyat min kitab al-shifa’. Edited by 
Mahdi Muhaqgiq. Tehran: Mu’ssasa-i Mutala°at-i Islami, 1986. 

Rahman, Fazlur. The Philosophy of Mulla Sadra (Sadr al-Din al-Shirazi). Albany: 
State University of New York Press, 1975. 

Sadr al-Din Shirazi, Muhammad ibn Ibrahim. Al-hikma al-muta “Gliya fi al-asfar 
al- agliyya al-‘arba‘a. Edited by Rida al-Muzaffar. 4 vols. Tehran: Dar al- 
Ma*arif al-Islamiyya, 1959. 

Wisnovsky, Robert. Avicenna’s Metaphysics in Context. London: Duckworth, 2003. 

- “Notes on Avicenna’s Concept of Thingness.” In Arabic Sciences and 

Philosophy 10, no. 2 (September 2000): 181-221. 

Zimmerman, F. W. Al-Farabi’s Commentary and Short Treatise on Aristotle’s De 

interpretatione. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1981. 


























Index 


‘abath. See triviality 
abstraction, xix, xx, 2, 7, 18, 59, 63, 107, 
109, 110, 151, 155, 156, 160, 190, 246, 
247, 251, 292, 382, 384, 385, 390, 397, 
400, 405 
accident, xxiii, 12, 16, 17, 19, 20, 27, 29, 
35-36, 43, 49, 52, 53, 59, 61, 62, 70, 
90, 93, 116, 124, 130, 147, 167, 180, 
182, 186, 188, 190, 191, 194, 195, 196, 
200, 202, 205, 206, 208, 210, 213, 218, 
241, 260, 261, 264, 265, 266, 269, 274, 
975, 280, 287, 289, 292, 298, 304, 310, 
312, 323, 340, 343, 345, 351, 355, 356, 
384, 385, 388-93, 396, 399, 401, 404, 
406, 409, 420, 421 
act and, 137-39 
cause of, 34 
existence of, 71—74 
genus and, 168-73 
investigation of, 5, 7, 9-11 
knowledge and, 107 
purpose and, 225, 228-32, 235 
qualities and, 102-105, 107, 109-110 
quantities and, 18, 21, 78-86, 89, 111 
relation and, 119-22, 254 
shape as, 8 
substance and, 45-46 
unity and multiplicity and, 236-37, 
250, 252 
universal and particular, 148-49, 
152-53, 156, 158-62 
act, xxiii, 2, 8, 13, 24, 47, 52, 56, 60, 63, 
67, 71, 75, 80, 81, 84, 86, 87, 90, 108, 
109, 130-35, 137-43, 145-46, 160, 
167, 171, 181, 182, 184, 193, 195, 196, 
200, 201, 205, 206, 209-16, 218-23 


action, 134, 135, 137, 142, 171, 193, 200, 
208, 210, 211, 213, 218, 220, 226, 230, 
245, 250, 295, 301, 302, 304, 313, 
390, 323, 332, 333, 335, 342, 352, 
356, 359, 363, 369, 373, 381, 391, 
402, 403, 409, 418 

actuality, 315, 323, 327, 331, 334, 352, 
384, 394, 408, 414 

actualization, 134, 263, 268, 304, 349, 
394 

ad infinitum, 46, 122, 160, 203, 220, 224, 
296, 227, 254, 258, 261, 293, 307, 331, 
362, 414, 417 

administrators, 370 

adultery, 344, 377 

affection, 190, 240, 244, 245, 302, 346, 409 

afterlife, 365, 366, 367, 368, 369, 377 

agent, 344, 346, 347, 391, 402, 408-10, 
419 

aggregate, 5, 6, 16, 42, 47, 77, 79, 91, 105, 

106, 117, 145, 152, 163, 164, 171, 173, 
177, 182, 240, 258, 303, 363 
agreement, 240, 251, 280, 334, 335, 336, 
374 
air, 75, 211, 216, 225, 259, 260, 261, 263, 
264, 267, 269, 274, 307 
“Ali, 375, 422 
Almagest, 317 
d’Alverny, M-Th., 383 
Analytics, 28, 406 
Anawati, G. C., xxiv, xxv, xxvi, 403 
angels, 15, 41, 358, 359, 365, 368, 369 
angle, 75, 88, 89, 114, 387, 392, 408 
acute, 190-93 ; 
obtuse, 88, 192, 193 
right, 85, 111, 116, 190-93, 387, 407 


— 426 — 


Index 


animal, 36, 92, 125, 130, 131, 135, 147, 
152-56, 164, 165, 166, 168, 170, 171, 
175, 177, 180-82, 184, 185, 191, 201, 
216, 224, 225, 267, 271, 282, 307, 312, 
339, 350, 351, 352, 354, 359, 364, 369, 
382, 385, 393, 402, 404, 406, 407, 410 

animality, 36, 84, 153, 154, 155, 156, 164, 
165, 185, 382, 405 

annihilation, 67, 254 

anniyya/inniyya, 383-86, 415, 417 

annulment, 96, 281 

appendages, 236 

apprehension, 7, 58, 63, 80, 101, 103, 105, 
107, 108, 109, 116, 118, 120, 121-23, 
142, 153, 160, 171, 178, 181, 185, 189, 
212, 243, 245, 247, 249, 266, 283-89, 
291-98, 310-12, 314, 316, 325, 327, 
330, 331, 339, 340, 348-52, 356, 
360-62, 382, 392, 394, 400, 412, 420 

a priori, 80, 382 

argument, 110, 120, 149, 243, 289, 317, 
326, 348, 376, 387-91, 393, 395-99, 
401-403, 407, 411, 412, 414-17 

arithmetic, xx, 15, 17, 18, 19, 11 

Aristotle (Aristti, First Teacher), 262, 
263, 264, 267, 268, 269, 316, 317, 326, 
401, 402, 406, 412, 421 

arrangement, 15, 255, 256, 319, 342, 353 

artisans, 370 

ascertainment, 249, 297, 320, 373 

Ash‘arites, 401, 403, 417 

assent, 26, 43, 49, 383 

category of (bab al-tasdiq), 22, 386 

association, xx, 311, 330, 335, 364, 371, 
372, 384 

astral predictions, 358, 363 

astrologer, 363 

astronomy, 15, 419 

atoms, 52, 53, 288, 389, 391. See also 
indivisibility 

attainment, 2, 13, 127, 128, 166, 167, 233, 
317, 322, 348, 375, 378 

attributes (divine), xxiii, 3, 4, 9, 149, 198, 
199, 257, 273, 276, 278, 288, 291, 296, 
297, 299, 306, 387, 408, 411, 415 

augmentation, 91, 251, 254 

‘ayn (pl. a‘yan). See existent, extramental 

Ayyiyya, 383 


bab al-tasdig. See assent, category of 
beginning, 1, 20, 31, 91, 125, 144, 152, 


427 


205, 220, 246, 257, 261, 274, 304, 306, 
307, 314, 318, 338, 343, 350, 358, 383, 
388, 403, 406, 408, 410, 415, 417, 418 
being qua being (al-mawjid bi ma huwa 
mawjud), 381-82 
belief, 2, 38, 133, 154, 198, 205, 247, 248, 
284, 286, 346, 347, 353, 356, 357, 362, 
366, 374, 375 
erroneous, 89 
benefit, xxv, 13, 14, 15, 231, 232, 233, 234, 
243, 270, 303, 304, 318, 319, 321, 323, 
326, 339, 341, 342, 345, 347, 350, 361, 
362, 365, 367, 368, 370, 371, 378 
bestowal, 14, 62, 231, 232, 234, 354 
bestower, 283, 413 
bitterness, 238, 239, 349, 373 
Black, D. L., 385 
blackness, 56, 147, 239, 281 
blame, 234, 351 
blameworthy, 241, 343 
blind, 136, 238, 349, 405 
blindness, 340, 394 
body, xxi, xxvi, 2, 4, 7, 8, 17, 18, 57, 60, 62, 
68, 70, 71, 73, 75, 76, 77, 101,110, 111, 
114, 115, 125, 131, 135, 137, 138, 147, 
177, 191, 208, 212, 225, 228, 251, 254, 
265, 277, 298, 399, 306, 307, 308, 311, 
312, 314, 315, 316, 325, 328, 329, 330, 
331, 333, 334, 335, 338, 346, 347, 348, 
330, 351, 352, 353, 355, 361, 369, 377, 
378, 389, 392, 393, 395, 398, 403, 406, 
408, 419 
celestial, 314, 319, 322-24, 326, 332, 
337, 356, 358, 359, 416, 418, 421 
definition and, 180-82, 184 
genus and, 163-74 
nature of, 46-55 
quality and, 102, 103, 105-107 
quantity and, 84—90 
See also atoms 
Book of Piety and Evil, The, 362 
booty, 370 
boy, 125, 134, 215, 259, 260, 261-64, 267, 
269 
brigandage, 371 
builder, 201, 230 
building, xxii, 201, 202, 219, 230, 291, 375 


caliph, 374, 375, 377, 422 
caliphate, 375 
calm, 368 


428 


categories, xx, 9, 19, 20, 71, 72, 79, 186, 
245, 249, 391, 398 
Categories, The, 389, 391, 393, 394, 395, 
398, 399, 400, 401, 413, 416. See also 
Healing, The 
causality, xix, xx, 12, 33, 127, 203, 411 
cause, xix, Xx, xxi, xxii, xxiii, 2, 3, 5, 6, 
10-13, 15, 20, 22, 23, 29-35, 37, 39, 46, 
48, 52, 53, 56, 61-63, 202, 362, 401 
absolute, 5, 207, 258, 270 
accidental, xxiii, 356, 420 
efficient, 195, 196, 201, 204, 205, 228, 
229, 259, 271, 300, 303, 313, 333, 360 
elemental, 194, 215, 271 
essential, xxiii, 31, 33, 129, 203, 207, 
275, 356, 401, 409, 415 
final, 16, 225-29, 231, 235, 265, 270, 
382, 411 
first, the, 2, 3, 11, 20, 104, 204, 230, 
258, 259, 270, 272, 301, 304, 321, 325, 
328, 333, 334 
formal, 73, 194, 196, 228, 270, 271 
intermediary, 65, 73, 322, 333 
material, 261, 264, 414 
proximate, 65, 66, 69, 203 
ultimate, 5, 6, 11, 12 
center, 78, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 337, 
338, 398 
change, xxv, 14, 50, 51, 86, 104, 105, 112, 
116, 131-33, 143, 146, 169, 184, 189, 
202, 204, 206, 210, 215-18, 231, 241, 
242, 245, 252, 253, 254, 263, 264, 267, 
270, 287, 289, 290, 302, 304, 309, 311, 
312, 332, 334-37, 338, 353, 364, 373, 
376, 377, 394, 395 
children, 225, 323, 372, 374, 410 
choice, 125, 132, 134, 137, 308, 312, 313, 
316, 319, 321, 322, 325, 351, 374, 381, 
382, 407, 418 
circumference, 111-13, 190, 191, 397, 398 
circle, 111-16, 190-92, 235, 310, 396, 397, 
398, 407 
circularity, 23, 27, 78, 114, 219, 235, 318 
citizens, 364, 375 
city, xxiv, 78, 189, 362, 364, 366, 370, 371, 
375, 376, 377, 378, 387 
coagulation, 52 
cogitation, 133, 221-24, 361, 410 
color, 68, 72, 84, 102, 104, 105, 166, 167, 
171, 177, 239, 245, 281, 282, 395, 406 
coldness, 96, 97, 210, 211, 256, 338 


Index 


collision of causes, 171, 288, 342, 359, 
360, 362, 420, 421 

comparable, the, 21, 281 

completion, 115, 131, 143, 144-46, 166, 
261-63, 299, 334, 350, 353 

concavity, 187, 244 


conjunction, 25, 33, 37, 66, 92, 103, 121, 
127, 129, 142, 158, 200, 215, 223, 238, 
247, 252, 281, 288, 305, 336 

compositeness, 20, 30, 38, 47, 54, 79, 81, 
91, 94, 147, 156, 165, 176, 178, 179, 180, 
182, 185-88, 190, 195, 196, 217, 225, 
226, 265, 266, 277, 280, 388, 407, 408 

compulsion, 50, 58, 115, 116, 121, 137, 138, 
181, 200, 238, 308, 309, 324, 360, 418 

concept(s), xix, XX, xxii, xxill, xxiv, 25, 
287, 292, 382, 383, 384, 386, 392, 397, 
400, 401, 411, 413, 415 

conception, xxiii, xxiv, 23, 43, 44, 49, 80, 
121, 142, 148, 149, 159, 161, 162, 165, 
189, 286, 288, 315, 353, 360, 361, 386, 
387, 392, 399, 400, 417 

conclusion (of a syllogism), 15, 16, 39, 40, 
41, 216, 220, 227, 278, 388, 389, 402, 
409, 415 

concomitance, 5, 25, 34, 155, 181, 276 

concomitant, xx, xxi, 5, 25, 78, 102, 107, 
121, 130, 134, 140, 155, 156, 158, 169, 
171, 172, 177, 178, 181, 182, 188, 225, 
235, 239, 240, 276, 294, 305, 402, 407, 
411, 412, 413 

necessary, xx, xxii, 8, 27, 30, 34, 36, 
49, 50, 51, 60, 70, 78, 81, 83, 84, 93, 
99, 102, 124, 150, 152, 153, 154, 158, 
160, 169, 170-74, 176-79, 181, 182, 
191, 196, 199, 225, 228, 240, 242, 246, 
267, 273, 274, 276, 293, 314, 321, 
323, 327, 328, 333, 382, 386, 387, 
392, 393, 411, 418 

concrete (existence), 24, 25, 91, 108, 109, 
119-22, 149, 153, 155, 156, 157, 159, 
161, 172, 282, 287, 288, 329, 385, 395, 
399, 400, 405 

condensation, 61, 337, 338 

connection, xxii, 14, 53, 56, 58, 63-65, 
67, 68, 75, 77, 86, 89, 120, 130, 132, 
149, 192, 196, 202, 244, 299, 302, 329, 
340, 354, 355, 368, 384, 385, 389, 390, 
396, 399, 400 

consensus, 374 








Index 


contiguity, 93, 74, 75, 87, 88, 103, 108, ” 
112, 113, 114, 116, 212, 230, 258, 301, 
332, 352, 398 

contingent, xxiil, 377, 382. See also 
possible 

continuous, xx, 8, 21, 48, 58, 72, 73, 75, 
76, 84, 85, 88-91, 143, 146, 202, 226, 
262, 299, 325, 369 

continuum, 51, 73, 398 

contradiction, 21, 31, 33, 35, 37, 39, 41, 
58, 59, 61, 65, 82, 95, 98, 136, 149, 
150, 159, 238, 242, 243, 248, 251, 256, 
276, 277, 279, 282, 316, 394, 404 

contrariety, 9, 10, 21, 40, 41, 42, 62, 96, 
97, 98, 99, 113, 116, 120, 134, 154, 178, 
203, 210, 216, 233, 237, 238, 239, 240, 
241, 242, 243, 250, 253, 262, 264, 282, 
293, 299, 304, 308, 324, 344, 345, 354, 
366, 373, 375, 377, 395 

corporeality, 49, 51, 53-57, 108, 137, 138, 
163, 164, 165, 166, 169, 251, 324, 331, 
406. See also form, matter 

corresponding, 21, 61, 78, 79, 90, 98, 112, 
113, 117, 122, 222, 237, 246, 249, 252, 
288, 315 

cosmology, xxi, xxiv 

courage, 240, 241, 374, 375, 378 

cowardice, 3, 240, 241 

Creator, the, 141, 306, 307 

creation, 137, 203, 204, 272, 305, 306, 
331, 362, 403, 415, 417, 418 

creatures, 306 

criminal, 371 

custom, 16, 94, 145, 162, 217 


deeds, 313, 369 

defamation, 351 

deficiency, 112, 117, 142, 146, 206, 208-10, 
213, 232, 245, 250, 255, 260, 284, 292, 
296, 297, 321, 339, 340, 343, 344, 345, 
352, 354, 378, 419 

definiteness, 117, 227 

definition, xx, 2, 12, 23, 24, 27, 28, 36, 40, 
43, 44, 57, 79, 80, 81, 84, 90, 92, 93, 
98, 106, 107, 108, 116, 120, 122, 132, 
142, 149, 150, 153, 156, 158, 160, 162, 
176, 177, 179-81, 184, 185-91, 193-95, 
206, 207, 228, 244, 245, 247-51, 277, 
281, 282, 299, 382, 387-89, 392-94, 
399, 406, 407, 409, 416 

demonstration, 15, 16, 44, 55, 154, 177, 


429 


277, 282, 283, 286, 299, 353, 363, 383, 
385, 412, 415. See also syllogism 
Demonstration, The Book of, 2, 15, 39, 55, 
384, 385, 388, 390, 392. See also 
Healing, The 
denuded 
from matter, 109, 158, 244, 255, 285, 
286, 287, 312, 358, 416, 417 
from types of change, 311 
deputy, xxiv, 378 
description, 19, 25, 26, 27, 50, 51, 85, 92, 
93, 100, 106-108, 118-20, 122, 145, 
150, 172, 180, 188, 189, 191, 193, 199, 
204, 208, 276, 277, 288, 308, 321, 329, 
346, 348, 389, 416 
desire, 4, 13, 50, 221-24, 283, 284, 292, 
312-18, 322, 323, 325, 328, 337, 348, 
349, 351, 352-56, 369, 372, 373, 410, 
418, 420, 421 
psychological, 224- 
determinate quantification, 151 
dialectic, 12, 13, 40, 243 
difference, 2, 6, 8, 13, 17, 20, 21, 25, 27, 
29, 34, 46, 55, 62, 64, 74, 81, 85, 86, 
87, 97, 99, 108, 117, 128, 135, 146, 150, 
151, 157, 161-64, 169, 174, 175, 186, 
187, 208, 211, 212, 220, 225, 228, 236, 
239, 241, 242, 246, 251, 252, 274, 278, 
282, 294, 296, 317, 318, 323, 324, 
334~—36, 347, 391, 398, 406 
differentia, 36, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 74, 75, 
78, 84, 86, 119, 158, 164-82, 184, 185, 
190, 217, 219, 237, 239, 242, 277, 
280-82, 406, 409 
dimension, 17, 32, 48-51, 53, 58, 61, 72, 85, 
86, 88, 89, 90, 103, 106, 113, 163, 164, 
165, 167, 183, 244, 251, 338, 389, 393 
diminution, 91, 251, 254 
disagreement, 40, 94, 239, 240, 241, 280, 
316, 335, 373 
discernment, 119, 385 
discontinuity, 86 
dispenser of justice, 364 
disposition, 53, 57, 61, 62, 63, 65, 13], 
134, 159, 195, 201, 202, 206, 208, 209, 
210, 218, 223, 240, 260, 262, 263, 266, 
267, 268, 301, 302, 313, 335, 340, 342, 
354, 355, 357, 399, 421 
positive, 135, 143, 223, 242, 245, 353, 
354, 355, 369 
disputations, 366 


430 


distance, 48, 85, 90, 103, 192, 241, 307, 
419 

division, 4, 5, 9, 10, 12, 14, 19, 22, 23, 30, 
35, 36, 43, 45, 46, 50, 52, 53, 59, 65, 
76, 80, 82, 90, 169, 170, 171, 191, 194, 
199, 207, 209, 210, 226, 230, 231, 235, 
943, 246, 255, 262, 263, 264, 266, 267, 
287, 296, 337, 341, 381, 383, 391, 394, 
397, 406 

divisions, 2, 10, 11, 14, 15, 19, 40, 45, 48, 
74, 76, 77, 78, 115, 117, 144, 169, 182, 
191, 198, 206, 209, 217, 221, 225, 236, 
243, 260, 261, 263, 265, 266, 267, 361, 
381, 413 

donkey, 349 

double, 90, 117, 212 

doubt, 15, 18, 24, 32, 39, 41, 42, 81, 102, 
154, 157, 176, 179, 183, 220, 224, 225, 
296, 228, 269, 274, 305, 333, 339, 
367, 395 

downward, 90, 115, 116, 256, 338, 356 

dreams, 356, 358 

duality, 73, 82, 186, 245, 252, 253, 254, 
286, 327, 330 

dyads, xxi 


earth, 58, 120, 148, 211, 225, 288, 307, 
337, 363 

Eastern Philosophy, The (al-falsafa al- 
mashrigiyya), Xxii 

eclipse, 288, 289, 290, 418 

effect, xxi, xxiii, 5, 20, 65, 198, 201, 202, 
205, 206, 207, 209, 214, 290, 293, 318, 
319, 328, 330, 331, 333, 359, 390, 415, 
419, 420 

efficacy, 199, 299 

element, 22, 194, 195, 201, 212, 215, 217, 
218, 225, 259, 263, 264, 265, 267, 268, 
269, 271, 324, 333-35, 337, 338, 342, 
353, 358, 359, 369, 421 

emanation, xxi, xxii, xxiii, xxiv, 14, 67, 
68, 233, 276, 291, 294, 295, 299, 308, 
392, 327, 328, 333, 335-37, 342, 343, 
359, 411, 413, 418, 419 

end (purpose), 46, 89, HI, 112, 115, 144, 
219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 226, 
997, 228, 229, 230, 231, 233, 234, 235, 
251, 270, 271, 301, 309, 310, 312, 318, 
325, 360, 398, 410, 414 

enemies, 376, 377 

enjoyment, 21, 297, 298, 316 


Index 


entity, 9, 34, 36, 54, 57, 59, 86, 99, 104, 
109, 110, 127, 141, 158, 159, 227, 238, 
244, 245, 250, 278, 279, 294, 302, 317, 
398, 331, 335, 336, 341, 383, 387, 392, 
393, 396, 401, 405, 407, 416, 419 

mathematical, 110, 235, 244, 245, 249, 
397, 412 

equality, 14, 21, 27, 30, 32, 40, 41, 51, 62, 
63, 80, 81, 90, 101, 102, 113, 117, 141, 
183, 193, 206, 207, 208, 210, 211, 212, 
213, 237, 240, 245, 251, 253, 257, 282, 
299, 306, 310, 346, 366, 387, 390, 393, 
395, 409, 412 

equivocal (bi al-tashkik), 8, 17, 41, 42, 47, 
74, 83, 119, 128, 188, 251, 253, 329 

error, xxvi, 26, 39, 41, 46, 89, 92, 105, 
113, 154, 201, 243, 247, 248, 294, 320, 
369, 377 

essence, Xx, xxii, xxill, 3, 17, 19, 32, 33, 
35, 55, 56, 61, 64, 65, 66, 70, 74, 81, 
84, 88, 93, 109, 118, 121, 122, 136-38, 
141, 144, 145, 149, 153, 158, 159, 163, 
166, 174-76, 186, 195, 196, 200, 202, 
203, 214, 218, 227, 231-33, 235, 237, 
249, 244, 247, 249, 252, 259, 269, 270, 
272-75, 278, 280, 284, 285, 287, 288, 
290—99, 302-307, 314, 320-23, 325, 
327-30, 332-35, 340, 352, 353, 383, 
386, 387, 390, 393, 396, 400, 401, 406, 
413, 414, 416, 417, 418 

estimation (wahm), 19, 59, 77, 84, 85, 87, 
171, 191, 235, 299, 307, 310, 311, 312, 
319, 332, 345, 348, 385, 387, 389, 393, 
418, 422 

equipollence, 154, 247, 405, 412, 413 

Euclid, 6 

even (number), 94, 98 

evil, 13, 98, 142, 143, 225, 231, 233, 239, 
945, 255, 284, 339-48, 351, 361, 362, 
372, 376, 420 

excellence, 40, 132, 375 

excess, 94, 105, 112, 117, 145, 193, 206, 
208, 213, 244, 245, 336, 341, 347, 351, 
354, 371, 378 

exemplars, 155, 243, 246, 249 
existence, xix, XX, XXi, xxii, xxiii, 3, 4,9, 
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 
20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26 
affirmative (al-wujid al-ithbati), 24, 
382, 386, 387, 400, 404, 405 
assuredness of, 28, 36 


Index 


existence (continued) 
concrete (individual), 91, 108, 109, 119, 
120, 121, 149, 153, 155, 157, 159, 282, 
287, 288, 329, 385, 395, 399, 400 
necessary, 19, 28, 29, 30, 32-38, 64, 65, 
82, 126, 198, 199, 214, 274, 275, 279, 
280-82, 284, 297, 299, 330, 342 
permanent, 38, 65, 200, 203, 204, 248, 
300 
proper, 8, 24, 33, 122, 353, 382, 386, 
390, 400, 404 
existent, xx, xxl, xxill, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 19, 
22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 29, 30, 33, 35, 38, 
43, 44, 45, 47, 60, 64, 71, 72, 73, 79, 83, 
86, 104, 107, 120, 131, 140, 141, 142, 
156, 158, 159, 186, 194, 255, 228, 236, 
238, 247, 250, 252, 272, 273, 276, 277, 
278, 281, 282, 287, 294, 296, 304, 306, 
309, 327, 358, 381, 387, 388, 408, 417 
inasmuch as it is an existent, 6, 9, 10, 
11, 12, 21, 39, 194, 274, 381, 382 
necessary, the, 29, 30, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37, 
38, 47, 64, 257, 271, 272, 273, 274, 
275, 276, 277, 278, 279, 281, 282, 283, 
284, 287, 288, 291, 294, 295, 296, 297, 
298, 300, 302, 304, 328, 388, 401, 415 
See also nonexistent 
extension, 8, 88, 114 


Faber, Frederick William, 421 

faculty, xxii, 18, 19, 25, 52, 58, 63, 87, 113, 
171, 221, 235, 239, 245, 249, 286, 297, 
298, 309, 310, 312, 313, 345, 349, 350, 
351, 352, 353, 354, 384, 385, 393, 397, 
410, 418, 421 

Al-Falsafa al-Mashriqiyya. See Eastern 
Philosophy, The 

al-Farabi, xxi, xxiv 

Kitab al-alfaz al-musta ‘mala fi al- 
mantig, 383 
Kitab al-miisiga al-kabir, 395 

father, xxiv, xxv, xxvi, 34, 117, 118, 120, 
201, 208, 247, 413 

fatherhood, 118, 120, 121, 122, 394, 413 

felicity, 22, 369 

female, 98, 168, 170, 171, 238 

festivals, 375 

fewness, 94, 95 

figure (geometrical), 21, 85, 111, 112, 113, 
114, 116, 186, 218, 235, 249, 385, 413 

fines, 37] 


431 


finite, xxiii, 8, 49, 86, 121, 162, 202, 227, 
244, 251, 257, 258, 259, 260, 271, 274, 
305, 313, 314, 391, 392. See also 
infinite (ad infinitum) 

fire, 43, 46, 137, 174, 201, 202, 205, 206, 
208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 225, 226, 264, 
267, 274, 323, 332, 337, 342, 344, 345, 
346, 347, 350, 352, 363, 418. See also 
form, fiery 

First Teacher, the. See Aristotle 

“fiveness,” 252, 253 

form 

corporeal, 57-63, 66, 86, 337, 338 

fiery, 201, 206, 336 

separable, 243, 244, 245, 396 
fund, common, 370 


gambling, 371 

garment, 102, 342, 346 

generality, 11, 17, 69, 140, 155, 271 

generable, 263, 287, 300, 318, 334, 338, 358 

generation, xxi, 14, 22, 139, 146, 204, 
205, 217, 220, 226, 262, 263, 264, 265, 
266, 267, 268, 287, 269, 295, 300, 301, 
304, 318, 334, 337, 338, 358, 392, 414 

and corruption, xxi, 14, 22, 146, 205, 

220, 269, 287, 318, 333, 334, 358, 410, 
41, 417 

genera, 20, 102, 172, 174, 184, 217, 237, 
239, 240, 319, 409 

genitalia, 374 

genre, 145, 216, 232 

genus, 20, 27, 36, 38, 54, 55, 74, 75, 78, 
79, 80, 81, 86, 89, 95, 97, 98, 99, 100, 
101, 102, 111, 119, 133, 144, 153, 158, 
159, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 
169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 
177, 178, 180, 182, 183, 184, 185, 188, 
190, 207, 219, 237, 238, 239, 240, 241, 
242, 277, 278, 282, 283, 299, 335, 352, 
363, 364, 385, 391, 393, 401, 405, 406, 
416, 422 

geometry, xx, 6, 11, 15, 17, 85, 111, 113, 
132, 246, 249, 341, 347, 396 

Ghariqi. See Megarians 

God, xx, xxi, xxiii, xxiv, 1—4, 12, 18, 22, 
156, 195, 290, 306, 307, 320, 345, 351, 
355, 359, 363-70, 372, 374, 375, 377, 
378, 381, 382, 384, 386, 387, 391, 392, 
400, 401, 403, 408, 411, 415-19, 421 

deputy of, xxiv, 378 


432 


godliness, 370 
Goichon, A-M., 383, 386, 393, 401 
good, 143, 204, 224, 225, 226, 231, 232, 
233, 234, 235, 239, 255, 256, 270, 283, 
284, 292, 293, 294, 296, 297, 312, 313, 
314, 315, 318, 320, 321, 322, 327, 339, 
342, 344, 345, 346, 348, 349, 350, 35], 
360, 370, 371, 372, 374, 376, 377, 403, 
410, 421 
good, the, xxiv, 13, 98, 142, 143, 220, 225, 
231, 232, 233, 234, 239, 245, 255, 256, 
270, 284, 293, 296, 312, 313, 314, 321, 
323, 325, 327, 339, 340, 342, 343, 345, 
346, 347, 348, 350, 352, 360, 361, 362, 
365, 366, 369, 376, 411, 418, 419, 420 
first, 317, 325, 342 
pure, 21, 283, 284, 312, 318, 342 
ultimate, 314 
goodness, 143, 220, 233, 256, 284, 294, 
297, 318, 319, 321, 326, 339, 341, 346, 
349, 370 
goods, 232, 318, 344, 345, 347, 356, 370 
bodily, 347 
governance, 14, 227, 290, 299, 322, 339, 
374 
governing rule (hukm pl. ahkam), 61, 122, 
159, 160, 176, 178, 267, 328, 330, 409 
Governor, The First, 342, 343 
gratitude, 231, 232 
ground, xxii, 126, 401 
necessitating, 37 
group, 12, 98, 120, 154, 156, 165, 171, 189, 
191, 243, 244, 245, 246, 2534, 286, 321, 
370, 391, 412 
groupings, 337 
guardian, 370, 377 
Gutas, D., 382 
gypsum, 74 


habit, 135, 223, 224, 369, 372 

haecceity, 38, 93, 150, 163, 164, 181, 217, 
236, 237, 246, 278, 280, 285, 383, 386 

haphazard, 105, 138, 139, 223, 292, 420, 
42] 

happiness, 13, 348, 352, 353, 354, 355, 
356, 357, 369 

higher, 356 

harm, 68, 72, 226, 246, 275, 339, 348, 
355, 356, 366, 372, 377, 378, 422 

harmful, 13, 241, 319, 340, 345, 349, 355, 
372, 420 


Index 


Healing, The (al-Shifa’), xix, xxii, xxiv, |, 
381, 382 
Categories, The, 391, 399 
Demonstration, The Book of, 2, 15, 39, 55 
Tsagoge, xix, Xx, xxii, xxvi, 381, 382, 383, 
384, 385, 386, 387, 391, 397, 399, 406, 
413, 415 
Logic, 28, 46, 71, 116, 237, 271, 278, 381, 
383, 398, 415 
Metaphysics (al-Illahiyyat), xix, xx, xxi, 
xxii, xxiv, xxv, 381, 382, 383, 385, 392, 
393, 396, 397, 399, 401, 402, 407, 410, 
412 
Physics, The, xx, 86, 88, 111, 139, 209, 
210, 213, 220, 227, 259, 261, 301, 307, 
381, 389, 391, 393, 396, 398, 402, 403, 
410, 412, 414, 418 
Psychology, 222, 291, 409 
hereafter, the, 13, 22, 320, 347, 352, 356, 
369, 370, 383 
felicity of, 22 
heat, 46, 90, 97, 102, 103, 106, 107, 131, 
147, 205, 210, 211, 291, 313, 332, 337, 


338, 340, 420 

heaven, 49, 50, 290, 307, 316, 317, 361, 
363 

heavens, the, 146, 269, 288, 307, 337, 339, 
418 


heaviness, 90, 256, 338 

heterogeneity, 21 

hidden, the, 290, 363, 364, 365 

Holy Spirit, 365 

homogeneity 21, 90, 142, 144, 160, 237 

horse/“horeseness,” xxii, xxiii, 149, 150, 
171, 226, 246, 251, 253, 340, 394, 
406, 410 

Horten, Max, xxiv 

house, 77, 78, 148, 216, 219, 230 

household, 370 

human, xxiv, 13, 18, 22, 45, 70, 76, 109, 
110, 142, 148, 158, 159, 164, 165, 170, 
171, 177, 190, 191, 193, 217, 224, 226, 
228, 230, 238, 247, 248, 259, 263, 347, 
353, 354, 358, 364, 365, 396, 403, 406, 
407, 416 

being, 148, 230, 283, 365 
god, 378 

humanity, 84, 150, 151, 152, 153, 158, 159, 
208, 230, 243, 244, 247, 248, 278, 279, 
283, 384, 404 

huwiyya, 383 





Index 


hyle, 54, 55, 62, 70, 86, 140, 141, 147, 
195, 226, 251, 254, 255, 256, 259, 260, 
281, 414 


ideas, xxii, xxili, I, 7, 22, 26, 84, 110, 123, 
164, 168, 176, 244, 298, 299, 317, 337, 
405 

identical, 29, 37, 42, 43, 53, 104, 109, 

119, 135, 139, 146, 150, 154, 156, 157, 
158, 182, 185, 187, 188, 199, 207, 221, 
237, 268, 269, 289, 292, 293, 295, 297, 
305, 331, 333, 351, 386, 390, 400, 
402, 403, 419 

idleness, 371 

Ilahiyyat, al- (The Metaphysics). See 
Healing, The 

imbecile souls, 355, 356 

imagination, 87, 94, 133, 134, 156, 181, 
221-24, 311-13, 325, 332, 356, 367, 
378, 392, 410, 422 

imitation, 117, 219, 235, 313-15, 321, 322, 
324, 325 

immobility, 169, 201, 234, 314, 319, 418 

imam, 374, 375, 422 

impediment, 134, 139, 208, 210, 211, 

266, 285, 324, 327, 341, 349, 350, 352, 
361, 403 

impossible, the, 27, 28, 109, 139, 294, 394 

impotence, 16, 130, 306 

Inati, S., 405 

incompleteness, 78, 79, 134, 143, 144, 
219, 264 

indefiniteness, 151, 152, 181 

indemnity, 373, 377 

indivisibility, 82, 254, 392 

inequality, 21, 90, 102, 251, 393, 395, 412. 
See also unequal, the 

infinite, xxili, 23, 31, 49, 85, 101, 105, 120, 
152, 161, 181, 199, 202, 220, 227, 244, 
246, 252, 253, 258, 259, 260, 261, 269, 
280, 286, 291, 298, 300, 301, 312, 314, 
316, 349, 353, 360, 391, 399, 406, 
413-16. See also ad infinitum 

infinity, 32, 98, 141, 202, 226, 253, 269, 
270, 274, 280, 410, 414 

injustice, 142, 343, 344, 362 

inniyya. See anniyya/inniyya 

inspiration, 363, 365 

instrument, 90, 137, 301, 302, 313, 320, 
355, 356, 378 

intellect, xxi, xxiii, 2, 21, 25, 40, 48, 76, 80, 


433 


108, 176, 177, 211, 239, 248, 251, 283, 
284, 285, 288, 291, 292, 293, 296, 297, 
307, 310, 311, 312, 325, 326, 330, 331, 
384, 409, 413 
active, xxiii, 109, 313, 325, 326, 331 
celestial, xxi 
pure, 311, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330 
separate, 325, 331 
intelligence, xxi, 22, 40, 113, 288, 376, 
396, 405, 406, 409, 413, 416 
intelligibles, 110, 244, 245, 247, 266, 291, 
292, 293, 294, 353, 384, 417 
incorruptible, 417 
primary, 384 
secondary, 384 
intention (ma‘nd), 4, 13, 22, 23, 24, 25, 
41, 92, 130, 180, 194, 221, 367, 402 
intention (gasd), 13, 41, 51, 135, 223, 233, 
268, 296, 301, 303, 308, 312, 319-23, 
326, 327 
primary, 96, 194, 315, 316 
intermediaries, 145, 246, 258, 239 
irada. See will 
irascibility, 133, 312, 313, 344, 351, 378 
Isagoge, Xix, xx, xxii, xxvi, 381, 382, 383, 
384, 385, 386, 387, 391, 397, 399, 406, 
413, 415. See also Healing, The 


Jahiz, al-, 187 

jealousy, 373, 378 

Jolivet, J., 411 

Jubba’i, Abu “Ali al-, 386 
Jubba*i, Abu Hashim al-, 387 
Jupiter, 288 

Justice, xxiv, 364, 365, 377, 378 


kawn. See generation, universe 
knowledge, xix, xx, xxii, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 11, 12, 
14, 15, 18, 22, 24, 25, 26, 40, 43, 101, 107, 
110, 117, 118, 130, 166, 189, 193, 215, 219, 
237, 257, 262, 268, 285, 289, 290, 295, 
323, 352, 353, 360, 363, 366, 367, 375, 
381, 383, 386, 392, 400, 407, 413, 416 
conceptual, 2, 383 
divine, xxi, xxiii, xxiv, 3, 4, 12, 18, 215, 
288, 290, 295, 326, 327, 361, 365 
latency (kumiin), 72, 103, 391 
law, xxiv, 168, 337, 347, 348, 364, 365, 
368, 370, 373, 374, 375, 376, 377 
divine, 377 


revealed, xxiv, 376 


454 


lawgiver, 364 

laziness, 369 

leader, 14, 125, 370, 422 

leadership, 14 

liberality, 220, 231, 234 

light (physical), 38, 98, 208, 291, 314 

lightness, 42, 90, 117, 242, 256, 338 

limit, 8, 50, 51, 75, 85, 87, 88, 90, 94, 98, 
115, 117, 144, 145, 227, 245, 251, 252, 
310, 311 

Lizzini, O., xxiv 

locomotion, 75, 217, 409 

logic, 7, 9, 13, 41, 99, 133, 149, 151, 180, 
383, 384 

Logic, The. See Healing, The 

logicians, 162 

loosening (of parts), 115, 398 

Lord of the Worlds, 1, 349 

lordship, 293 

love, 21, 118, 225, 292, 297, 312, 314, 316, 
317, 322, 323, 327, 352, 354, 372 

lover, 118, 292, 297, 312, 316 


magharigiyyiin, al-. See Megarians 
majesty, 21, 291, 327, 349, 366 
Mahdi, M., 387 
malady, 42, 350, 370 
male, 98, 168, 170, 171 
man, xxiv, 4, 13, 22, 42, 92, 101, 125, 133, 
134, 152, 153, 163, 164, 180, 181, 191, 
215, 221, 226, 246, 251, 253, 259, 260, 
261-64, 267, 269, 278, 318, 340, 342, 
3.46, 349, 364, 365, 369, 370, 373, 374, 
378, 381, 384, 392, 393, 395, 406, 407, 
410, 413 
many, the, 10, 21, 40, 77, 79, 90, 96, 97, 
98, 256, 269, 335, 394, 413 
Marmura, M. E., 381, 382, 389, 392, 396, 
397, 399, 401, 413, 415, 416 
masses, the, 23, 124, 125, 231, 232, 243 
mathematics, xix, xx, xxi, l, 2, 4, 5, 7, 10, 
11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 20, 51, 101, 
110, 228, 234, 243, 244, 245, 246, 248, 
249, 250, 396 
matter 
corporeal, 8, 16, 57, 62, 63, 70 
prime, 19, 59, 134, 216, 338, 353, 358, 
390, 414, 419 
specific kind, xix, xx, 384, 413 
meaning, 9, 13, 17, 18, 21, 23-27, 34-36, 
38, 41, 42, 46, 50, 51, 56, 74, 75, 78, 


Index 


79, 81, 83, 84-86, 99, 102, 106, 108, 
109, 124, 125, 128, 130-32, 138, 140, 
148, 149, 153, 154, 156-58, 162-69, 
171-74, 176-79, 181, 183-85, 187, 188, 
195, 203, 206, 207, 209, 212, 213, 218, 
296, 227, 229-32, 234, 239-41, 244, 
246-49, 253, 255, 259, 260, 264, 267, 
268, 272, 274-82, 289, 291, 295, 296, 
299, 301, 305, 306, 308, 309, 317, 324, 
325, 328, 330, 331, 334, 339, 351, 355, 
356, 385, 386, 389, 391-93, 395, 399, 
400, 402-405, 410, 414, 416-18, 420 

measure, xx, 7, 8, 9, 15, 17, 50, 51, 55-62, 
73, 75, 77, 84-86, 88-90, 99-101, 106, 
117, 132, 144, 146, 167, 183, 210, 212, 
251, 254, 255, 260, 310, 311, 316, 369, 
385, 393, 394, 395, 397, 414 

absolute, 17, 55, 56 
corporeal, 59, 72, 88, 90 

mediation, 62, 65, 69, 138, 169, 204, 211, 
287, 293, 303, 308, 312, 328, 329, 331, 
332-36, 361, 384, 390, 417 

medical, 131 

medicine, }1 

mean, the, 242, 354, 369, 377, 378 

Megarians, 135, 403 

metal, 211, 212 

Metaphysics, The, xix, xx, Xxi, xxiv, xxv, 381], 
382, 396, 399. See also Healing, The 

metathetic, 405 

mode, 8, 9, 12, 18, 20, 21, 108, 153, 159, 
161, 204, 213, 216, 238, 242, 246, 273, 
301, 304, 309, 339, 343, 356, 359, 385, 
399, 400, 401, 415 

moderation, 378 

moistness, 264, 337 

moisture, 248 

moon, 208, 226, 289 

moral dispositions, 223, 343, 344, 357. 
See also temperament 

motion, xx, 2, 4, 7, 11, 12, 16, 46, 49, 58, 
70, 75, 87, 88, 89, 90, 98, 99, 100, 101, 
108, 114, 115, 116, 117, 131, 132, 133, 
141, 164, 169, 188, 195, 196, 201, 202, 
203, 204, 205, 208, 210, 212, 215, 217, 
218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 
997, 230, 231, 234, 235, 262, 263, 265, 
266, 285, 286, 289, 295, 299, 300, 301, 
302, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 
312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 
321, 322, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 334, 


Index 


335, 336, 338, 360, 367, 381, 382, 394, 

396, 398, 408, 409, 417, 418, 419 
Mughariqin, al-. See Megarians 
Muhammad (the Prophet), 1, 348, 422 
multiplicity, 6, 21, 30, 34, 35, 41, 75-77, 79, 

80, 110, 145, 146, 150, 158, 161, 183-86, 

236, 237, 241, 246, 248, 251, 255, 287, 

291, 292, 294, 296, 297, 317, 326, 331, 

333, 334, 353, 392, 413, 416, 418 
munificence, 225, 232, 295, 296, 306 
muscle, 221, 222, 224 


Naraqi, al-, 383, 387 
nature, xxii, 10, 16—23, 26, 30, 33, 34, 36, 
38, 43, 44, 48, 50-57, 60, 61, 64, 68, 
70, 71, 73, 75~78, 81, 82, 91, 97, 99, 
101, 104-108, 111, 112, 114, 116, 125, 
127, 134, 135, 139, 142, 144, 148, 
153-59, 161, 162, 166-78, 180-82, 
184, 191, 196, 201, 205, 207, 208, 218, 
219, 223, 226, 227, 233, 241, 244, 249, 
250, 251, 255, 259-61, 265-67, 270, 
280, 292-94, 301-304, 307, 308, 309, 
310, 312, 316, 320, 324, 327, 331, 333, 
335-38, 340-42, 345, 346, 350, 353, 
360, 362, 363, 366, 367, 369, 372, 376, 
381, 386, 388, 389, 391-94, 396, 
401-403, 410, 414, 419 
necessity, 5, 19, 30, 32, 33, 35, 83, 88, 114, 
121, 128, 129, 134, 150, 164, 165, 198, 
199, 202, 203, 213-15, 220, 222, 226, 
250, 261, 264, 265, 267, 271-73, 275, 
282, 300, 303, 325-28, 330, 337, 342, 
345, 347, 372, 374, 391, 420 
rational, 5, 128, 129 
negroes, 376 
Neoplatonism, xxi 
nonexistent, 25, 26, 28, 29, 31, 60, 61, 
120, 122, 140, 197, 198, 203, 272, 292, 
309, 321, 340, 346, 387 
number, 7, 8, 17, 18, 19, 21, 55, 73-76, 
79-81, 84, 91, 93-95, 111, 118, 119, 
143, 144-46, 161, 177, 235, 245-47, 
252-56, 258, 317, 325, 326, 328, 333, 
334, 351, 363, 385, 393, 404, 410, 414 
numeral, 55 


obdurate, the, 43 
objects, xix, 56, 109, 159, 245, 246, 249, 
250, 298, 318, 323, 351, 376, 384, 413 
mathematical, xix, 245, 246, 249, 250, 384 


obligation, 22, 369, 421 

obtuseness (geometrical), 192 

oddness, 94, 98, 111, 113, 388, 393, 394 

odor, 72, 209, 351 

one, the, 2, 9, 10, 14, 18, 21, 23, 28, 32-34, 
36, 39, 40, 41, 46, 51, 52, 60, 61, 63-65, 
68, 69, 73-79, 81, 82, 83, 86, 87, 89, 
91, 92, 93, 96-100, 103, 105, 112, 113, 
115, 118, 125, 126, 130, 133, 135, 136, 
139, 142, 147, 150-52, 156, 158-60, 
169, 179, 181, 185, 186, 189, 193, 199, 
201--203, 208, 209, 211, 215, 217, 221, 
223, 226-30, 235, 236, 239, 247, 248, 
251, 253, 260, 261, 263, 270, 271, 274, 
280, 285, 299, 303, 306, 307, 309, 311, 
315, 317, 320, 322, 325, 330, 333, 335, 
337, 338, 341, 343, 354, 356, 358, 359, 
363, 367, 368, 369, 373, 374, 375, 377, 
387, 389, 393, 394, 408, 413 

and the many, 10, 79, 96, 97, 98, 394, 413 

opinion, 2, 13, 21, 40, 98, 133, 135, 146, 
206, 220, 243, 255, 263, 312, 320, 353, 
365, 371, 421 

opposition, 20, 21, 92, 96, 97, 98, 99, 101, 
114, 171, 208, 209, 236, 239, 261, 270, 
355, 394 

organ, 49, 133, 172, 221, 222, 287, 291, 
295, 340, 350, 362, 420 

origination, 20, 67, 124, 140, 198, 199, 200, 
272, 301, 302, 305, 334, 390, 400, 401 

otherness, 184, 236, 237 

outward appearance, 210 


pain, 43, 130, 133, 239, 339, 350, 352, 355 

palm (tree), 226, 410 

parallelism, 112, 113, 298 

participation, 159, 160, 177, 209, 213, 215, 
216, 244, 331, 332, 333, 334, 335, 406 

particular, the, xix, xx, xxi, xxii, xxv, 5, 
6, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 35, 
39, 43, 46, 52, 61, 66, 67, 73, 94, 100, 
119, 132, 141, 143, 148, 149, 153, 154, 
155, 156, 157, 159, 161, 162, 170, 176, 
178, 188, 189, 194, 202, 213, 217, 218, 
225, 226, 228, 235, 238, 242, 271, 
273, 284, 287, 288, 289, 290, 305, 
309, 310, 311, 315, 319, 325, 331, 336, 
351, 353, 360-64, 377, 382, 385, 392, 
393, 397, 399, 404, 405, 411, 413, 414, 
416, 418 

partners, 364, 373 


436 


parts, xxii, 6, 11, 12, 14, 26, 28, 46, 47, 48, 
52, 59, 88, 89, 98, 102, 103, 104, 
112-16, 131, 147, 152, 161, 162, 168, 
169, 170, 175, 177, 180, 182, 184, 185, 
190, 191, 193, 207-209, 211, 216, 219, 
229, 259, 260, 271, 273, 292, 294, 297, 
299, 306, 310, 311, 325, 331, 338, 339, 
353, 382, 397, 398, 406, 422 

indivisible, 48, 53, 58, 111, 112, 113, 
397, 398 
See also atoms 

penalties, 351, 371, 377 

perfection, 2, 3, 6, 8, 13, 14, 18, 22, 58, 
89, 108, 142, 143, 145, 146, 190, 191, 
218, 219, 220, 231-34, 234, 235, 239, 
251, 260, 263-65, 266, 267, 270, 278, 
283, 284, 294, 296, 297, 298, 299, 304, 
311-16, 319, 320, 321, 322, 327, 328, 
329, 331, 332, 333, 337, 339, 340, 341, 
342, 343, 344, 345, 347, 348, 349, 
350, 351, 352, 353, 355, 356, 357, 364, 
367, 378, 396, 397, 403, 404, 411, 418, 
420, 421 

secondary, 51, 341, 342, 347 

peripatetic, xxii, 29, 317 

perpetuity, 227, 318, 320 

perpendicular, 50, I11, 193 

philosophers, xxiv, 13, 39, 41, 43, 73, 93, 
131, 146, 173, 188, 195, 203, 323, 348, 
396, 410 

ancient, 243 
natural, xx, 72, 205, 229, 234, 412 

philosophy, xix, xxii, xxiii, xxiv, 1, 2, 3, 4, 
11, 13, 15, 62, 177, 243, 323, 364, 381, 
396, 401, 405. See also science 

physics, xix, xx, xxi, 213. See also Healing, 
The 

place, 14, 20, 23, 29, 32, 38, 45-47, 
50-53, 58-60, 64, 75, 78, 87, 88, 90, 
96, 100, 101, 103-105, 108, 110, 114, 
115-17, 119, 124, 133, 134, 143, 144, 
159, 182, 196, 197, 201-203, 208, 213, 
215-18, 221, 223, 225, 229, 231, 240, 
242, 245, 246, 261, 264, 265, 268, 269, 
270, 276, 279, 288, 290, 291, 294, 299, 
302, 306, 307, 308, 312, 314, 315, 318, 
319, 322, 324, 326, 327, 336, 338, 344, 
346, 352, 355, 359, 366, 368, 370, 372, 
387, 395, 396, 411, 413 

plants, 120, 339, 341, 358, 362 

Plato, 244, 391 


Index 


pleasure, 133, 224, 291, 312, 313, 320, 
323, 348, 349, 351, 352, 335, 356, 357, 
373, 374, 422 

plurality, xx, xxii, 46, 91, 92, 94, 95, 96, 
97, 98, 99, 101, 125, 126, 146, 152, 154, 
156, 251, 255, 258, 330, 394, 404 

point, the, 38, 72, 73, 76, 87, 88, 102, 114, 
115, 116, 179, 185, 229, 233, 251, 254, 
391, 395, 396, 398, 399, 400, 409 

populace, 143, 144, 362 

position, 50, 57, 59, 71, 73, 76, 87, 103, 
106, 111, 112, 114, 115, 116, 192, 279, 
288, 289, 306, 308, 310, 312, 314, 313, 
324, 338, 364, 382, 385, 387, 388, 391, 
398, 415 

politics, xxiv, 4, 15, 374, 375 

possession, 97, 98, 109, 170, 178, 181, 191, 
237, 238, 366, 394, 401 

possible, xx, xxiii, 3, 10, 15, 25-33, 35-38, 
41, 46, 48, 50, 52, 53, 55-58, 61-64, 
66, 67, 75, 77, 83, 85, 86, 88-90, 99, 
100, 101, 104, 105, 11, 112, 114, 121, 
122, 126, 128, 129, 132, 136, 139, 140, 
149, 155, 157, 158, 159, 161, 165, 167-69, 
171, 178, 183, 188, 197, 199, 203, 206, 
207, 210, 213, 214, 220, 222, 225-27, 
237, 261, 262, 266, 268, 272, 275, 276, 
281, 284, 287-89, 293, 294, 300-304, 
306, 307, 309-11, 313-316, 319, 322-24, 
327-34, 338, 339, 341-43, 360, 361, 
363, 365, 368, 385, 388, 395-97, 400, 
404, 406, 412, 414, 418 

in itself, xxiii, 31, 139, 140, 199, 315 

possibility, 3, 19, 30, 33, 36, 38, 58, 66, 87, 
88, 116, 126, 127, 131, 136, 137, 139, 
140, 160, 165, 174, 188, 189, 198, 212, 
213, 214, 215, 264, 270, 271, 273, 282, 
284, 285, 296, 303, 306, 307, 310, 321, 
324, 330, 331, 339, 343, 403, 417, 418 

posteriority, 11, 16, 17, 20, 27, 32, 74, 117, 
120, 122, 123, 124, 126, 130, 141, 163, 
186, 194, 203, 213, 220, 254, 259, 
260, 269, 272, 273, 283, 287, 292, 
293, 307, 309, 331, 363, 391, 392, 

400, 406, 414, 418 

postulate, 50, 87, 89, 100, 115 

potency, 5, 60, 65, 75, 90, 108, 130-32, 
134, 135, 137-39, 141-43, 145-47, 149, 
152, 153, 160, 184, 193-95, 200, 216, 
228, 230, 231, 251, 260, 261, 285, 296, 
311, 314, 336, 340, 384, 391, 403, 404 


Index 


potentiality, 19, 38, 53, 54, 59, 60, 65, 70. 
77, 130, 132, 135, 136, 137, 140-43, 
146, 150, 183, 184, 192, 194, 195, 196, 
215, 216, 217, 260, 263, 269, 285, 314, 
315, 327, 331, 384, 397, 404, 408 

power, 2, 4, 13, 16, 21, 117, 130-35, 137, 
139, 140, 143, 147, 160, 161, 164, 167, 
181, 199, 205, 209, 210, 221-24, 226, 
227, 230, 234, 245, 250, 251, 265, 266, 
295, 300, 303, 304, 306, 308, 311, 312, 
314, 316, 320, 325, 327, 328, 331, 332, 
340, 344, 348, 349, 350, 359, 361, 375, 
377, 378, 400, 402, 403, 412, 418 

appetitive, 222, 223, 295, 316, 323 
passive, 134, 346, 359 
psychological, 311, 331, 348, 359 

praise, 1, 231, 232, 233, 313, 320 

praiseworthy, 241, 368, 376 

prayer, 367, 368, 422 

precedence, those who have, 75, 78, 91, 
93, 126, 141, 196, 305, 306, 374 

predetermination, divine, 339 

predicate, 49, 74, 78, 84, 119, 163, 174, 
176, 177, 180, 189, 405, 408, 412, 413 

premises, 15, 16, 38, 39, 40, 179, 216, 223, 
227, 363, 364, 388, 389 

principle(s), xx, xxi, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11, 
12, 14-17, 20-23, 43, 44, 62, 67, 72, 
73, 76, 79, 80, 86, 89, 95, 107, 111, 114, 
115, 118, 125, 131, 133, 134, 137-39, 
146, 147, 175, 181, 182, 195, 196, 205, 
213, 215, 217, 218, 219, 221, 222-95, 
227, 229-231, 234, 235, 243-46, 249, 
251, 253-57, 261, 264, 265, 269, 271, 
273-75, 283, 287, 288, 290-97, 
299-304, 307, 309-11, 313, 314, 316, 

317, 320, 323-31, 333-36, 343, 
348-51, 353, 355, 359-63, 367, 385, 
386, 392, 396, 397, 401, 407, 408, 410, 
412, 417 

common, I] 

first, the, 4, 16, 21, 43, 69, 80, 138, 145, 
215, 250, 257, 270, 274, 299, 316, 318, 
322, 325, 326, 327, 328, 336, 353, 365, 
392, 421 

originating, 6, 220, 221, 225 

lofty, 318 

prior, 6, 10, 11, 12, 16, 17, 20, 27, 32, 40, 

45, 46, 63, 65, 70, 72, 74, 80, 88, 117, 
122-28, 130, 135, 136, 140-43, 153, 
156, 165, 166, 167, 174, 190, 198, 199, 


? 


437 


202, 203, 206, 214, 216, 219, 290, 228, 
229, 250-52, 259-61, 263, 265, 268, 
272, 273, 276, 287, 292, 293, 307, 309, 
312, 323, 331, 332, 343, 354, 361, 389, 
392, 400-402, 404, 408, 409, 411, 418 
by nature, 20 
essentially, 8, 33, 66, 69, 276 
for the intellect, 21 
priority, 20, 27, 65, 69, 74, 122-26, 130, 
142, 143, 156, 166, 181, 186, 194, 203, 
206, 213, 250, 261, 268, 273, 306, 
338, 361, 391, 392, 401, 404, 408, 409, 
411, 414 
essential, 206, 414 
privation, 19, 97, 98, 101, 102, 199, 204, 
218, 237-39, 241, 242, 276, 279-81, 
340-44, 347, 394, 395, 409, 412, 413 
progeny, 372 
property (logic), xix, 17, 20, 29, 37, 38, 
39, 47, 66, 67, 88, 91, 92, 93, 111, 122, 
124, 138, 139, 149, 163, 168, 171, 173, 
174, 235, 237, 281, 282, 359, 389, 391, 
403, 406 
propertics (commercial), 370, 371, 372, 
376 
prophecy, 22, 347, 358, 364 
proof of, 364 
Prophet, The (Muhammad), xxiv, 367, 
369, 375, 422 
prophets, xxii, xxiv, 41 
prophethood, 348, 359 
prophetic qualities, xxiv, 378 
providence, xxii, 14, 156, 225, 322, 339, 
353, 362, 365 
proximate, 60, 65, 66, 69, 74, 117, 134, 
135, 160, 161, 169, 193, 196, 203, 209, 
221, 222, 224, 230, 237, 238, 239, 301, 
307, 309, 311, 317, 325, 328, 334, 367, 
368, 390 
cause of form, 66 
potentiality, 60 
species, 74 
proximity, 58, 59, 113, 192, 211, 269, 300, 
301, 309 
Ptolemy, 317 
punishment, 352, 355, 356, 358, 361, 362, 
370, 377 
celestial, 358 
purification, 368, 369, 377 
purpose, 9, 7, 12, 13, 16, 18, 37, 40, 52, 91, 
142, 167, 171, 172, 191, 194, 195, 219, 


438 


purpose (continued) 
220, 221, 224, 226, 232, 233, 236, 259, 
271, 289, 294, 295, 304, 324, 326, 344, 
345, 381, 410, 411 

Pythagoreans, 246, 254 


quadrilateral, 249, 254 

quality, xxiii, 10, 23, 60, 68, 72, 85, 88, 
105, 106, 111, 117, 118, 130, 167, 179, 
180, 211, 216, 217, 229, 237, 240, 242, 
256, 264, 267, 282, 299, 307, 314, 348, 
385, 391, 401, 402, 409, 413 

quantification, 151 

quiddity, xx, xxii, xxiii, 1, 9, 10, 14, 24, 27, 
31, 35, 53, 63, 64, 71, 73, 79, 81, 93, 98, 
99, 106-109, 116, 120-22, 136, 150, 
154, 158, 168, 170, 174-80, 186, 187, 
188, 190, 198, 199, 200, 207, 228, 260, 
274-79, 281, 282, 285, 286, 287, 297, 
299, 328, 352, 382, 383, 386, 387, 390, 
394, 396, 399, 400, 406-408, 413, 416 


rank, 16, 22, 63, 98, 125, 145, 246, 257, 
273, 316, 323, 332, 333, 334, 350, 357, 
358, 359, 385, 418, 421 

ransom, 377 

rational, 5, 16, 36, 89, 92, 128, 129, 133, 
137, 146, 159, 164, 169, 171, 175, 176, 
177-81, 184, 185, 191, 221, 231, 268, 
270, 271, 282, 298, 320, 325, 342, 344, 
349-52, 354, 372, 373, 392, 393, 406, 
421, 422 

animal, 180, 184, 191, 393 
person, 89, 271, 342, 349, 372 

al-Razi (Abi Bakr), 403 

reality, 3, 6, 17, 23, 24, 25, 36, 46, 51, 66, 
76, 77, 80, 83, 89, 91, 108, 109, 112, 113, 
120, 123, 126, 132-34, 136, 141, 143, 
145, 148, 153-55, 158, 175, 176, 181, 
184, 185, 189, 200, 201, 205, 214, 215, 
220, 224, 226, 228, 231, 232, 234, 239, 
240, 241, 242, 247, 254, 261, 274, 275, 
278, 279, 280, 282-84, 291, 292, 293, 
296, 297, 314, 320-22, 327, 344, 348, 
352, 356, 361, 367, 372, 381, 384, 386, 
392, 396, 397, 399, 405, 409, 415, 417 

reason, 23, 27, 32, 38, 49, 51, 62, 66, 74, 77, 
78, 86, 88, 89, 92, 93, 99, 110, 11], 113, 
121, 122, 126, 127, 129, 133, 134, 137, 
138, 141, 149, 150, 153, 155, 170, 171, 
181, 185, 187, 190-92, 199, 200, 202, 


Index 


203, 210, 225, 228, 234, 236, 239, 241, 
242, 243, 245, 247, 250, 261, 266, 267, 
269, 271, 277, 279, 284, 286, 291, 295, 
299, 302, 303, 314, 318, 319, 324-26, 
328-30, 332, 336, 338, 340, 342, 344, 
348, 349, 351, 359-61, 364, 369, 373, 
387, 388, 392, 394, 396, 407, 415 
receptacle, 46, 47, 52, 70, 137, 194, 218, 
246, 393 
receptivity, 59, 66, 67, 85, 131, 132, 142, 
171, 183, 218, 335 
recompense, 231, 232, 234, 362 
relation, xix, xx, 5, 12, 14, 17-22, 26, 27, 
30, 32-34, 39, 40, 48, 51, 52, 54, 55, 
59, 61, 63, 70, 78, 84-86, 90, 94, 95, 
97-99, 101, 116-23, 125, 127, 132, 133, 
136, 137, 140, 146, 147, 156, 157, 
159-61, 178, 180, 181, 186, 189, 190, 
192, 202, 203, 204, 208, 214, 215, 216, 
293, 224, 230, 231, 233, 234, 237, 239, 
240, 242, 245, 247, 258, 263, 264, 267, 
272, 273, 274, 278, 284, 286, 288, 
291-94, 296, 298, 302-304, 309, 310, 
312, 320, 324, 325, 335, 340, 343, 344, 
347, 348, 351, 353-35, 357, 361, 368, 
388, 393, 394, 396, 398-401, 406, 
408-10, 413, 414, 416 
haphazard, 292 
intellectual, 122, 292 
relative, the, 71, 85, 98, 116-18, 120-22, 
136, 178, 240, 254, 371, 385, 391, 
398, 399 
remote principle, 139, 221, 222, 307 
remoteness, 160, 269, 300, 301, 309 
removal, 60, 64, 65, 104, 116, 129, 131, 
134, 175, 233, 270, 390 
repetition, 133, 186, 246, 253, 355 
representation, 113, 156, 287, 308, 309, 
310, 322, 325, 356, 361 
resurrection, 27, 120, 320, 347, 356, 366, 
367, 368, 387, 400 
bodily, 387 
return, the, 299, 347, 348, 358 
revelation, xxiv, 359, 376 
renewal, 16, 100, 211, 306, 307, 309, 310, 
394 


reverence, 368 


sacrificial offerings, 361, 368 
Sawa, G., 395 
scandal, 361, 373, 422 


Index 


sciences, xix, 1-7, 9-19, 43, 234, 235, 
244, 317, 381, 382, 383, 397, 413 
mathematical, 1, 12, 14, 16 
natural, 4, 14, 16, 62, 76, 107, 114, 195, 
234, 300, 306, 333 
practical, 5 
theoretical, xix, xx, 381, 382 
seceder, the, 2, 375 
self-identical, 21 
self-subsistent, 46, 105, 136, 137, 216, 217, 
311, 313 
sensation, 5, 6, 101, 112, 117, 163, 164, 
175, 181, 182, 189, 224, 245, 291, 311 
senses, the, 52, 58, 61, 103, 112, 152, 212, 
243, 249, 298, 350, 360, 369, 384 
sensible things, 8, 9, 16, 249, 250, 298, 405 
separation, 19, 45, 52, 53, 60, 84, 87, 94, 
103, 176, 178, 179, 211, 247, 280, 351, 
353, 369, 372, 373, 412 
separability, 2, 4, 8, 12, 17-21, 48, 66, 69, 71, 
85, 87, 106, 110, 154, 155, 156, 188, 201, 
202, 243-45, 307, 333, 396, 412, 413 
sequel, 21, 35, 50, 70 
shame, 351, 373 
shelter, 230, 345 
sign, 23, 27 
signification, 23, 41, 42, 146, 239, 386 
similar, the, 21, 117, 193, 237 
similarity, 78, 193, 237, 241 
similitude, 366 
situation (category of), 77, 98, 212, 221, 
245, 281, 282, 319, 323, 414 
snow, 2, 118 
“snub nose,” 187, 244 
Socrates, 188, 189, 244 
son, 34, 74, 117, 118, 120, 189, 201, 202, 208 
sophist, 13, 39, 40, 406 
sophistical, 12, 92 128 
soul, xxi, xxiii, 2, 6, 9, 20, 22-27, 48, 51, 
71, 76, 91, 107, 108, 110, 120, 123, 131, 
135, 137, 141, 146, 147, 149, 153, 
157-61, 164, 166, 167, 169-71, 177, 
178, 181, 182, 185, 216, 219, 227-29, 
251, 263, 266, 268, 277, 292, 293, 298, 
307, 308, 311, 312, 316, 324, 325, 
329-34, 337, 341, 344, 346-59, 366, 
368, 369, 378, 386, 396, 400, 403, 405, 
407-409, 411, 416, 421 
celestial, xxi, xxii, 326, 334, 360, 395, 
405, 416, 418, 419, 421 
human, 22, 109, 291 


439 


space, 57, 113, 307, 314, 397 
spatial, 57, 58, 62, 77, 169, 244, 306, 338, 
393, 398 
species, xxi, 2, 10, 11, 14, 19, 20, 36, 38, 
45-47, 53-55, 58, 62, 68, 69, 73-75, 
77-79, 91, 95, 97, 119, 121, 124, 153, 
158, 159, 162, 165-69, 171, 172, 174-78, 
180, 184, 185, 189-91, 199, 207-209, 
213, 218, 226, 237~39, 242, 253, 263, 
264, 273, 279, 287, 288, 310, 314, 318, 
322-25, 331, 333-35, 340-42, 345, 
364, 365, 372, 382, 385, 391, 392, 401, 
406, 407, 409, 410, 413, 416, 419 
specification, 31, 34, 59, 61, 84, 138, 188 
speed, 46, 306, 317, 319, 398 
sperm, 134, 141, 142, 170, 193, 201, 216, 
263, 323 
sphere, xxi, xxiii, 15, 49, 111, 51, 53, 100, 
II, 114, 210, 220, 288, 291, 308, 309, 
311, 312, 314-19, 324, 325, 326, 328, 
330-37, 341, 363, 398, 404, 407, 411, 
413, 418, 419 
celestial, xxi, 51, 53, 100, 291, 308, 311, 
312, 314-17, 319, 324, 325, 332-35, 
363, 404, 411, 418 
of the fixed stars, 317, 325, 419 
outermost, 328, 331 
sublunar, 318, 341, 413 
splendor, 291, 297, 298 
speculative wisdom, xxiv 
Speusippus, 412 
“squareness,” 88 
statement, xxii, xxiv, 13, 23-26, 28, 
38-42, 65, 74, 80, 86, 87, 91-93, 98, 
109, 132, 133, 139, 150, 151, 155, 173, 
177, 179, 187, 201, 213, 224, 227, 238, 
240, 242, 248, 255, 258, 259, 268-71, 
273, 276, 278, 305, 306, 316, 318, 320, 
322, 331, 339, 340, 358, 364, 375, 383, 
384, 386, 387, 398, 402, 404-406, 410, 
411, 414, 419, 420 
informative, 23, 24, 25, 340 
primary, 38, 39 
states (ahwal), xxii, 2, 3, 6, 7, 9, 11, 17-20, 
29, 31, 40, 43, 60, 66, 69, 71, 78, 85, 107, 
119, 127, 130, 137, 146, 154, 155, 158, 160, 
167, 171, 172, 174, 194, 206, 231, 232, 245, 
268, 289, 290, 300, 309, 311, 314, 315, 
317, 325, 332, 334, 336, 343, 347, 351, 
354-57, 359, 360, 363, 364, 366, 368, 369, 
383, 386, 387, 393, 409, 411, 418, 419 


440 


stationary, 98, 306, 337 

statutes, 368 

stoicheion, 217 

substantiation, 8, 52, 69 

subsistence, 8, 9, 10, 12, 17, 36, 45, 46, 47, 
50, 52, 53, 57, 59, 63, 66, 67, 69, 70, 
72, 81-83, 95-98, 103-105, 136, 137, 
158, 161-63, 170, 171, 173, 176, 179, 
182, 187, 188, 190, 191, 194-96, 199, 
201, 216-18, 237, 247, 251, 264, 265, 
267, 269, 273, 276, 277, 280-82, 287, 
311, 313, 321, 328, 330, 332, 334-36, 
338, 382, 412 

sufficiency, 15, 31, 33, 52, 97, 116, 127, 
129, 143, 146, 198, 213, 271, 295, 321, 
329, 360, 363, 397, 402, 414, 420 

sun, 148, 208, 226, 290, 332 

supplication, 361, 362 

surface, 8, 17, 46, 49, 51, 55, 56, 72, 73, 
75, 85-90, 100, 101, 112, 114-16, 132, 
183, 190, 191, 210, 212, 245, 251, 254, 
338, 352, 392, 397, 398, 407 

survival, xxiv, 364, 365, 378 

swan, 118 

syllogism, 23, 39, 40, 43, 216, 227, 348, 
363, 384, 387, 388, 401, 402, 406, 
409, 420 

symbols, xxvi, 41 

symmetry, 235, 256 

sweetness, 238, 239 

syrup, 239 


temperance, 374, 378 

temperament, 70, 159, 352, 354, 355, 376 

temporality, 6, 29, 65, 77, 126, 141, 166, 
196, 203, 220, 253, 272, 287, 289, 290, 
292, 300-302, 305, 359, 384, 390, 
400, 401, 408, 417, 418 

temporally originated, 140, 300, 305 

“tenness,” 252, 253, 404 

terrestrial world, xxlii, xxiv, 326, 356, 
359, 392, 411 

terms, xxili, xxiv, 13, 17, 20, 23, 24, 26, 
27, 29, 34, 35, 36, 39, 40, 43, 46, 48, 
50, 52, 53, 54, 56, 60, 62, 64, 69, 
73-81, 84, 90, 91, 93, 94, 98, 100, 101, 
104, 105, 108, 111, 113, 115, 116, 117, 
118, 119, 123, 125, 130, 131, 133, 140, 
141, 143, 144, 149, 150, 152, 154, 155, 
156, 158, 160, 161, 163, 177, 178, 179, 
182, 183, 184, 186, 190, 193-95, 200, 


Index 


202, 203, 205-208, 210, 213, 214, 217, 
220, 224, 225, 228, 229, 232, 233, 
236, 237, 239, 241, 246, 247, 251, 253, 
258, 260, 261, 263, 265, 267, 268, 270, 
272, 275, 278-80, 282, 286, 287, 289, 
290, 298-300, 305, 307, 314, 315, 319, 
322, 324, 333, 337, 339, 340, 347, 350, 
351, 353, 381, 384, 387, 388, 392, 394, 
397, 398, 400, 402, 405, 407, 409, 412, 
415, 418 

theft, 377 

Theophrastus, 405 

“threeness,” 246, 404 

time, xxiii, 3, 14, 16, 26-29, 38, 60, 61, 
85, 89, 90, 93, 99-102, 106, 109, 117, 
124, 125, 127, 129, 133, 140-42, 154, 
162, 166, 168, 184, 197, 199, 200, 202, 
203, 204, 211, 212, 227, 237, 238, 242, 
243, 245, 254, 262, 265, 268, 279, 
286-90, 292, 299, 301, 302, 304-307, 
317, 333, 339, 341, 350, 356, 360, 363, 
367, 368, 374, 377, 388, 392, 393, 396, 
400-402, 410, 414, 417, 418 

toil, 418 

totality, 9, 16, 19, 58, 143, 144, 146, 147, 
167, 168, 177, 185, 202, 212, 270, 342, 
355, 420 

touch, 119, 175, 212 

touching, 115, 117, 119 

transfer, 103, 104, 106, 114, 115, 134, 224, 
242, 310, 324, 372 

transformations, 212, 264, 266, 361 

triad, xxi, 378, 411, 418, 419 

triangles, 24, 111, 113, 116, 387, 396, 397 

transition, 243, 306, 309, 310, 311, 363, 
364 

triviality (‘abath), 220, 222, 223, 224, 410 

truth, 13, 21, 27, 38, 39, 40, 49, 86, 94, 97, 
104, 114, 133, 181, 215, 241, 243, 245, 
273, 283, 284, 297, 304, 307, 327, 341, 
348, 353, 361, 362, 365, 366, 369, 376, 
377, 386, 387, 389 

Turks, 376 

“twoness,” 55, 94, 95, 228, 246 


‘udil. See equipollence 

unemployment, 370 

unequal, the, 21 

union, 61, 182, 183, 372 

unit, 79, 80, 91, 94, 96, 99-101, 144, 147, 
216, 245, 246, 251, 255, 394 


es 


Index 


unity, xx, xxii, 11, 12, 46, 59, 69, 72, 73, 
75-84, 91, 92, 94-99, 101, 102, 124, 
146, 150, 155, 156, 184, 188, 19}, 228, 
230, 235, 237, 245, 246, 251-56, 278, 
299, 330, 333, 353, 366, 387, 392-95, 
401, 414 

universal, the, xxi, xxiii, 5, 6, 10, 20, 75, 
148, 149, 157, 159-62, 170, 172, 194, 
219, 226, 277, 309, 310, 311, 343, 346, 
370, 392, 406, 410, 415 

universal way, xxi, 45, 288, 289, 310, 360 

universality, xx, xxii, xxiii, 149, 157, 158, 
159, 161, 217, 219, 289, 399, 409 

universe (al-kawn), 409 

upward, 90, 115, 116, 211, 256, 322, 338, 398 

utterances, 14, 98, 99, 383 


Van Riet, S., xxiv 

variety, 48, 54, 55, 66, 193, 237, 241, 273, 
291, 299, 333, 335 

vegetables, 364 

veracity, 38 

verbal classifications, 366 

vice, 183, 184, 240, 241, 356 

virtue, 24, 47, 50, 51, 66, 77, 78, 91, 92, 
117, 118, 122, 125, 126, 155, 169, 181, 
188, 203, 232, 233, 240, 241, 264, 278, 
279, 335, 344, 349, 350, 359, 369, 370, 
374-76, 378, 393 

virtuous city, xxiv, 376 

virtuous disposition, 313 


war, 370, 376 

watery form, 201, 260, 336 
“waterness,” 77 

wax, 43, 50, 215 

wealth, 142, 372, 375 


44] 


weight, 90, 99, 100, 101, 117, 288, 398 
whim, 141, 374 
whiteness, 24, 56, 74, 84, 103, 105-107, 
136, 137, 143, 147, 150, 153, 154, 168, 
182, 239, 281, 406 
wideness, 421 
whole, the, xxi, 12, 16, 143, 146, 147, 153, 
161, 162, 163, 177, 185, 214, 245, 252, 
272, 291, 295, 296, 299, 302, 311, 317, 
322, 325, 326, 327, 328, 344, 346, 350, 
352, 353, 376, 385, 404, 410, 411 
and the part, 20, 117, 157, 161 
will (irada), 13, 127, 131, 132, 133, 134, 
137, 138, 181, 224, 233, 295, 296, 301, 
302, 303, 304, 308-13, 316, 324, 325, 
327, 345, 360, 362 
wilting, 266 
wine, 216, 218 : 
wisdom, xxiv, 3, 11, 22, 40, 235, 345, 366, 
369, 378 
practical, 378 
theoretical, 378 
Wisnovski, R., 411 
Woman, 372, 373, 374 
world, xix, xxi, xxi, xxili, 22, 50, 195, 227, 
247, 294, 305, 306, 318, 326, 328, 335, 
337, 339, 346, 350, 351, 354, 356, 359, 
366, 367, 369, 370, 376, 400, 401, 410, 
411, 416, 418 
celestial, 354, 411 
intellectual, 298, 250 
worship (acts of ), xxiv, 316, 367, 368, 
370, 375, 377, 378 


Xenocrates, 412 


Zimmermann, F. W,, 405 


