
[sayfa 1]
 
Volume: 20, Issue: 3, 2022, pp. 879-893 
 
An Analysis of Sirrī Pasha’s Translation of Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid with a 
Focus on the Issue of Free Will 
Sırrı Paşa’nın Şerhu’l-Akāid Tercümesi’nin Cüz’î İrâde Meselesi Örneğinde 
Analizi 
 
Ayşe Betül DÖNMEZ TEKİN 
Assistant Professor Dr., Yalova University, Faculty of Islamic Sciences, Yalova/Türkiye 
betul.tekin@yalova.edu.tr | orcid.org/0000-0002-8311-8818 | ror.org/01x18ax09 
 
Article Information 
Article Type 
Research Article 
Date Recieved 
27 November 2022 
Date Accepted 
30 December 2022 
Date Published 
31 December 2022 
Plagiarism 
This article has been scanned with iTenticate 
software. No plagiarism detected. 
Ethical Statement 
It is declared that scientific and ethical principles 
have been followed while carrying out and writing 
this study and that all the sources used have been 
properly cited (Ayşe Betül Dönmez Tekin). 
Licensed under CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license. 
 
Atıf  | Cite As  
 
Dönmez Tekin, Ayşe Betül. “An Analysis of Sirrī Pasha’s Translation of 
Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid with a Focus on the Issue of Free Will”. Kader 20/3 
(December 2022), 879-893. https://doi.org/10.18317/kaderdergi.1210612  
 
 
“
” 

[sayfa 2]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Analysis of Sirrī Pasha’s Translation of Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid with a Focus on the Issue of Free Will 
 
Kader 
20/3, 2022 880 
 
Abstract 
This paper analyzes Girīdī (the Cretan) Sirrī Pasha’s (1844-1895) translation of Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid al-Nasafiyya by al-Taftāzānī 
(d.792/1390). The paper begins with contextualizing this translation by alluding to the background of Sirrī Pasha and his 
other works. I particularly pay attention to the translator’s prolegomenon which reflects his conception of kalām. Then 
the paper shows how a translation expands this classical Māturīdite kalām text for the nineteenth century Ottoman 
readers, by including all different opinions from other commentaries and glosses on Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid. Collection of views 
in the translation enables us to compare all different positions. Sirrī Pasha did not only translate the text and quoted other 
interpretations but put forward his own comments. Thus, I call it “commentarial translation”. This study also analyzes the 
views on the concept of human free will, which was regarded as the main conflict between Māturīdī and Ashʿarī schools. 
Sirrī and his sources hold fast to the Māturīdī position in their discussion of the particular free will (al-irāda al-juzʾiyya).  
Keywords: Kalām, Māturīdī kalam, Sirrī Pasha, Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid, Translation, Free will. 
Öz 
Bu makalede Giritli Sırrı Paşa’nın (1844-1895) Şerhu’l-Akāid Tercümesi analiz edilmektedir. Makalede öncelikle Sırrı Paşa’nın 
entelektüel arka planı ve diğer eserlerine değinilerek tercüme tarihsel bağlamına yerleştirmeye çalışıldı. Özellikle 
mütercimin kelâm tasavvurunu yansıtan mukaddime kısmına dikkat çekildi. Mâtürîdî kelâmına dair klasik bir metnin on 
dokuzuncu yüzyıl Osmanlı okuyucusu için Şerhu’l-Akāid’in diğer şerh ve haşiyelerindeki farklı yorumları içerecek şekilde 
tercümenin nasıl genişlediği gösterildi. Tercümede farklı görüşlerin bir araya toplanması, aynı mesele karşısında farklı 
yaklaşımların birbirleriyle karşılaştırılabilmesini sağlamaktadır. Sırrı Paşa sadece metni tercüme edip diğer yorumları 
nakletmekle kalmamış, kendi yorumlarını da ortaya koymuştur. Bu nedenle bu tercümeyi “yorumlu tercüme” olarak 
adlandırmaktayız. Örnek olarak bu çalışma Mâtürîdî ve Eşʿarî ekolleri arasındaki temel ihtilaflardan biri olarak görülen 
irâde-i cüzʾiyye kavramı üzerine odaklanmaktadır. Sırrı Paşa ve faydalandığı kaynaklardan Cevdet Paşa bu meselede 
Mâtürîdî görüşü benimsemişlerdir.  
Anahtar Kelimeler: Kelâm, Mâtürîdî kelâmı, Sırrı Paşa, Şerḥu’l-Akāid, Tercüme, Cüzʾî irâde. 
 
Introduction*  
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries after Tanzimat period there was an intensive 
translation activity. Many scientific and philosophical texts were translated from French and 
Arabic into Ottoman Turkish. This paper looks at the translation of a kalām text in nineteenth 
century. However, before getting into the topic, let me note some important studies on Ottoman 
Turkish translations. A number of scholars including Saliha Paker, Zehra Toska, Berrin Aksoy, 
Cemal Demircioğlu and Sadık Yazar have made important contributions to the field of Ottoman 
translation studies.1 They have pointed out that the boundary between translation and original is 
not clear in the Ottoman period translations. They have also shown that there were different 
forms of translation practices. Hence, some of them such as Paker and Demircioglu dealt with the 
concept of terceme (translation) as a one way of producing original work (te’lif eser). Since 
 
*  
A previous version of this paper was presented on 29 October 2017 in Jordan at a conference entitled 
“Understanding Maturidi Kalam – Legacy, Present & Future Challenges”. I would like to thank the editor and the 
reviewers for their suggestions which were very useful for revising the paper. 
1  
Saliha Paker, “Telif, Tercüme ve Özgünlük Meselesi”, Metnin Halleri: Osmanlı’da Telif, Tercüme ve Şerh Eski Türk Edebiyatı 
Çalışmaları IX, ed. Hatice Aynur et al. (İstanbul: Klasik Yayınları, 2014), 36-71; Sadık Yazar, “Bakir Bir Araştırma Sahası 
Olarak Osmanlı Tercüme Geleneği”, Türk Dili ve Edebiyatı Dergisi 60/1 (2020), 153-178; Berrin Aksoy, “Translation 
Activities in the Ottoman Empire”, Meta: journal des traducteurs/Meta: Translators’ Journal 50/3 (2005), 949-956. 

[sayfa 3]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ayşe Betül DÖNMEZ TEKİN 
 
Kader 
20/3, 2022 881 
 
translating had a meaning of interpreting in the Ottoman translations.2 That is because, 
transferring (naql) textual products occurs through translations, adaptations, additions, or 
omissions. According to Toska, we should not evaluate the original text and its translation as 
opposed to each other.3 Their studies are mostly on the literary translations, however there is a 
gap in theological translations. Following their perspective, in this study I look at a case of a 
theological translation activity during the late Ottoman Empire.  
 There is an increase in translation of theological works in the last quarter of the nineteenth 
century. Earlier translations were usually brief creedal texts beginning from the 16th century. 
Larger theological texts were being translated into Turkish during 18th and 19th centuries. These 
are the translations of Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid al-Nasafiyya by Saʿd al-Dīn al-Taftāzānī, Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid al-
ʿAḍudiyya by Jalāl al-Dīn al-Dawānī, al-Fiqh al-akbar by Abū Ḥanīfa, Tawāliʿ al-Anwār by Qādī al-
Baydāwī, ʿAqāʾid of al-Tahāwī, Qasīdat Badʾ al-Amālī by Sirāj al-Dīn al-Ūshī and al-Qasīda al-Nūniyya 
by Hızır Bey.4 As a case study, I look at the translation of Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid al-Nasafiyya (The 
Commentary on the Creed of al-Nasafī), which is one of the most important source texts of 
Māturīdism. I chose the translation of Sirrī Pasha, as it is representative of a combining kind of 
translating.  
The creed was written by Najm al-Dīn Omar al-Nasafī al-Samarqandī (d. 537/1142), a twelfth 
century Māturīdī theologian and a Hanafī jurist. al-Nasafī’s Aqāʾid was so essential that it was also 
translated by the Orientalists in the eighteenth century. In 1788 its translation to French was 
published, in 1792 to German, in 1903 to English. Nasafī's text was among the Ottoman madrasa 
curricula and it was very suitable for memorization. It was titled as al-ʿAqāʾid, which means the 
creed of Islam. It was studied and taught in advanced level madrasas with its most prevalent 
commentary, Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid, was authored by al-Taftāzānī (d.793/1390), who was an Ashʿarī 
scholar. This commentary was one of the highly esteemed books among the Ottoman ulama. 
Throughout centuries many glosses were written upon it until modern times.  
The Ottoman Turkish translation of the Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid is made by Selim Sirrī Pasha Girīdī (the 
Cretan) (1844-1895). Sirrī Pasha consulted the major glosses of this commentary including that of 
glosses of al-Khayālī (d. 875/1470[?]), Isām al-Din Isfarāyīnī (d. 945/1538), Ramazan Efendi (d. 
979/1571), Siyālkūtī (d. 1067/1657) and Kefevī (d. 1168/1754). Sirrī Pasha also benefited from 
contemporary writings such as Ahmed Cevdet Pasha’s (d. 1895) translation of Ibn Khaldun's 
Muqaddima.5 It appears that during the nineteenth century there was an increasing interest 
 
2  
Cemal Demircioğlu, “Osmanlı Çeviri Tarihi Araştırmaları Açısından ‘Terceme’ ve ‘Çeviri’ Kavramlarını Yeniden 
Düşünmek”, Journal of Turkish Studies (Türklük Bilgisi Araştırmaları) 33/1 (2009), 159-177; Saliha Paker, “On the poetic 
practices of ‘a singularly uninventive people’ and the anxiety of imitation”, Tradition, Tension and Translation in 
Turkey, ed. Ş. Tahir Gürçağlar et al. (Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 2015), 27-52. 
3  
Zehra Toska, “Evaluative Approaches to Translated Ottoman Turkish Literature in Future Research”, Translations: 
(Re)shaping of Literatüre and Culture, ed. Saliha Paker (İstanbul: Boğaziçi Üniversitesi Yayınevi, 2002), 58-76. 
4  
See Serbestzade Ahmed Hamdi, İlm-i Kelamdan Akāid-i Adudiyye Şerhi Celal Tercümesi (Trabzon: Serasi Matbaası, 1311 
[1893]); Müstakimzâde Süleyman Sâdeddin, Fıkh-ı Ekber Tercümesi (İstanbul: İkdam Matbaası, 1314 [1896]); Hafız Refi, 
Kaside-i Emâli Tercümesi (İstanbul: Mahmud Bey Matbaası, 1302 [1884]); İsmâil Müfîd Efendi, Kasîde-i Nûniyye Şerh ve 
Tercüme-i Manzûmesi (İstanbul: Süleymaniye Kütüphanesi, H. Hüsnü Paşa, 892.7); Üsküp Kadısı Mustafa Sıdki, Tavâliʿ 
Tercümesi (İstanbul: Süleymaniye Kütüphanesi, Giresun, 160). 
5  
Ahmed Cevdet Paşa, Tercüme-i Mukaddime-i İbn Haldûn (İstanbul: Yazma Eserler Kurumu Başkanlığı, 2015). 

[sayfa 4]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Analysis of Sirrī Pasha’s Translation of Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid with a Focus on the Issue of Free Will 
 
Kader 
20/3, 2022 882 
 
toward these kinds of translations outside madrasa circles, as the number of educated people was 
rising thanks to the newly established schools and colleges.  
The last quarter of the nineteenth century witnessed many changes when this commentary was 
translated. Many scholars such as Muhammad Abduh (d. 1905) in Egypt attempted to revitalize 
kalām thought. It seems that Sirrī Pasha did not aim to change the traditional views, but he 
intervenes and stresses on certain problems, which illustrate how an Ottoman scholar received 
and transmitted the classical kalām thought in this reform period. There was an emphasis on 
Hanafī-Māturīdī tradition in the late Ottoman history. Māturīdī thought, especially the idea of 
human free will and power to act, drew interest from the larger Sunnī tradition in the modern 
kalām thought. Also, Sirrī Pasha’s writing may have been influenced by his political environment 
where the non-Muslim groups began challenging or rising against Ottoman rule as they were 
receiving protection and support from European nationalism. Subsequently, this led to many 
religious conflicts and wars in Ottoman territory. Thus, all these intellectual, social, and political 
changes were making their way into Sirrī Pasha’s writings in general and his comments in this 
translation in particular. 
1. Sirrī Pasha: An Ottoman Scholar-Bureaucrat 
Selim Sirrī Pasha was an Ottoman bureaucrat, a poet, and also a scholar of tafsīr and kalām. He was 
born in the town of Heraklion (Kandiye) in the island of Crete in 1844. We should recall that the 
Cretan Revolt took place in between 1866-69 against Ottoman rule. Therefore, it is likely that Sirrī 
himself grew amidst tensions between Muslims and Christians living on the island. After 
completing his primary education in Crete, Sirrī served as a clerk (kâtip) in various Ottoman 
provinces. In 1872 he was appointed to the chief secretary (mektupçu) of Tuna province. He was a 
successful statesman. At the end of his career, he became the governor of Baghdād and Diyarbakir. 
Sirrī Pasha died in 1895 in Istanbul where he was receiving treatment for a heart disease.6 
Since Sirrī Pasha had a good grasp of Arabic and Persian, he translated from both languages into 
Turkish. Firstly, he composed commentarial translation of Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid of al-Taftāzānī and then 
published its summary entitled Naḳdü’l-kelâm fī ʿaḳāʾidi’l-İslām in 1884. In this field he also wrote 
on the views about seeing God in paradise, titled Rüʾyetü’l-Bârî hakkında risâle (Treatise on the 
Beatific Vision of Creator). His book ʾĀrāu’l-Milel (Views of the Nations) is a compilation about the 
history of theological sects. Also, in his treatise titled Rûh Risâlesi, Sirrī describes the ideas of the 
Muslim thinkers on the spirit.  Another book he penned is entitled Nûru’l-Hüdâ li-men İstehdâ (the 
light of guidance for the one who seeks the guidance), which was published in Diyarbakir. It is 
about the falsifying Christian belief in trinity and proving alteration (tahrīf) of the Bible. Besides, 
Sirrī wrote an exegesis of several chapters of the Quran and his main source was Fakr al-Din al-
Rāzī's Tafsīr al-Kabīr. The most important tafsir book he authored was Aḥsenü’l-Ḳaṣaṣ (The Best of 
 
6  
Cemal Kurnaz, "Sırrı Paşa", Türkiye Diyanet Vakfı İslâm Ansiklopedisi (İstanbul: TDV Yayınları, 2009), 37/127-128. 

[sayfa 5]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ayşe Betül DÖNMEZ TEKİN 
 
Kader 
20/3, 2022 883 
 
Tales), an exegesis of the surah Yūsuf.7 In his tafsīr works he uses mostly method of rational 
interpretation (dirāya) rather than transmitting traditions (riwāya).8 
Ottoman ulama usually studied and composed texts in the commentary/gloss (sharḥ /ḥāshiya) 
style. Among the commentaries that were highly esteemed in the Ottoman Empire we can 
mention the Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid of al-Taftāzānī, which was written in 1367. It was taught in the 
madrasas and glossed upon by many scholars until modern times.9 The glosses also were received 
well. Among them the gloss of Ahmed b. Musa (d. 1481), known as Khayālī, gained notoriety and 
became a madrasa textbook in its own right. Sirrī Pasha undertook translation of Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid 
while working in the Vilayet of the Danube (Tuna). Initial parts of the translation were published 
in 1875 (1292 AH) in Ruse (Rusçuk), the capital of Danube. The last part was published in Trabzon 
in 1884, because the printing press was closed in Ruse. This translation of Sirrī Pasha includes 
glosses from Khayālī and other prominent glossators of Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid. Collection of views in the 
translation enables us to compare all different positions on various theological issues. For such an 
example, we will look at the section on free will. However, first we will provide an overview of 
Sirrī’s reason for translation and his method and then look at the prolegomenon which is his own 
composition. 
2. Sirrī’s Reason for Translation and His Method 
Ottoman translators usually added an introduction and a conclusion to the source text. In these 
additional sections, we can find the reason for composing (sebeb-i teʾlîf) a text. Sirrī Pasha adds his 
purpose of translation in his foreword (temhîd) by stating that the Arabic text is difficult for the 
majority to benefit from. Besides, it is worth to translate a recognized work rather than 
floundering to write an original work.10 However, it seems that he did something more than 
translating, he compiled from many sources and constructed a new text. His lengthy introduction 
is his own composition, and four volumes of translation is around 800 pages. Thus, his main reason 
for translating a theological text is the audience who are the new intellectual elite and not 
necessarily proficient in Arabic. 
Sirrī states his method of translation in the beginning. He wanted to translate the text word-by-
word, but he was obliged to summarize some discussions. As is well-known, there are two main 
methods of translation: word for word and sense for sense. Sirrī summarizes some discussions 
marking them in the headlines of the subject that it is a summary (telhīṣ). Sirrī also notes other 
sources he used in order to discern them from the main text under translation.11 This act of 
summarizing is also a rewriting of the text. It is actually a kind of commenting and glossing. In 
fact, his writing style is similar to other glosses. Sirrī adds his own views under the title headings 
such as 'for the translator' (li’l-mütercim), additional note (lâhiḳa), benefit (fâʾide), answer (cevāb). 
 
7  
Kurnaz, "Sırrı Paşa", 37/128; Bursalı Mehmed Tahir, Osmanlı Müellifleri, ed. Fikri Yavuz - İsmail Özen (İstanbul: Meral 
Yayınevi, 1972), 2/368-369.  
8  
Ekrem Gülşen, "19. Yüzyılda Bir Osmanlı Valisi: Giritli Sırrı Paşa ve Tefsir Anlayışı", Sakarya Üniversitesi İlahiyat 
Fakültesi Dergisi 12/22 (2010), 186. 
9  
Sırrı Paşa, "Mukaddime", Şerh-i Akāid Tercümesi (Ruscuk: Tuna Vilayet-i Celilesi Matbaası, 1875), 4. 
10  
Sırrı, “Mukaddime”, 3. 
11  
Sırrı, "Mukaddime", 4-5. 

[sayfa 6]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Analysis of Sirrī Pasha’s Translation of Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid with a Focus on the Issue of Free Will 
 
Kader 
20/3, 2022 884 
 
He also puts down a compact conclusion (netîce) after bringing together different interpretations. 
He sometimes expresses his views in the footnotes, where at other times he gives definitions of 
basic concepts related to the topic under discussion.  
In some footnotes Sirrī Pasha poses a presumed question (suâl-i muḳadder) to the author. For 
example, according to Taftāzānī’s commentary, Nasafī reminds that it is suitable to begin the book 
with the topic of knowledge, which is an introductory subject of kalām books. Sirrī points out that 
this comment was an answer to a presumed question which was raised as to why the author did 
not start the text with the most important aim of kalam, i.e., the existence of Creator and His 
unity, but rather preferred beginning with the problem of created beings (muḥdathāt), i.e., the 
world (kāʾināt) and its states [substances (aʿyān) and accidents (aʿrāż)]. Reminding these issues 
leads to knowing the essence and attributes of the Creator. Here Sirrī Pasha adds that philosophers 
discuss natural body in physics since it is a part of the world too. But their vision is different from 
theologians because they study natural body regarding whether it is moved or unmoved. 
However, theologians study it in so far it indicates existence and attributes of the Creator.12  
Sirrī occasionally explains the topic in a dialogue style. For example, in the subject of universals 
and particulars, he writes a dialogue between a philosopher and a pupil (shākird) discussing if 
Allah knows the particulars (juzʾiyyāt)13 and then another dialogue between a virtuous person 
(fāżıl) and a theologian on the same topic.14 This method of dialogue makes it easier to learn and 
understand the theological problems. From these translation strategies, it can be said that Sirrī 
Pasha did not only translate the text and quoted other interpretations but put forward his own 
comments which makes it a mix of literal and free translation. This shows how the translator 
intervenes in the text and it can also be seen as an interpretation activity. Thus, I call it 
“commentarial translation”.  
3. The Sources of Sirrī’s Prolegomenon (Muḳaddime) 
Sirrī composed a lengthy introduction for the translation. Although this is Sirrī’s own 
composition, it does quote many passages from other classical books such as Sharḥ al-Mawāqif of 
Sayyid Sharif al-Jurjānī (d. 1413), Muqaddima of Ibn Khaldūn (d. 1406), and Kashf al-Zunūn of Kātib 
Chelebi (d. 1657). Relying on these sources, the introduction provides, in a way, a history of 
thought. It begins with the emergence of the divergences (ikhtilāfāt), after the Prophet 
Muhammad died, between his companions. This section is mostly based on the appendix of Sharḥ 
al-Mawāqif of al-Jurjānī, which is another famous book taught in the madrasas. Sirrī instead 
introduces his translation with this exposition of kalām’s historical background.  
In the appendix of Sharḥ al-Mawāqif, al-Jurjānī reports from al-Āmidī saying that when the Prophet 
died all Muslims were in one creed and one way except hypocrites. He mentions divergence 
among the Muslims in five issues: first, whether the Prophet was conscious in deathbed when he 
wanted a paper; second, whether Usama should be the commander of an army as the Prophet 
ordered; third, whether the Prophet was really dead or still alive; fourth, where to bury him, and 
 
12  
Sırrı, Şerh-i Akāid Tercümesi (Ruscuk: Tuna Vilayet-i Celilesi Matbaası, 1875), 1/9. 
13  
Sırrı, Şerh-i Akāid Tercümesi, 1/310-314. 
14  
Sırrı, Şerh-i Akāid Tercümesi, 1/314-316.  

[sayfa 7]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ayşe Betül DÖNMEZ TEKİN 
 
Kader 
20/3, 2022 885 
 
finally who would be the caliph.15 Then, the misguided seven big sects are elaborately explained 
with their subgroups. The main sects are respectively Muʿtazila, Shīʿa, Khawārij, Murjiʾah, 
Najjāriyya, Jabriyya, and Mushabbiha. The eighth group is the one which will be saved (Nājiya) in 
the hereafter. The main source for this section is Sharḥ al-Mawāqif, Muqaddima of Ibn Khaldun 
together with its translation by Cevdet Pasha (d. 1895) and occasionally Gelenbevî's (d. 1791) gloss 
on Jalāl. Besides classical books, Sirrī quotes from a contemporary Ottoman scholar Nüzhet 
Efendi's (d. 1889) treatise called Kırmızı Bayrak (Red Flag) while he is explaining where the name 
of Qarmatians derived from and the origins of Hasan Sabbah.16  
After Islamic sects Sirrī goes on to enumerate philosophical groups (mezāhib-i felāsife) and other 
religions. This topic is lacking in Sharḥ al-Mawāqif. Therefore, Sirrī uses other trustworthy sources. 
These are mostly taken from Cevdet Pasha’s translation of the Muqaddima’s sixth chapter, Molla 
Lutfi's Gloss, Nevʿî Efendi’s (d. 1599) Netāyicü’l-Fünūn,17 a book on the classification of sciences, 
Kâtib Chelebi’s two books, i.e., Kashf al-Zunūn and Jihan-numa (Cihânnümâ), Ali Suâvî's Târih-i Efkâr, 
which is a series of articles that Suâvî wrote in his newspaper Ulūm Gazetesi (1869-1870), and 
Shamsiyya, a logic handbook by al-Qazwīnī al-Kātibī (d. 1276), and its commentaries.  
Sirrī’s discussion of various religions includes Zoroastrianism, Judaism, and Christianity. He gives 
a relatively longer space to Christianity by summarizing Tuḥfetü'l-erîb fi’r-red ʿalâ ehli’ṣ-ṣalîb of 
Abdullah al-Tarjumān (d. 1429) who was a convert from Spain. Sirrī introduces four gospels 
namely Matta, Luka, Markos, and Yuhanna, and talks about twelve apostles of Jesus.18 Quoting Ibn 
Khaldun’s Muqaddima at length, Sirrī elucidates the history of Christianity further by focusing on 
the Nestorians.19 At the end, Sirrī Pasha directs the reader who wants to learn details of 
Christianity by referring to Iẓhār al-ḥaqq written in 1861 by Raḥmat Allāh al-Hindī al-Kayrānawī 
(d. 1891), an Indian scholar. It is a refutation of trinity. He points out that “studying this book is a 
necessity for Muslims” (ehl-i İslâm için mütâlaası vâcib).20 It is unusual to encounter so much 
information about Christianity in a kalām book. However, as I have suggested, this could be related 
to the environment in which Sirrī Pasha grew and served as an Ottoman statesman, i.e., Crete and 
Balkans, which were witnessing rise of nationalism that was tied to religious difference. In a way, 
Sirrī’s translation embodies the impact of nationalist movements on a theology book.  
Sirrī Pasha was not merely translating the main text and quoting others to explicate the text. He 
intervenes where he does not agree with the author. For instance, he criticizes Cevdet Pasha’s 
account of the ancient Greek philosophy. Sirrī asserts that Cevdet seems to merge the 
philosophies of Anaxagoras and Anaximenes under the name of Anaxagoras.21 Another example 
is about the meaning of sophist, which Sirrī defines as owner of the wisdom, but then notes that 
it accrued a negative meaning later on. However, in Sharḥ al-Mawāqif sophist (sûfastâ) is explained 
 
15  
Sırrı, "Mukaddime", 5-10. 
16  
Sırrı, "Mukaddime", 26, 31. 
17  
Sırrı, "Mukaddime", 59. He mistakenly writes Nevʿîzâde.  
18  
Sırrı, "Mukaddime", 69. 
19  
Sırrı, "Mukaddime", 80-86. 
20  
Sırrı, "Mukaddime", 86. 
21  
Sırrı, "Mukaddime", 58. 

[sayfa 8]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Analysis of Sirrī Pasha’s Translation of Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid with a Focus on the Issue of Free Will 
 
Kader 
20/3, 2022 886 
 
with two terms, i.e., sûfa means knowledge and sata means error.  Sirrī Pasha considers this 
definition to be wrong.22 
There are even more sources that are consulted in the main part of the book which is a translation 
of Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid. Sirrī resorts almost to all the glosses (ḥāshiya) on this book such as those of 
Khayālī, Ramazan Efendi, Isam, Siyālkūtī, Kefevī, Mufti of Vidin (Mustafa Hamdi Efendi), and 
Taliqāt of Sheikh Khālid (d.1255/1839). Sirrī Pasha also refers to al-Mutawwal of al-Taftazānī, and a 
gloss known as Torun by grandson of al-Taftazānī (d. 906/1500), Rumûzul-Hikem (1871) by 
Abdurrahman Sami Pasha (d. 1881) and Miftah al-Funūn by Pasquale Gallupi (d. 1846), a logic book 
which was translated to Turkish in 1861.23 He uses Tefsîr-i Mevâkib, a Qur’an exegesis translated 
from Persian to Turkish by İsmâil Ferruh Efendi (d. 1840). All in all, Sirrī’s translation is a very rich 
text that has some striking aspects such as changing the structure of a kalām book and introducing 
new subjects. He also uses texts that were just published at the time, showing that Sirrī was an 
avid reader and paid attention to contemporary publications in explaining a centuries old text. 
The translation reflects influence of contemporary politics and religious conflicts. 
4. Cevdet Pasha’s Criticism of Sirrī’s Prolegomenon 
In the foreword of his translation Sirrī Pasha requests to be excused for any mistakes in his 
translation because he was busy with official duties while he was translating and commenting on 
Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid. Sirrī believes that his text is not completely devoid of mistakes (mündericâtının 
sehv ü hatadan beraetine iʿtimadım yok), thus, he says that he is open to corrections and 
improvements of the master scholars.24 Of course this is a traditional utterance that shows his 
modesty rather than being pompous about his work. After composing his prolegomena, Sirrī 
Pasha sends it to Ahmed Cevdet Pasha, one of the leading scholars and statesman of his time, for 
whom Sirrī has so much respect. He is from Lovech (Lofça), a town in the province of Tuna in 1822. 
He was serving as the Minister of Education in 1875, when he got Sirrī’s prolegomenon.25  
Ahmed Cevdet Pasha thoroughly reads the prolegomenon and writes a brief review in which he 
makes some revisions. Sirrī reproduces this letter at the end of introductory (muḳaddime) volume 
of the book. In the letter Cevdet Pasha warns Sirrī about structure and style of his writing. Cevdet 
criticizes that Sirrī listed the Ashʿariyya under the Jabriyya as a moderate compulsionism (cebriyye 
mütevassıta) which is a version of fatalism in page 45. Since the Jabriyya was mentioned as the 
opposite side of the saved sect (fıraḳ-ı nâciye), so in this classification Ashʿariyya would fall within 
the heretic groups (fıraḳ-ı ḍâlle). The Jabrites believe that all actions are determined by God and 
they deny the free will. However, in page 47, the Ashʿariyya was included in the saved sect. Thus, 
according to Cevdet this amounts to a contradiction. Then Cevdet suggests that Sirrī should have 
adequately explained only the Jabriyya among the heretic groups, so that one would not assume 
the Ashʿarites to be among them.26 Although, Cevdet proposes some other corrections in the text, 
 
22  
Sırrı, "Mukaddime", 67-68. 
23  
Sırrı, Şerh-i Akāid Tercümesi, 1/109. 
24  
Sırrı, "Mukaddime", 5. Çerkeşîzâde Mehmed Tevfîk (d. 1901) wrote a treatise as a critique of Sirrī Pasha’s translation 
in order to show his errors and flaws.  
25  
Yusuf Halaçoğlu - Mehmet Âkif Aydın, “Cevdet Paşa”, Türkiye Diyanet Vakfı İslâm Ansiklopedisi (Erişim 21 Aralık 2022). 
26  
Sırrı, "Mukaddime", 321. 

[sayfa 9]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ayşe Betül DÖNMEZ TEKİN 
 
Kader 
20/3, 2022 887 
 
looking at his articulation of the free will shows how he saw the position of Ashʿarites among 
different groups.  Cevdet elucidates his ideas in the following way:  
If it were desired to explain the two-fold division of Jabriyya, it would be suitable to explain within 
the issue of debates between the Māturīdism and the Ashʿarism. Hence the topic of free will and 
destiny is a very large and hazardous field. On one side of this is the Jabriyya, and on the other side 
the Mu'tazila, they sometimes got out of the way and went astray. The saved sect, which is 
Followers of the Sunni tradition (Ehl-i Sünnet ve’l-Cemâat), became moderate between these two 
sides by demonstrating the particular (human) free will (irâde-i cüzʾiyye) and thus saved from being 
in danger. But they also differ (among themselves) in interpreting this human free will and are 
divided into two: The Ashʿarism and the Māturīdism. The Ashʿarism were objected to because their 
inference and style of explanation eventually [concerning human free will] leads to compulsion, 
and from this perspective the position of the Māturīdism was seen more suitable to the reasoning. 
Yet among them the Hanafites who at most incline and rely on the side of reason, of course in this 
topic inclined to the Māturīdī position. However, the difference between the Ashʿarism and the 
Māturīdism does not reach to the level of accusing each other with heresy; and both of them 
essentially hold the same position, thus, the saved sect consists of them.27 
Here Cevdet emphasizes the rationality of Māturidism in addition to its commonality with 
Ashʿarism against heretical groups. The pages, where Cevdet accuses Sirrī of being contradictory, 
are in fact, Sirrī’s summarized translations mostly from Sharḥ al-Mawāqif, which in turn quoted al-
Āmidī. On page 45 of Sirrī’s prolegomenon, the compulsion (cebr) is described as attributing the 
human actions to Allah. Then the Jabrites (Cebriyye), which is among the heretic groups, is divided 
into two: the first is the moderate (mütevassiṭa) and the second is the pure (hālisa) Jabrites. The 
moderate one is between compulsion and submission (tevfîz), and attributes an effective 
acquisition (kesb) to the human. These are Ashʿarites (Eşʿariyye), Najjārites (Neccâriyye), and 
Ḍirārites (Dırâriyye). The pure Jabrites are the Jahmites (Cehmiyye), which belongs to Jahm b. 
Safwān and his companions. They do not give any power, whether acquisitive or effective, to the 
human. The human is like an inanimate body whose all actions are necessary.28  
On page 47 Sirrī discusses the saved sect. The idea of saved sect is based on the seventy-three-sect 
hadith.29 The prophet said that "the saved sect is the one to which I and my companions belong". 
The scholars understood this hadith in different ways. Sirrī continues quoting from Sharḥ al-
Mawāqif of al-Jurjānī and writes that the Ashʿarites, the predecessors of Atharīs (selef-i muḥaddisîn) 
and other Sunnis (ehl-i Sünnet ve’l-Cemaat) all are the saved sect. Māturīdites were not mentioned 
here.30 Then, Sirrī quotes Ahmed Cevdet’s translation of Muqaddima in classifying the saved sect 
into two groups: the Ashʿarism and the Māturīdism. Even though they have differences in minor 
issues (mesāil) of theology, they agree upon the method of creed.31  
Sirrī Pasha did take Cevdet Pasha’s criticism seriously as evidenced by his later work that paid 
attention to the letter. In his Ārāü’l-Milel, which was published in 1886, Sirrī narrates the same 
 
27  
Sırrı, "Mukaddime", 321. 
28  
Sırrı, "Mukaddime", 45-46; cf. Seyyid Şerif Cürcânî, Şerhu'l-Mevâkıf, trans. Ömer Türker (İstanbul: Türkiye Yazma 
Eserler Kurumu Başkanlığı Yayınları, 2015), 806. 
29  
"My community will divide into seventy-three sects." Sırrı, "Mukaddime", 47. 
30  
Sırrı, "Mukaddime", 47; cf. Cürcânî, Şerhu'l-Mevâkıf, 3/810. 
31  
Sırrı, "Mukaddime", 49; cf. Ahmed Cevdet Paşa, Mukaddime Osmanlı Tercümesi (İstanbul: Klasik Yayınları, 2008), 3/71. 

[sayfa 10]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Analysis of Sirrī Pasha’s Translation of Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid with a Focus on the Issue of Free Will 
 
Kader 
20/3, 2022 888 
 
information, except that this time he follows Cevdet Pasha’s suggestion. Amongst the heretic 
sects, he mentions only the pure Jabriyya excluding the moderate Jabriyya altogether.32 As for the 
saved sect, he quotes only the two division of Ahl al-Sunnah (ehl-i Sünnet) from Cevdet Pasha.33 In 
other words, he excludes the Atharism, instead names Māturīdism (Māturīdiyya).  
5. Ashʿarī and Māturīdī Divergence on the Free Will 
Following the classification of Ahl al-Sunnah, Sirrī Pasha gives an account of the birth of these 
two groups and again quotes from Cevdet Pasha about the relationship between Ashʿarism and 
Māturīdism. Cevdet’s approach is remarkable to illustrate how Ottoman translators adjusted the 
theological texts to their own Māturīdī context: “When Ashʿarism is mentioned in the opposite of 
Māturīdism, by this the followers of Imam Ashʿarī are intended, but sometimes, if it is mentioned 
in the opposite of heretics (ehl-i bidʿat), then Ashʿarism refers to Sunnis (ehl-i Sünnet) in general. In 
this way, Ashʿarism encompasses Māturīdism. Therefore, Māturīdism becomes a sub-group under 
Ashʿarism.”34 Even though they agree on the basic beliefs of Islam, they have a few diverging views 
on some questions of kalām. Nevertheless, it is possible to reconcile them.35  
According to Cevdet Pasha the main controversy is the problem of human’s particular free will 
(irâde-i cüzʾiyye). There are two extreme sides regarding this problem. While the Jabrites 
absolutely deny the human free will and believe that all movements of humans are determined 
by God, the Mutazilites claim that humans are free in all their actions because they are responsible 
for what they do in this world, and gain rewards in the hereafter. They state that human is the 
creator of his actions, so the creator becomes multiple. On the other hand, according to the 
Jabrites, the divine duties are in vain. Also, it is apparent that there is a difference between 
climbing up the stairs and falling from them. Ahl al-Sunnah takes a middle position between these 
two extremities. They believe that the Necessary Existence (Vâcibü’l-Vücûd) is the Creator of all 
things, but humans have a particular free will in their voluntary actions.36  
The major debated issue is that whether the free will is created or not. The particular free will 
means to choose the action or abandon it. The Ashʿarites say that it is created, but the Māturīdites 
say that it is not created. In this sense, according to the Ashʿarites everything happens since Allah 
already knows them. As for the Māturīdites, the knowledge follows what is known (ʿilim maʿlûma 
tâbiʿdir), therefore God eternally knows the future since it is going to happen.37 It means that God 
has pre-eternal knowledge, but this does not restrain humans’ free actions. In the chapter on the 
attributes of God, quoting Siyalkûtî who presents a division of knowledge: (1) active knowledge 
 
32  
Sırrı-i Giridî, Ârâü’l-milel (İstanbul: Şirket-i Mürettibiye Matbaası, 1886), 187-188. 
33  
Sırrı, Ârâü’l-milel, 192-193. 
34  
Sırrı, "Mukaddime", 50. For the differing positions between two schools on the doctrine of acquisition and free 
choice see Yahya Raad Haidar, The Debates Between Ash’arism and Māturīdism in Ottoman Religious Scholarship: A 
Historical and Bibliographical Study (Canberra: The Australian National University, PhD Thesis, 2016), 76. 
35  
For an extensive account of controversial topics between Ashʿarism and Māturidism see Mehmet Kalaycı, "Mâtürîdî-
Hanefî Aidiyetin Osmanlı’daki İzdüşümleri", Cumhuriyet İlahiyat Dergisi 20/2 (2016), 9-72.  
36  
Sırrı, "Mukaddime", 50. 
37  
Sırrı, "Mukaddime", 51.  

[sayfa 11]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ayşe Betül DÖNMEZ TEKİN 
 
Kader 
20/3, 2022 889 
 
(fiilî) which comes before what is known (malûm) and (2) passive (infiâlî) knowledge which comes 
after what is known.38   
Cevdet Pasha states that the truest view is that of the Māturīdites. The discussion is put as follows: 
If particular free will (irâde-i cüzʾiyye) is created, then humans are obligated in using their powers, 
so this leads to determinism (cebr), which makes the divine orders futile (abes). However, it is 
possible to compromise between two views by saying “the stimulation (şevḳ) and desire (arzu), 
which are the causes (esbâb) of irâde-i cüzʾiyye, are created”. If the Ashʿarites contest it by saying 
that if the irâde-i cüzʾiyye were not created by Allah, then the human would create it, so it leads to 
the Muʿtazilite view. Also, if the human is not a creator, and it is impossible to have the created 
without a creator, so it requires that Allah is not the creator of everything as Mu'tazila argue. It is 
answered as follows: The Creator of everything is Allah, but the particular free will (irâde-i cüzʾiyye) 
is not a thing (şey). Since a thing means an existent matter (emr-i mevcûd), but particular will is not 
temporal and rather is a state (ḥāl) that emerges in a human suddenly in one moment, it is like 
conceptual entities (umûr-i iʿtibâriyye), hence it is not an existent which needs a creator and 
directed at active creation. If one were to say that it is unlikely to accept particular free will as a 
conceptual entity regarding that it is the source of voluntary actions and focal point of happiness 
in two worlds, it would be responded that there are two meanings of conceptual entity (emr-i 
iʿtibârî) : the first is not existing in itself but being mere imagination, the second is existing in itself, 
but not being qualified with the existence in a time in the outside world. Here what we say is that 
the human free will is a conceptual entity and has a meaning in the latter sense not in the former 
sense.39  
In this passage, Cevdet Pasha, as a follower of al-Māturīdī, argues that human's limited free will is 
a conceptual entity (“irâde-i cüzʾiyye emr-i iʿtibârîdir”) noting that it is not a mere imaginative thing 
rather it is the kind of perspectival state that exists in itself but not in the external temporal world.  
Considering that Sirrī extensively quoted Cevdet’s discussion of particular will without any 
objections, we may surmise that he endorses his position.   
6. Creation of Actions  
Sirrī’s translation of the chapter on the human actions is noteworthy both for showcasing his 
style of translation and his position on the issue of particular will. Typically, Sirrī translates 
passages from the main text and the commentary and intersperses the commentary with 
additional material from other glosses on the Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid. He also uses footnotes to either 
explain an issue further or again quote relevant passages from other theological or religious 
books. In the section on creation of actions and the following related topics, besides the original 
text, Sirrī consults works of Ramazan Efendi, Akkirmânî (d. 1760), Ibn Abī Sharīf (d. 1500), Khayālī, 
Siyalkūtī, ‘Isām, and Tefsîr-i Mevâkib. This tafsīr is particularly referenced to provide exegesis of 
the quoted verses from the Qur’an.  
With regard to human actions, in the text of Nasafī it is stated that God creates all human actions 
pertaining to belief and disbelief, obedience and disobedience. Taftāzānī provides some 
arguments for this position such as that creating actions would require their detailed knowledge 
 
38  
Sırrı, Şerh-i Akāid Tercümesi, 2/65. 
39  
Sırrı, "Mukaddime", 51. cf. Sırrı, Ârâü'l-milel, 195; Ahmed Cevdet Pasa, Mukaddime, 3/72. 

[sayfa 12]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Analysis of Sirrī Pasha’s Translation of Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid with a Focus on the Issue of Free Will 
 
Kader 
20/3, 2022 890 
 
which humans lack, and that the Qur’an includes verses that show God as the creator of every 
thing. Although the discussion does not directly mention the differences between Ash’arīs and 
Maturidīs in this part, there are allusions to the Maturidite position as Sirrī combines the 
commentary with Akkirmanî’s explanation in a few instances, in one of which Akkirmâni’s 
statement that knowledge follows upon the known is insterted into the commentary.40 Sirrī also 
quotes from Akkirmânî’s treatise on the free will at times.41  
Mehmed Akkirmânî’s treatise on the particular will was one of several treatises written during 
the eighteenth-century Ottoman Empire.42 In this treatise eight different positions are counted 
on this subject. According to Akkirmânî, al-Māturīdī held the most consistent view. Al-
Māturīdī argues that Allah creates everything, however he rejects the view that human free will 
is created, since it does not have an external existence, and is a relative thing. According to him, 
particular free will is a state (ḥāl), hence, it is neither an existent nor it is created. The human 
action happens with Allah's power from the aspect of creating and with the human's power from 
the aspect of acquisition. Akkirmânî states that there are four stages before an action: conception 
(taṣavvur), stimulation (şevḳ), volition/will (irāde), and movement of bodily organs (taḥrīk-i āza). In 
the fifth stage God creates (halḳ) the action per His custom. Even if all the four come together, 
Allah does not have to create the action. Akkirmânî notes that the will (irāde) and the stimulation 
(şevḳ) are different concepts. Allah creates the stimulation, but not the will.43 Based on this idea, 
Cevdet Pasha, in his above discussed views tried to mediate the two sides and solve the conflict by 
asserting that just before the will phase, the stimulation can be created, as it is the cause of the 
will.  
Another indication of Sirrī’s allusion to the Maturidī view is in the first footnote to this topic. In 
that footnote, Sirrī explains that the topic is not limited to human actions but rather applicable 
to all kind of creatures. He notes that even though the evidence on this issue is brought up in 
regard to the actions of responsible adults (mukallaf), once they are established it is possible for 
the intellect to judge others based on them. After this general note, he proceeds to explain the 
issue noting that this topic contains Abū Isḥāq al-Isfarāyīnī’s (d. 418/1027) views, despite the fact 
that he asserted that both powers, that is God and human’s power (kudret) are together efficient 
in bringing about adults’ (mukallafīn) actions he did not fear from stating that two wills are 
efficient on one action. However, he does not say that humans are creators of their actions 
because the word ‘creation’ has the meaning of determining, God the sublime gives existence 
(icâd), and through his power, without being diminished, determines as well. However, humans 
 
40  
Sırrı, Şerh-i Akāid Tercümesi, 2/191. 
41  
Sırrı, Şerh-i Akāid Tercümesi, 2/192. 
42  
For a few other treatises and their analysis see Philip Dorroll, “Māturīdī Theology in the Ottoman Empire: Debating 
Human Choice and Divine Power”, Osmanlı’da İlm-i Kelâm: Âlimler, Eserler, Meseleler, ed. O. Demir et al. (İstanbul: İSAR 
Yayınları, 2016), 219-238; Murat Karacan, “XVIII. Yüzyıl Osmanlı Âlimi Hâdimî’nin İnsan Fiillerine Dair Bir Risalesi -
Tercüme ve Tahlil-,” Osmanlı’da İlm-i Kelâm: Âlimler, Eserler, Meseleler, ed. O. Demir et al. (İstanbul: İSAR Yayınları, 
2016), 239-265. For an overview of the topic see Hatice K. Arpaguş, “Mâtürîdîlik ve Osmanlı’da İrâde-i Cüz’iyye 
Yorumu,” Osmanlı Düşüncesi: Kaynakları ve Tartışma Konuları, ed. Fuat Aydın et al. (İstanbul: Mahya Yayıncılık, 2019), 
243-262. 
43  
Şamil Öcal, “Osmanlı Kelamcıları Eş'arî miydi? -Muhammed Akkirmânî'nin İnsan Hürriyeti Anlayışı-.” Dini 
Araştırmalar 2/5 (1999), 246-247.  

[sayfa 13]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ayşe Betül DÖNMEZ TEKİN 
 
Kader 
20/3, 2022 891 
 
cannot determine the action as it is.44 The point being made here is that even though al-Isfarāyīnī 
held on to the view that both humans and God have a role in the occurrence of an action, this did 
not necessitate asserting that humans are creators of their actions. Instead, he still was considered 
among those who say that God is the sole creator of actions. Perhaps Sirrī is suggesting that the 
Maturidi position does not lead to plurality of creators even though they defend that partial free 
will is not created.   
Conclusion 
Sirrī Pasha’s translation of Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid of Taftāzānī is not a literal (word-for-word) translation. 
As we have seen on the issue of partial free will, it engages contemporary as well as traditional 
Māturīdī views. By bringing together previous glosses on the distinguished commentary of 
Taftazānī on one of the most prominent creed texts in Islam, Sirrī was able to compare previous 
authors’ views and discuss their opinions in an inter-textual and dialogical vein. Furthermore, 
being translated in a time of fast reforms, Sirrī’s translation provided us with an understanding 
of Maturidī thought in the Ottoman modernization period. Through translation Sirrī transferred 
a classical madrasa book in field of kalam to the 19th century literate audience. We do not know its 
influence on the readers and how they received it, but it is clear that there was a need for 
translating this kalam text. 
From the analysis of his prolegomenon, we can see that Sirrī follows the traditional expositions 
by heavily relying on such sources. For instance, we have seen that Sirrī adapted a topic that was 
treated at the end of Sharḥ al-Mawāqif of Jurjānī and put it in the introduction of his translation. 
Sirrī also engages with some contemporary Ottoman scholars such as Cevdet Pasha, whose 
translation of the last chapter of Ibn Khaldun’s Muqaddima was quoted a few times. Apparently, 
he cared enough about Cevdet’s views on his prolegomenon and thus published a letter from him 
at the end of that part. The main issue that concerns both of these late Ottoman scholars is the 
place of Māturīdī thought in the Sunni community. They not only point out that Māturīdīs 
together with Ash’ari’s are the two mainstream Sunni theological schools. However, they also 
prefer Māturīdī views over some Ash’ari positions such as in the case of free will. 
 
 
 
44  
Sırrı, Şerh-i Akāid Tercümesi, 2/182-183, 62-64. 

[sayfa 14]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Analysis of Sirrī Pasha’s Translation of Sharḥ al-ʿAqāʾid with a Focus on the Issue of Free Will 
 
Kader 
20/3, 2022 892 
 
Bibliography 
Ahmed Cevdet Paşa. Mukaddime Osmanlı Tercümesi. 3 Volumes. İstanbul: Klasik Yayınları, 2008. 
Ahmed Cevdet Paşa. Tercüme-i Mukaddime-i İbn Haldûn. 3 Volumes. İstanbul: Yazma Eserler Kurumu 
Başkanlığı, 2015. 
Aksoy, Berrin. “Translation Activities in the Ottoman Empire”. Meta: journal des traducteurs/Meta: 
Translators’ Journal 50/3 (2005), 949-956. 
Arpaguş, Hatice K. “Mâtürîdîlik ve Osmanlı’da İrâde-i Cüz’iyye Yorumu”, Osmanlı Düşüncesi: 
Kaynakları ve Tartışma Konuları. ed. Fuat Aydın et al. 243-262. İstanbul: Mahya Yayıncılık, 2019. 
Bursalı, Mehmed Tahir. Osmanlı Müellifleri. 3 Volumes. ed. Fikri Yavuz-İsmail Özen. İstanbul: Meral 
Yayınevi, 1972. 
Cürcânî, Seyyid Şerif. Şerhu'l-Mevâkıf. 3 Volumes. trans. Ömer Türker. İstanbul: Türkiye Yazma 
Eserler Kurumu Başkanlığı Yayınları, 2015. 
Demircioğlu, Cemal. “Osmanlı Çeviri Tarihi Araştırmaları Açısından ‘Terceme’ ve ‘Çeviri’ 
Kavramlarını Yeniden Düşünmek”. Journal of Turkish Studies (Türklük Bilgisi Araştırmaları) 33/1 
(2009), 159-177. 
Dorroll, Philip. “Māturīdī Theology in the Ottoman Empire: Debating Human Choice and Divine 
Power”. Osmanlı’da İlm-i Kelâm: Âlimler, Eserler, Meseleler. ed. O. Demir et al. 219-238. İstanbul: İSAR 
Yayınları, 2016. 
Girîdî, Sırrı Paşa. Şerh-i Akāid Tercümesi. 3 Volumes. Ruscuk: Tuna Vilayet-i Celilesi Matbaası, 1292 
(1875). 
Girîdî, Sırrı Paşa. Şerh-i Akāid Tercümesi. Trabzon: s.n., 1301 (1884). 
Girîdî, Sırrı. Ârâü'l-milel. İstanbul: Şirket-i Mürettibiye Matbaası, 1303 (1886). 
Girîdî, Sırrı. Nakdu'l-kelam fî akāidi'l-İslâm. Dersaâdet: Mekteb-i Sanayi Matbaası, 1310 (1893). 
Girîdî, Sırrı. Nuru'l-Hüdâ li-men İhtedâ. Diyarbakır: Diyarbakır Vilayet Matbaası, 1310 (1893). 
Gülşen, Ekrem. "19. Yüzyılda Bir Osmanlı Valisi: Giritli Sırrı Paşa ve Tefsir Anlayışı". Sakarya 
Üniversitesi İlahiyat Fakültesi Dergisi 12/22 (2010), 161-188. 
Haidar, Yahya Raad. The Debates Between Ash’arism and Māturīdism in Ottoman Religious Scholarship: A 
Historical and Bibliographical Study. Canberra: The Australian National University, PhD Thesis, 2016. 
https://openresearch-repository.anu.edu.au/handle/1885/115206 
Halaçoğlu, Yusuf - Aydın, Mehmet Âkif. “Cevdet Paşa”. Türkiye Diyanet Vakfı İslâm Ansiklopedisi. 
Erişim 21 Aralık 2022. https://islamansiklopedisi.org.tr/cevdet-pasa 
İsmâil Müfîd Efendi. Kasîde-i Nûniyye Şerh ve Tercüme-i Manzûmesi. İstanbul: Süleymaniye 
Kütüphanes, H. Hüsnü Paşa, 892.7, 8a-22b. 
Kalaycı, Mehmet. "Mâtürîdî-Hanefî Aidiyetin Osmanlı’daki İzdüşümleri". Cumhuriyet İlahiyat 
Dergisi 20 (2016), 9-72. 

[sayfa 15]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ayşe Betül DÖNMEZ TEKİN 
 
Kader 
20/3, 2022 893 
 
Kalaycı, Mehmet. Tarihsel Süreçte Eşarilik Maturidilik İlişkisi. Ankara: Ankara Okulu Yayınları, 2019. 
Karacan, Murat. “XVIII. Yüzyıl Osmanlı Alimi Hâdimî’nin İnsan Fiillerine Dair Bir Risalesi -
Tercüme ve Tahlil-”. Osmanlı’da İlm-i Kelâm: Âlimler, Eserler, Meseleler. ed. O. Demir et al. 239-265. 
İstanbul: İSAR Yayınları, 2016. 
Kurnaz, Cemal. "Giritli Sırrı Paşa Hayatı, Eserleri, Şiirleri". İlmî Araştırmalar: Dil, Edebiyat, Tarih 
İncelemeleri 9 (2000), 133-160. 
Kurnaz, Cemal. "Sırrı Paşa." Türkiye Diyanet Vakfı İslâm Ansiklopedisi, 37/127-129. İstanbul: TDV 
Yayınları, 2009). 
Öcal, Şamil. “Osmanlı Kelamcıları Eş'arî miydi? -Muhammed Akkirmânî'nin İnsan Hürriyeti 
Anlayışı-”. Dini Araştırmalar 2/5 (1999), 225-254. 
Paker, Saliha. “On the poetic practices of ‘a singularly uninventive people’ and the anxiety of 
imitation”, Tradition, Tension and Translation in Turkey. ed. Ş. Tahir Gürçağlar et al. 27-52. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 2015.  
Paker, Saliha. “Telif, Tercüme ve Özgünlük Meselesi”, Metnin Halleri: Osmanlı’da Telif, Tercüme ve 
Şerh Eski Türk Edebiyatı Çalışmaları IX. ed. Hatice Aynur et al. 36-71. İstanbul: Klasik Yayınları, 2014. 
Taftāzāni. A Commentary on the Creed of Islam: Sa'd al-Din al-Taftāzāni on the creed of Najm al-Din al-
Nasafi. translated with introduction and notes by Earl Edgar Elder. New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1950. 
Toska, Zehra. “Evaluative Approaches to Translated Ottoman Turkish Literature in Future 
Research”. Translations: (Re)shaping of Literature and Culture. ed. Saliha Paker. 58-76. İstanbul: 
Boğaziçi Üniversitesi Yayınevi, 2002.  
Üsküp Kadısı Mustafa Sıdki. Tavâliʿ Tercümesi. İstanbul: Süleymaniye Kütüphanesi, Giresun, 160, 
1b-83a. 
Yazar, Sadık. “Bakir Bir Araştırma Sahası Olarak Osmanlı Tercüme Geleneği”. Türk Dili ve Edebiyatı 
Dergisi 60/1 (2020), 153-178. 
 
 
