en | 


| 


2ed' (‘The Book of Monotheism’) is the famous Sunni 
Mansoor al-Maturidi’s magnum opus (d. 333AH/944AC) 
rk and its author are a foundation of Sunni thought to oe 
Its early provenance and originality, as well as wide and fe = 
ice, Make this book essential for students of theology, 
the history of ideas. Yet despite the wide purported 
d devotion to his ideas, Maturidi’s work has been 
cted and untranslated by Muslim and non-Muslim : 
This is the first ever English translation — with ; 
of the first half of ‘Kitaab at-Tawheed'. 


{ 


Wy UeulTe[Ns 
Aq 
A1P}USUIUIO’) 


pue uonrjsuesy 


ij 1 


a= 
ique, providing a detailed and holistic approach to = 
, whilst also being its earliest extant comprehensive c 
e epi gical foundations of his ss Oo 
detailed arguments in defence of Monotheism, z a OC 
the creation gE om 
xf es 
gi PIO 
; Ke o fae owl 


1 


i 
{ 


4 
| 90000 
MANU 


institute.com info@maturidiinstitute.com 


‘(HE BOOK OF MONOTHEISM 


_KITAAB AT-TAWHEED: 


God and the Universe 
A Manual of Sunni Theology 


Translation and Commentary by 


ra—“‘(‘i‘iéélYy ry] 


OOO OO 


bu Mansur al-Maturidi (d. 333/944) 
an be regarded as the founder or 
ystematiser of orthodox Sunni 
Jamic theology and dogma, with a 
najority of Muslims through history 
laiming to follow his school of 
hought. Born in Maturid, a locality in 
amarkand, he authored many books 
n a wide variety of fields, but only two 
ave survived until our time — ‘Kitaab 
1t-Tawheed’ and his voluminous 
-ommentary on The Quran, ‘Ta’wilat 
jh! al-Sunna’. 


scholars have posited that he 
nherited his doctrinal positions from 
he earliest Sunni Imam, Abu Hanifa, 
and then systemised and interpreted 
‘hem. Others argue that he himself 
formulated the school. 


A awd * 


extant detailed text in Islamic 
doctrine and has been relied upon by 
practically all orthodox Muslim 
theologians succeeding Maturidi. To 
the present day, a vast number of 
Muslims either follow his school or 
specific doctrines from within it. — 


Fas 
= 
ry 
ny} 
SE 
re) 
nd 
a! 
\S 
m 
a’) 
a 
nm 
rt 
a 
t ) v 
a 
oO 
rol 
D 
LF 9] 
ot 
EEDA. 


The Book of Monotheism 


Kitaab At-Tawheed: 


God and the Universe 


A Manual of Sunni Theology 


Shaykh Abu Mansoor al-Maturidi 


Translation and Commentary 
by 


Sulaiman Ahmed 


The Book of Monotheism Kitaab At-Tawheed 
God and the Universe 
A Manual of Sunni Theology 
Copyright © Maturidi Publications. All rights reserved 
First hardback edition printed in 2019 


A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
ISBN 978-1-9993775-0-2 


No part of this book shall be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording by any information 


retrieval system without permission from the publisher. 
Published by Maturidi Publications 
For more copies of this book please email sales@maturidiinstitute.com 
Tel: 0114 221 7010 
Authored by Shaykh Abu Mansur al-Maturidi 
Translation and Commentary by Sulaiman Ahmed 


Although every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the 
publisher and author assume no responsibility for error or omissions. Neither is any 


liability assumed for damages resulting from the use of this information contained 


herein. 


“There is only one good — knowledge, and one evil — ignorance.” 


-- Socrates 


To my Grandmother Jamila Akbar 


Without whom none of this would have begun 


Contents 


Arabic Transliteration ey 

Introduction 

A Short Biography of Shaykh Aba Mansur al-Maturidi 
Chain of Teachers from Abi Hanifah to Al-Matutidi 
Kitaab at-Tawhid 

Notes on ‘Translation 


Religion must not be Based on Belief in Authority (Laghd) 
but must be Based on Evidence 


Knowledge of the Religion 7s Acquired Through Transmission 
(Sam’) and the Intellect (Aq!) 


Humans have Essentially Three Means of Acquiring Knowledge: 
a) The Senses, b) Transmission, ¢) Intellect 


Proof for the Created Nature of the Universe: The Ontological 
Structure of the Universe 


Proof that the Universe has a Creator 
The Issue of the Creator of the Universe Being One 
The Issue of the Creator of the Universe Being One Based on Reason 


Refutation of Those who Dispute our Teachings on Epistemology 


KAX 


Deducing that Which 15 Present from that Which is Absent 
The Refutation of those Who Profess the Eternity of the Universe 


God’s Names and _Altributes: God may not be Described as 
Body (Jism) 


God may be Described as a Thing’ (Shay?) 

Shaykh Abi Mansur was asked About the Meaning of ‘The One’ 
God's Essential Attributes: Pree Will (‘Ikbtzyar) 

Power (Qudra) and Will (Irada) 

Knowledge (Un) 

God’s Attribute of Action: Creating (Laquin) 


Proof of the Excistence of the Attributes: Against Equating the 
Creation with the Created 


Creating is just as External as Knowledge and Power 
Presentation and Refutation of al-Ka‘bi’s Doctrine on the Attributes 
Speech (Kalam) 


The Correct Understanding of God's Pree Will (‘Ikhtiyar) in 
Repudiation of Ka ‘bi 


Against those Who Profess an Autonomous Process of Nature 


Against those Who Profess an Eternal Material Substance (Tina) 


52 


ei 


74 


78 


85 


86 


89 


90 


94 


96 


99 


101 


115 


120 


1A 


128 


Against The Karanztes 127 
The Correct Understanding of God's Names (Asma’) 130 


All Names Apply to God Eternally (With a Critique of Jahm 
Bin Safwan) ies) 


Anthropomorphic Descriptions of God in the Quran: God Sitting 
on the Throne (AL-"Istama ‘Ala al-'Arsh) 135 


The Differing Views of the Throne as well as the Possibility of a 
Localisation of God 140 


Summary of Al-Maturidi’s Teachings 148 


Disputation with Ka’abi and Against the Idea that God is in the 
Sky Above Us 150 


The Meaning of the Terms ‘Near’, ‘Coming’, ‘Going’ and ‘Sitting’ in 
Regard to God 154 


The Vision of God (Ru'yat Allah) in Paradise 156 


Dispute with Muslim Opponents Against the Mutazalites: 
Proof that their Main Teachings are Close to the Ideas of 
Foreign Religions 173 


Against the Thesis: That which is Non-Existent (Ma’dum) Has 
Abvays Existed 174 


Against the Thesis: God has not Eternally been the Creator 1s 


— 


Against the Thesis: God’s Act of Creation is not Different from 
that Which is Created, God’s Will is not other than that 
Which is Willed 


Against the Thesis: Accidents Function in the Material Universe 
According to ther Own Sets of Laws 


Against the Thesis: Humans, Based on their Freedom, can Act 
in a Way that God did not know Previously 


Description of God and Attributing Names to Him does not 
Entail Anthropomorphism 


Why did God Create the Universe? 
Dispute with ALNajjar on God's Wisdom and Providence 


The Question of Why God Created the World (Against ALNajar, 
the Mutazalites and Ismailts) 


The Definition of Wisdom 
God’s Command and Prohibition (In Agreement with Al-Nagar) 
God’s Promise and Threat (In Agreement with Al-Nagar) 


On the Correct Understanding of the Maxim Whoever Knows 
Himself, Knows Has Lord’ 


Again: On the Use of the Terms Thing’ (‘Shay’), Body (Jism) and 
Being (Huwiyyah) with God 


Again: Is God in a Place (Due to His Sitting on The Throne) 


180 


182 


185 


192 


120 


204 


206 


207 


209 


200 


212 


216 


218 


On the Application of the Categories: What (Ma), How (Kayfiya), 
Where (Ayna), and Action (Fil) in the Teaching on God’s Attributes 221 


Theodicy: God's Wisdom and Providence in the Creation of Harmful 


Beings and Substances 294 
The Disagreement of Sects on the Nature of the Universe 228 
Refutation of Duaksm asi 
Refutation of Ni aturalisi 240 
Approaches to Monotheism 243 


The Views of Muhammad ibn Shabib on the Existence and 
Attributes of the Creator 252 


Defence of the Necessity of Speculative Reasoning (Naar) 
In Theology o7A 


Muhammad ibn Shabib’s Argument for the Created Nature 


of Bodies 219 
Refutation of the Teachings of the Dabriya (Materialsts) 285 
The Categories of Aristotle 205 


Refutation of the Sumaniya’s Thesis that the World is with no 
Beginning and Incessantly Sinks Downward: AL-Nazgam’s Argument 
with a Commentary by ALMaturidi 302 


Against the Sophists: Muhammad Ibn Shabib’s Argument with a 
Commentary by Al-Maturidi 304 


——— 


On the Teachings of the Manicheans: An Exposition of their 


lucorrectness 


On the Teachings of the Daysaniyyah: An Eixposition of thetr 


Incorrectness 


On the Teachings of the Marcionites: An Exposition of their 


Tncorrectness 


On the Teachings of the Magians: An Exposition of their 


I ncorveciness 
Acknowledgements 


Glossary 


A10 


320 


BoA 


335 


341 


342. 


co 


ot 


sp 


fray 


Ak 


Arabic Transliteration Key 


Glottal stop: a, ior u sound 
As ‘b’ in bread 

As ‘t’ in tea 

Like an ‘s’ but with a lisp 

As 9 in Jack 

As ‘h’ but deep in the throat 
As ‘ch’ in loch but heavier 
As ‘@’ in door but lighter 
Like a ‘2’ but with a lisp 

As ‘’ in road but more trill 
As ‘z in z00 

As ‘s’ in serpent 

As ‘sh’ in shine 

Like ‘s’ but very heavy 

Like ‘@’ but heavier 

Like ‘? but heavier 

Like a heavier version of dh 


Deep throat high pitched ‘a’ 


ah; at (construct state) 


= 
ra 


aw 


oy 


As ‘gh’ in ghoul but heavier 
As ‘f in ferty 

As ‘q’ in quote but heaviet 
As ‘k’ in kilo 

As ? in look 

As ‘m’ in mouse 

As ‘n’ in nose 

As ‘h’ in hurricane 

As “w’ in water 

As ‘y’ in year 

The ‘a’ vowel 

The ‘e’ ot ‘i’ vowel 

The ‘w or ‘o’ vowel 
Elongated vowel: aa 
Elongated vowel: 00 
Elongated vowel: ¢¢ 


ce 33 


aw 


ec 33 


ay 


al- (article) 


Introduction 


Shaykh Abu Mansoor al-Maturidi is the Islamic philosopher and 
theologian responsible for establishing one of the two main Sunni 
theological schools, the other being the Asharis, founded by Abu al- 
Hasan al-Ashari (d. 324/935). (There are some who argue that the Afari 
school should be included as a third, whilst others disagree as to the 


metits of its inclusion).' 


In spite of the fact that al-Maturidi holds such a significant role in Islamic 
thought, there has been little analysis of his ideas, though he established 
his school more than a thousand years ago. The works of al-Maturidi 
have not been translated into English and even in Arabic there is limited 
to no work produced on his writings. There have been two main works 
in the English language: “Roots of Synthetic Theology in Islam: A Study of the 
Theology of Abu Mansur Al-Maturid?’ written by Mustafa Certic in 1995 
(whose translation of certain excerpts I used to help support my own) 
and “ALMaturidi and Sunni Theology in Samarkand’ by Ulrich Rudolph 
written in 1997 (whose chapter headings were used in some instances). 
It is quite accurate then, to state that al-Maturidi and his ideas have not 
yet been explored in detail, if not outright neglected, in both the English 
and Arabic Languages. Therefore, I hope that the present work will help 
fill a significant void in academia and facilitate the advancement of 


research into the original ideas of a founder of Sunni Islamic thought. 


The majority of Muslims are (or at least claim to be) followers of the 


Maturidi School, and yet they have not had access to his ideas. One of 


The Athari School is split into two, those who follow the teachings of Ibn Taymiyyah 
(d. 728/1328) and those who follow Ibn Qudamah al-Maqdisi (d. 620/1223), Despite 
their differences, anthtopomorphism is included within both of their teachings. 


the many reasons for this is that the language of al-Maturidi is quite 
challenging, as he doesn’t use standard Arabic grammatical rules in his 
writings. It therefore requires someone who is accustomed to his works 
and thought to be able to bring forth his ideas in translation. However, 
this is by no means the only or main reason for al-Matutidi to be 
relegated to the fringes of Islamic education. We will attempt to explore 


the various causes of this omission here. 


There has been, in modern Sunni thought, and especially since the 20" 
Century, an aggressive, systematic and well financed infiltration of ideas 
from literalists and anthtopomorphists (people ascribing a body ot 
human attributes to God) — most obviously financed by the regressive 
Wahhabi Saudi regime, which claims (and is often accepted as) 
representing ‘custodianship’ of Islam, in places as far afield as Central 
London and China, to the point where all Muslim groups have been 
affected by their beliefs, whether in theology, Islamic jurisprudence 
(Sharia Law’) ot in Hadith (purported sayings of the Prophet 
Muhammad). This helps explain why Maturidi’s book, with its staanch 
rationalism and condemnation of anthropomorphism, has never been 
translated despite calls for it even from orientalists. This speaks volumes 
about the intentions of many of al-Maturidi’s ‘followers’ when we 
compate it to the plethora of editions and translations of the works of 
latter-day Salafist favourites like Ibn Taymiyya and the even more latter- 
day founders of other ‘sects’ from the Ikhwaanis (the ‘Muslim 
Brotherhood’) to ‘Hizb Ut Tabrir. It is much like having numerous 
books on Relativity by latter day polemical interlopers and ‘Star Trek’ 
fan fiction but ‘neglecting’ to publish Finstein himself (who also insisted 
on presenting his ideas to the lay public). 


In order to understand how this occurred, one needs to go back to 


interactions between the divergent groups today represented by Salafists 


and others claiming to carry the torch for Muslims, during the early 
periods of Islam, when petrodollars were not a factot as they are now, 
but violence was still a currency in dealing with your opponents — just as 


itis in ‘Islamic’ regimes and movements today. 


In early Islam, numerous groups held distinct views and doctrines. You 
can create a taxonomy of such groups based on a wide range of dogmas; 
for example, those who believed that the physical Quran was the 
uncreated word of God - which includes the anthropomorphists and the 
Hanbalites - and those who argued against this on the basis that 
something uncreated (God’s eternal speech) cannot be within something 
created (the Universe). This group included the Mutaalites (very broadly 
speaking, ‘rationalists’), the Maturidis and Imam Bukhari. Another 
classification of these groups can be made on the basis of the distinct 
methodologies employed by them in relation to the role of reason within 
Islam. hose who argued for the importance of reason were known as 
the ‘Ad/ ar-Ra'y’ (People of Rational Discretion’), and this included 
Maturidi, Mutazalites, the Murji school (who were followers of Imam Abu 
Hanifa), as well as the Malikis. They held that treason was the focal point 
in all forms of analysis, whether it was philosophical inquiry or analysing 
sctipture, such as the Quran or hadith. They believed that the Quran and 
reason conform to one another and that the Quran does not citcumvent 
reason. The Mutazalites even atgued that a person could come to the 
realisation about the ideas taught in the Quran based on philosophical 
inquiry alone and thus the reason for the Quranic revelation is in order 
to realign one’s thoughts when they have become ‘uncalibrated’ due to 
social influences that adversely affect the proper use of the intellect — 
somewhat akin to tuning a piano. It was on this basis that the “AA/ ar- 
Ra’ held that Hladith were a secondary source within Islam, and 
therefore if these Hadith conflict with the Quran (which is a primary 


source) or, importantly, reason, then they should be rejected, On the 


vi 


other hand, the *44/ a/-Hadith’ (‘Partisans of Hadith’ — again, very broadly 
speaking, anti — rational traditionists and literalists) claimed that hadiths 
should be centrally located in Islamic thought, with some arguing that 
their importance was at the same level as the Quran itself. They believed 
in following the sources without questioning their authenticity (for 
example, if a hadith was natrated in a famous collection, it was considered 
heretical to question its veracity — much as is the case with collections 
such as ‘Sahih Bukhar? today). This camp includes the Hanbalis, the 


modern-day Salafis as well as many Shafis. 


Al-Matutidi was included in the group known as ‘Ad/ ar-Ra'y’. His 
viewpoint was that Asad hadith (solitary narrations making up the vast 
majority of the hadith corpus) have an equal possibility of being authentic 
ot fabricated." Therefore, if these narrations conflict with stronger 
evidence or the Quran, they cannot be accepted. This can be seen from 
a number of examples where he rejected narrations that most Muslims 
today not only unquestioningly accept but ate not aftaid to label those 


who do question them ‘heretics’ or even non-Muslims. 


Maturidi questioned the authenticity of the tradition relayed about the 
Mira (the Prophet Muhammad's ‘Night Journey’). Al-Maturidi made a 
clear distinction between the first leg of the journey that is mentioned in 
the Quran - which is the Prophet Muhammad travelling from the Holy 
Mosque to the “Furthest Mosque’, which most argue is from Mecca to 
Jerusalem - and the second leg of the journey (not mentioned in the 
Quran), which is the Prophet Muhammad ascending from Jerusalem to 
the Heavens and eventually meeting God Almighty. Al-Maturidi argued 
that we should restrict our understanding and belief of the journey to 
what is stated in the Quran and all other related stories from inauthentic 


sources ot from solitary narrations should not be included in one’s 


uSeeukane 1S 


vii 


understanding of the ‘Night Journey’. If one was to say this at a setmon 


in most UK mosques today, it would likely start a riot. 


Another example of al-Maturidi’s methodology was his rejection of the 
narration that the Prophet Muhammad was affected by black magic and 
was no longer aware of his actions. This hadith was once again later found 
in ‘Sabih Bukhar?: “Once the Prophet was bewitched, so that he began to imagine 
that he bad done a thing when in fact, he had not done it.” Despite the close 
resemblance between this and the ‘Satanic Verses’ incident (also 
bizarrely regarded as ‘authentic’ not only by Islamophobes but by the 
partisans of Hadith as well), rejecting this absurd idea will expose you to 


howls of protest and instant anathematisation from the vast majority of 


ii Al Maturidi, Abu Mansoor, ‘Tawilat ab/ al-Sunnal’, (Baghdad, al-Irshad, 1983), (Surah 
ALlIsra, Verse 1). Another instance was the bizarre story of Moses and the stone which 
was relayed in the following 4adith found in (again, very aggressively canonised) ‘Sahih 
Bukhar?: “The Prophet PBUH said; Moses was a shy and reserved man. None of his skin 
would be seen due to bis shyness. Some people from the Sons of lsrael insulted him and said; He doesn't 
hide himself except for some defect in his skin, either vitiligo or scrotal hernia or some other defect. God 
wanted to defend Moses from this insult. Once, Moses was alone and took, off bis clothes and put them 
on arock. Then be went for a bath, Once he finished, he came to take his clothes, but the rock started 
running with bis clothes on it. Moses took his staff and ran after the rock. He started calling; ‘O rock, 
my clothes! O rock, my clothes!’ He Rept on walking until he reached the place where group of the Sons 
of Israel were sat. They saw his body as the most perfect shape that God had created. That is how God 
defended hint from what they used to accuse him of. Then the rock stood, and Moses took. his clothes 
and put them on. Then he beat the rock with his staff. I swear by God, that rock, has three or four or 
five scars on it from striking by the staff. That is what ts the meaning of the verse [of the Quran|; 
O believers! Do not be as those who have hurt Moses, and then God freed him from their accusation. 
Indeed he [Moses] was very glorious before God.””™ 
AL-Maturidi said that this was a peculiar and outlandish statement and rejected it. He 
argued that the Prophet Moses would order his people to cover theit private parts and 
therefore it is improbable that they would expect to bathe with him or to look at his 
ptivate parts. He also argued that it is not possible that the rock would run away with 
the clothes of Moses (found in Muhammad bin Ismaeel bin Ibrahim al-Bukhari, “SaAih 
al-Bukbart’, Hadith 5765) 
'’ Muhammad bin Ismacel bin Ibrahim al-Bukhari, “Sahih a-Bukhar?’, Hadith 5765 


vill 


Sunni Muslims today. Maturidi also said that the reason for the 
revelation (Asbab al-Nuzul of ‘Surah ALFalag (‘The Daybreak’) and 
‘Surah ALNaas’ Mankind’), two patts of the Quran which most people 
in cutrent times claim refer to the Prophet Muhamad being affected by 
‘magical forces’, was not as a fesult of magic at all, but instead these 


chapters were revealed whilst the Prophet was on a journey." 


Ironically, Maturidi today would be regarded as a heretic by those very 


sectarians who claim to be his loyal followers - for example modern 


“Hanafis’. 


Al-Matutidi ejected supplementary information about things 
mentioned in the Quran. He did not accept information that was added 
by the Mufassireen (commentators of the Quran), or extra content from 
the books of other religions such as the Israeliyaat’, the Torah and the 
New Testament. Using these to elaborate on the Quran or even to 
openly add to it was (and is) common practice amongst commentators 
and scholars, and this can be seen by the fact that most of the famous 
books of Tafiér (Qutanic Interpretation) proliferate with such narrations 
— such as that of [bn Kathir (which by no coincidence is a favourite of 
Salafists)." Al-Maturidi rejected these stories because he explained that 
they had been relayed through Adsad (solitary narrations) and Ahad 
narrations cannot be accepted in the Maturidi School in issues of Ageedab 


(creed or theological dogma). (For a detailed treatment on the use and 


» Al-Maturidi, Abu Mansoot, ‘lawilat abl al-Sunnal’, (Massasah al-Risalah, Beirut, 
Lebanon, 2004), Volume 3, page 162, and Volume 5, pages 543, 545 

vi these are narrations that have originated from Jewish and Christian sources and 
despite often being considered apocryphal within their own religious traditions, are 
relied upon to an often ridiculous extent by Muslim exegetes. 

vii A|-Maturidi, Abu Mansoor, ‘“Tamilat abl al-Sunnal’, (Baghdad, al-Irshad, 1983), (Surah 
Al-Isra, Verse 1) 


misuse of hadith and supplementary natrations in Islam, see my earlier 


book ‘Hanafi Principles of Testing Hadith’). 
Take as an additional example the following in the Quran: 


“And when Moses said to his people, “Indeed, Allah commands you to slaughter a 
cow.” They said, “Do_you take us in ridicule?” He said, ‘T seek refuge in Allah 
from being among the ignorant. ” They said, “Call upon your Lord to make clear to 
us what it is.” [Moses] said, “[Allah] says, ‘Tt is a cow which is neither old nor 
virgin, but median between that,’ so do what you are commanded.” They said, “Call 
upon your Lord to show us what ts her colour.” He said, “He says, ‘Tt es a_yellow 
com, bright in colour — pleasing to the observers.’ They savd, “Call upon your Lord 
to make clear to us what it is. Indeed, [all] coms look alike to us, And indeed me, if 
Allah wills, will be guided.” He said, “He says, ‘Tt is a cow neither trained to plow 
the earth nor to irrigate the field, one free from fault with no spot upon her.’ “They 
said, “Now you have come with the truth.” So they slaughtered her, but they could 
hardly do it.” 


Al-Maturidi explained that many of the Mafasireen (Quranic 


commentators) made the assumption that God’s initial order was general 


and was not specific in terms of the description of the cow. Later, due 
to the many questions and interrogative natute of the Israelites, God 
made the attributes of the cow specific by way of a lesson. Al-Maturidi 
rejected this notion as he argued that this infers that there was a change 
in God’s command, because initially it was meant to be a plain cow and 
only after multiple questions from the Israelites was it changed to a 


specified version of the cow. Al-Maturidi argued that believing that God 


™ Quran, Surah A/Bagarah (2:67-71) 


‘Changes His mind’ is unacceptable and went so far as to say that such 


an idea would be tantamount to disbelief,® 


These examples (and there are many others) hopefully adequately 
demonstrate the difference in methodological approach between 
Maturidi and the ‘4H/ar-Ra'y and the ‘Abk Hadith’. 


These two groups were not only in an intellectual but a political battle 
for supremacy as well. For a time, the Mutazalites held the upper hand 
due to the Abbasid Caliph Al-Ma’mun ibn Harun al-Rashid (d. 217/ 833) 
being an advocate of Mutazalite theology. He launched an inquisition 
against the anthropomorphists in regards to the issue of whether the 
physical Quran is the uncreated attribute of God* known as the Mihna* 
He also imprisoned the famous /adith scholar Ahmad bin Hanbal for the 
belief he held on the same issue.“ The son of Al-Ma’mun, Abu Ja far 
Haran ibn Muhammad (Al-Wathiq) (d. 233/847) became the next 
Caliph and was also an adherent of the docttine of the Mutagalites. 
During the period of the Mutazahtes rule, the traditionists were 
persecuted because of their anthropomorphist views, which as 
mentioned, included the dogma that the physical Quran (i.e. the actual 
published book that you could purchase today) was uncreated.*# 


x Al-Maturidi, Abu Mansoor, ‘Tawifat abl al-Sunnal’, (Baghdad, al-Irshad, 1983), (Surah 
Al-Bagarah, Verse 67) 

* Which was what they believed, meaning the physical book and the human recitation 
of it were part of God 

*! Nawas, John A, ‘4 Reexamination of Three Current Explanations for al-Ma’mun’s 
Introduction of the Mihna’, International Journal of Middle East Studies, vol 26, No. 4, 
(Nov. 1994), 615-629 

sl Kelsay, Jon, ‘Divine Commands and Social Order: The Case of Classical Islam’, The Annual 
of the Society of Christian Ethics, vol 10, (1 990), 63-80, 

xl Ton Hayyan, Waki, “A&bbar al-Oudat’, (Cairo, Al-Maktabat al-Tijariyah, 1947), p, 227 


xi 


Afterwards came Caliph Ja‘far ibn Muhammad al-Mu'tasim (al- 
Mutawakkil) (d. 246/861) who repealed the Mihna*” and actively 
propagated the traditionists doctrines, which resulted in the beginning 
of the persecution of the Mufazakies. This continued throughout the 
succession of the other Caliphs - through to the time of al-Maturidi and 
afterwards. It was under the rule of the Caliph Qader Billa (d. 422/1031) 
that Hanbalism became the official creed of the empire. Qadr Billa was 
known for forcing the Mutazahies to make public recantations of their 
beliefs and he also banned them and the Rawafidh (Shia) from holding 
any public discussions. Henceforth, they had to speak in secrecy.” 
Prince Mahmud, under the instructions of Qadr Billa burnt, killed, 
imprisoned and banished many of the (largely) Hanafi Mutazalites and 
Shia. He also ordered that people should curse them in the mosques as 
they were heretics.** He even made a ruling that whoever says the Quran 
is created is an apostate and he must be killed, which was a complete 
reversal and a huge escalation from the time of Caliph Al-Ma’mun. By 
the end of his reign, Hanbali Islam was totally authoritative and all 
opposition, namely the Hanafis and Shia, had been completely 
subjugated. 


I know from my own early education that Muslims are usually keenly 
taught the first part of this story — the imprisonment of Imam Ahmad 
in the Minha — to the point of hagiography. But the hundreds of years of 
persecution by his followers after this is assiduously avoided or even 
presented in a good light. The result is that we don’t possess most of the 


books of the opposing groups such as Muatagalites and Murjia to decide 


*” Tbn Jawzi, Abd al-Rahman, Managib Ahmad ibn Hanbal, (Cairo, n.d) p. 348 

* Thn al-Jawzi, ALMuntazam fil Akhbar al-Muluk wa'l-Umam, (Hyderabad, Dairatul- 
Ma‘arifil-Uthmaniyyah, 1939), Volume 7, Page 287 

*“i Thid p. 289 


xii 


for ourselves; book burning as a strategy for ‘winning’ an argument is 


nothing new unfortunately, 


The political situation had significant ramifications on what became 
known as ‘orthodox’ Islam. The doctrine of the Hanafi Mutazahtes was 
eradicated entirely from history, theit books destroyed and their scholars 
killed. I believe that this also included many of the Hanafi Maturidi’s, 
who valued the role of reason above tradition. Therefore, what remained 
was largely the doctrine of the traditionists and those who held similar 
views. In terms of the teachings that survived until current times, then 
al-Maturidi’s book was the most ‘reason based’ ideology that was left in 
existence. This is because over time, the role of reason was subjugated 
and even the Hanafis and Maliki’s began incorporating the ideologies 
and dogmas of traditionists into their belief system (often just to 
survive). These theological and philosophical battles were lost because 
those in power held anthropomorphist/‘Salafist /Hanbali doctrines and 
this meant that Islam morphed into the version that is followed by many 


people in current times. 


All that did remain of the Matazahites was that theit principles were used 
to form Hanafi Usual a/-Pigh (principles of Islamic jurisprudence), which 
are followed by most Muslims. The same can be said for theologians 
from various schools within Islam who deployed the same rational 
arguments that were used by the Musazafites. The fact that al-Maturidi’s 
book remains is most likely because he managed to relay enough proof 
based on transmission that the traditionists did not destroy or supress it. 
Therefore, if one was to put ‘treason’ and literalism or hadith on a 
spectrum, with reason being on the left and ‘transmission’ on the right, 
then al-Maturidi’s was the most ‘leftist? book that remained. This is 
probably due to it being not wat much towards the left, and any other 
book that was further ‘left? was destroyed and the scholars who held 


xiii 


these viewpoints wete frequently killed. Therefore, in my view, most of 
the books that remain from these periods are enough towards the ‘right’ 
of the spectrum that they survived the culling - until current times at 


least. 


It also meant that Islam became a largely anti-intellectual religion where 
it is not permissible to question the status guo, and reason has been 
relegated to something which has little significance and is not respected 
ot valued (beyond its utility in harassing Christians about the Trinity or 


trying to rebut atheists, in which case it is wheeled out with alacrity). 


Take the example of the well-known and oft decried tendency of 
Muslims today to insist on stoning adulterers. Neither the fact that the 
punishment must fit the crime, nor that the punishment for adultery in 
‘Sharia’ is far worse than for killing a baby (or mass murder), nor that 
the contrary teaching (i.e. don’t kill adulterers) is found in the Quran, is 
enough to make Muslims stop and think about this. Instead, simply 
adducing that there are ‘traditions’ or /adit#h supporting this practice 1s 
enough to secure instant capitulation from even the most educated 
Muslims and for them to start trying to burn anyone who says otherwise 
at the metaphorical stake: not only does Revelation from God override 
reason (a privilege God never once asks for), so does dubious historical 


data. 


This links nicely to the question of why this book was never translated 
or even taught in Islamic institutes, even though it is in fact the primary 
doctrinal book of Sunni Islam. As explained, over time Islamic education 
became largely anti-rational (or rather, wildly inconsistent as to the use 
of reason — which was applied only to other people’s beliefs and never 
to Muslims’ own narrations; the result of which we see on campus today, 
where Liberals and other faiths are bombarded with extreme rationalism 


by Muslims, only for this to be immediately jettisoned at the first sign of 


xiv 


it interfering with Muslims preconceived sectarian dogmas) as well as 
overly reliant on hadith, aspects of anthropomorphism crept into its 
dogma, and extremist, as well as violent ideas which are associated with 
this (as will be demonstrated shortly), were incorpotated by many 
Muslims. 


Although bashing Musagalites as the greatest evil in Islamic history is a 
fashionable pastime of everyone from Salafi Jihadists to ‘Traditional’ 
Muslims and ‘Sufis’ nowadays (any attempt at a defence results in instant 
anathematisation, as I am sute this piece will demonstrate), there is an 
important distinction to be made between the violence perpetrated by 
the Mutazaltes and the subsequent abhorrent actions of the 
Hanbak/Traditionists. The persecution of the Mutazalites towards their 
opponents was in otder for their ideology to reign supreme and 
therefore political in nature and not linked to their religious docttine per 
se. The creed of the Mutazaltes never taught this form of violence, which 
can be seen by their well-known dogma that justice is one of their ‘five 
fundamental principles’. In the case of the traditionists, the (greater and 
more prolonged) violence was not only politically beneficial, but these 


violent tendencies are actually found within their doctrines and leaders. 


A common theme amongst extremists (who, in those tate moments they 
take away from taping and crucifying people to consider such matters, 
ate invatiably anthropomorphists in creed), is that they either openly 
follow Salafism/Hanbalism or they display their affection and respect 
towards Taqi ad-Din Ahmad ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728/1328). Veneration 
of this individual is what unites many groups claiming to be disparate — 
from Hizb Ut Tahrir and the Muslim Brotherhood to the Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia. It is very much like how many Protestant groups within 
Christianity will decry other such groups, whilst at the same time holding 
Calvin or Luther in high esteem (and hating the Pope). Non-Salafists are 


XV 


often challenged to ‘prove’ that someone or the other is indeed a ‘Salati’ 
and Salafists, much like many other affiliations that wish to be seen as 
mainstream or speak for a larger group, dislike the appellation ‘Salaf’ or 
WWahhab?’. Likewise, for an outside observer, it is hard to see what 
unites, say, the Muslim Brotherhood with the Wahhabi Kingdoms that 


persecute them. 


The answer would be this very late and idiosyncratic scholar, whose 
centrality to many of these movements is no more strange than that of, 
say, Joseph Smith to Mormonism as distinct from ordinary Christianity. 
Despite the very real and violent disagreements these groups have, they 
all give a disproportionate amount of attention to this previously obscure 
scholar, and likewise for Muslim groups that are of older provenance but 
ate now kowtowing for pecuniary interest or relevance to the same ideas. 
It is not unusual to see in Islamic educational establishments, whether 
Al Azhar, vatious Madrassas around the world or indeed universities in 
the West, people demanding the prominent inclusion of this formerly 
anathematised scholar. The reasons for his importance to them — and by 
‘them’ I mean the violent, regressive and isolationist tendency within 
Muslims as exemplified in our time by Salafism — I will argue are his 


literalism and anti-tationalism, as well as penchant for violence. 


Ibn Taymiyyah™ was infamous for anthropomorphist ideas, which he 
was instrumental in propagating. His doctrine was not accepted by 


orthodox Muslims, namely the followers of the Ashari and Maturidi 


xvii Ibn ‘Taymiyyah was a follower of one of the four Sunni schools of Figh 
(jutisptudence), namely Hanbalism. ‘Therefore, it is claimed by many Salafists that they 
adhere to the rulings of Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal (d. 241 /855). Despite this, there are 
divergent scholats with differing ideologies who also claim to follow Ahmad bin 
Hanbal, such as Ibn Qudamah al-Maqdisi (d. 620/1223), and even though they differ 
with Ibn ‘Taymiyyah, they still held some anthropomorphic ideas, such as in the case 
of their doctrine regarding the physical Quran being uncreated. 


xvi 


schools. Nor was he accepted by his contemporaries. He exasperated the 
disagreement between him and orthodox Sunnis by attributing a literal 
upward direction to God * and his flagrant expressions of 
anthropomorphism, such as when he once relayed a hadith regarding the 
‘descent’ of God while standing on the pulpit and climbing down two 
steps in order to demonstrate that the ‘descent of God’ was “Just like the 
descent of mine’** In his books ‘at-Ageedah al-Hamaniyyd, ‘al-Ageedah al- 
Wasitiyya and ‘Majmoo al Fatawa’ (amongst many others), he attributed a 
literal hand, foot, shin and face to God, and argued that God physically 
established himself on the throne (something which Imam Maturidi 
spends a huge amount of time in the present volume debunking — so 
again, I would invite readers to question why orientations claiming to be 
‘orthodox’ and ‘Sunni’ and harsh towards ideological ‘deviants’, would 
nonetheless be so enthusiastic about including an individual who went 
against such a fundamental tenet of Sunni, and indeed Shite, creed. It ts 
again, like an alleged Catholic advocating for Mattin Luther while 


claiming he is a senior Catholic authority), 


He also applied spatial confinement and divisibility to God, claiming that 
if God is not divisible, then He cannot exist, and nor can He exist if He 
is not in a physical space. He narrated embarrassingly anthropomorphic 
hadiths such as from Qutada via Ikrima that the Prophet said; T saw my 
God in the image of beardless (man), with long curly hatr in a green garden.**'These 
are just some examples, which could (and have) been multiplied at great 


length. 


wu ALSubki, Taj al-Din, Tabagat al-Shafiiyya al-Kubra. (Al-Matba’a al-Husayniyya, 
Cairo), Vol 9, p. 61 

“8 Al-Asgalani, Ibn Hajar. A/Durar al-Kamina Fi Ayan al-Mi'a at-Tamina, (Cairo 2008), 
p- 154 

“Ibn Taymiyyah, Tagi ad-Din Ahmad, Bayan Talbis al-Jabmriyyah, (Dax al-Uthmani. 
Makkah, Matba’ah Al-Hukuumah 1972) VOl7 fpw290 


xvil 


It is relayed in a collection named Bayan Lalbis Al-Jabmiyyah’ that he 
believed that anyone who did not conform to his anthropomorphist 
belicfs was a ‘Jahmi’ (a common theme that was adopted by later Muslim 
scholars who would also call their anti-anthropomorphist opponents 
Jabmis). Viven though his ideas were not accepted during his own time, 


they had a significant effect on Sunni doctrine. 


It is their deep connection to anthropomorphists that explains why 
Salafists hold strongly to extremist ideologies; because this doctrine 
comes hand in hand with them, in that the source of both are the same. 
One merely needs to peruse the ‘Majmoo’ al-Fatand of Ibn Taymiyyah 
(preferably while not tenured in a Western University at the pleasure of 
a Wabhabi autocrat): the book proliferates with rulings imploring that 
people should be killed for the smallest of infractions. For example, 
stating that killing a person who omits his prayers is more effective than 
saying that he has sinned; if a person insists on pronouncing the 
intention for prayer loudly, then he must be killed (this is despite the fact 
that in the Hanafi School, which is followed by most Muslims, it is 
recommended to recite the intention aloud if it helps one focus their intent 
to ptay). There is even a case where in a single page of this lengthy work, 
Ibn Taymiyyah produces rulings that a person should be killed in xzne 
instances, and again, for the smallest of violations; a person should be 
killed if he doesn’t ptay his prayer at the correct time, when he intends 
to miss a prayer and make it up later, when he prays without ablution, if 
he doesn’t pray his obligatory prayers etc. etc. “ Tt is no wonder 
whatsoever that ISIS telied on his quotations in their populist 


publications such as ‘Daliq’ from the very outset — as do Islamophobes. 


‘i Tbn Taymiyyah, Taqi ad Din, Majmoo al-Platawa (Makhtabak al-Malik Fahd 1995) vol. 
22;° pe. 236. Seealso: (https://sulaimanahmed.com/2017/07/28/isis-via-ibn- 


taymiyya-and-avicenna/) 


This blueprint for extremism didn’t begin and nor did it end with Ibn 


Taymiyyah, and not only because these examples can be applied to 
cutrent extremist groups such as ISIS, which have the same ‘kill first 
(don’t) ask questions later’ approach. Obviously, their leaders are 
attracted to a scholar who has a /aissex fair attitude to killing such as Ibn 
Taymiyyah. Sadly however, this violent ideology is also found in a 


number of early scholars who came well before him. 


Such is the strange case of Ikrima (d. 105/723), a famous early 
Traditionist (and yes, criticising him in the least will earn you instant 
anathematisation from many Muslims today) and prolific narrator of 
(violent) hadith who was well known for his own violent tendencies, such 
as his wishing to undertake the Haj (pilgrimage) for the simple reason 
that he wanted to kill his fellow Muslims. * Taking these types of 
individuals as your moral or intellectual compass is, I hope, very 


obviously problematic. 


Yet despite these lamentable character traits, he was accepted as a Just 
and honourable scholar’ by ‘Traditionists, to the extent that what he 
telayed became law. Ikirma was responsible for narrating many hadith 
which are expedient for Salafists, such as the famous ones about killing 
apostates and burning homosexuals (recently enacted by ISIS). Ikrima is 
also very important to them since single chain (and hence unreliable) 
narrations form the basis for most of the bizatre creedal and juristic 


positions of the various extreme Salafist groups. 


But again, to lay the blame for Sunni Islam being affected by 
anthropomorphism only on later people like Ibn Taymiyyah et a/is also 
unfair because these ideas existed well before them. During the early 


stages of Ahmad bin Hanbal’s life, as we saw, he was imprisoned by the 


«x Al-Dhahabi, Shams al-Din, S yar A'lam Al-Nubala'i, (Datul Hadith, Cairo), pg. 22 


Mutazalite Caliph Mu’tasim. But later, when the Caliph Mutawakkil took 


over and propagated Hanbali Islam, he brought Ahmad bin Hanbal into 
the fold, even asking him to teach his children.“ He was then allowed 
to propagate his ideology, and the main work that he produced was his 
‘Musnad’, a collection that has a significant number of Aadith that are 


frankly anthropomorphic in nature, savs explanation. 


The main issue that the Mutazahites (as I said, also often no saints) had 
with the Traditionists is illustrated by Al-Jahiz (d. 253/868), where he 
argued that the biggest problem during the period of Mzhna was not the 
issue of the uncteated Quran, but rather that of anthropomorphism.*” 
Therefore, he implies that the anthropomorphists and those who believe 
that the Quran is uncreated were one and the same. In terms of 
Orientalist scholarship, Walter Patton as well as Anawati argued that 


Ahmad bin Hanbal was in fact an anthropomorphist himself. 


Ahmad bin Hanbal was quite specific about what type of 
anthropomorphism could be attributed to God, so if something was not 
mentioned in Islamic texts, then he prohibited applying it to God. He 
famously condemned those who attributed ‘form’ to God as this was 
not mentioned in either the Quran or Hadith. On the other hand, if there 
was a tradition that anthtopomorphised God or a verse of the Quran 
which when taken literally meant God had a form, he accepted this 
natration. For example, one merely needs to look at the traditions 
mentioned in the ‘Musnad’ to see a large number that gave God a body 


ot other created characteristics. Such is the narration that on the Day of 


ii Ton Jawzi, Abd al-Rahman, Managib al-Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal. (Maktabat al- 
Khaniji. Cairo 1930), vol 7, p. 161 

sv AT-Jahiz, Abu Uthman, Risala Fi Nafy al-Tashbih, near al-Jahiz, Rasail al-Jahiz, vol 1, 
p. 285 


XX 


judgement, God will reveal His ‘true form’ to the believers, or that God 


created Adam in the ‘form of God’, sixty cubits in length. 


It can be said in defence of Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal that this is not 
proof that he was an anthropomorphist and that he was merely relaying 
hadith that he had collated in his job as a Muhaddith (collector of hadith), 
and as such his sole responsibility is inspecting the chain of the Aadith. It 
can be argued that he didn’t look into the content of the Aadi#), and even 
if he did, the Aadith should be considered in the same way as the Quran, 
in that when it is taken literally, it can seem to imply that God is being 
anthropomotrphised, but like the Quran, the literal meaning is 
inapplicable. ‘The problem with this is that for some hadith, Ahmad bin 
Hanbal was obdurate that if one didn’t take the anthropomorphic 
understanding of God, then that person was either a heretic or a 
disbeliever. For example, regarding the Aadith that Adam was created in 
the form of God, Abu Thawr (d. 239/854) argued that it meant that 
Adam was created in the form of Adam as opposed to the form of God. 
When this was telayed to Ahmad bin Hanbal, he argued that Abu Thawr 
held a deviant position and stated that anyone who reported that God 
created Adam in Adam’s own form as opposed to God’s form was a 
Jabmi. Vhis demonstrates that the anthropomorphist ideology runs 


deep within the fabric of Sunni Islam.* 


=v Tbn al-Farra, Ibn Abi Ya’la, Tabagat al-Hanabila, (Muhammad Hamid al-Fiqi, 2 vols, 
Matba'at al-Sunna al-Muhammadiyya. Cairo 1952), vol 1, p. 313 

“vt There is a clear difference between the Quran and hadith. The Quran is the word of 
God and the texts of the Quran that when taken literally seem to anthropomorphise 
God should not be taken literally according to the Asharis, Mutazalites and Maturidis. 
The Asharis and Mutazalites argue that one must make a metaphorical interpretation 
(Tamil) or according to the Maturidis, one must not attempt to interpret the verses 


(Tajweed) as they cannot be understood, so one should accept it is a revelation, but deny 


any ascription to God that denotes similarity to created things. 


XXi 


Of course, people will use the hallowed ground that Imam Ahmad 
occupies amongst most Muslims to create hysteria over plain academic 
facts and pretend that presenting the Imam’s views honestly is, ironically, 
an affront. This can be observed by the lengths some people will go to 
in otder to ‘protect’ him; he is praised for actions which would be 
considered problematic by normal standards, such as his abrupt 
treatment of non-Muslims. It is relayed that whenever a Christian would 
walk by him, he would close his eyes and argue that he could not even 
/ook at someone who lied about God and lied to Him in turn." It seems 
this was imitated by his followers as well as Muslims affected by the ideas 
that were formulated by the AA‘-Hadith. This lack of integration and 
treatment of minorities is very obviously not a good precedent or legacy 
and the same goes for other prominent Muslim figures who did likewise: 
there is simply no sugar coating this. We sometimes must choose 
between critiquing our ‘favourite’ scholars and bringing Islam into 


disrepute. The choice should be clear to all people of any faith. 


My aim in any case is not to ‘disrespect’? Imam Ahmad or any luminary: 
it is merely to present the facts. The field of Islamic studies is no longer 
occupied by ‘respectful’ teachers in Islamic Madrassas and if young 
Muslims are not taught frankly about the ideas and opinions of not only 
Imam Ahmad but any given scholar from the past or present, they are 
apt to find out from other sources the hard way - and the same goes for 
Imam Maturidi. In any case, if Imam Ahmad was not squeamish about 
expressing these ideas, then there is no need for us to be treading on 


egoshells either. 


My broader point is that this link between extremists and ‘traditionists’ 


has resulted in people who don’t follow this ideology either being 


“vil Tbn al-Farra, Ibn Abi Ya’la, Tabagat al-Hanabila, (Muhammad Hamid al-Fiqi, 2 vols, 
Matba'at al-Sunna al-Muhammadiyya. Cairo 1952), vol 1, p. 12 


Xxil 


eradicated, as in the case of the Musazalites (and Sufis and others in parts 
of the Middle East today) or their beliefs and ideas being deliberately 
and violently excluded (again, in the petrto-monarchies and their 
metastases for example). Such was also the fate of al-Maturidi, and the 
same can be said for the Sufis as well. One needs to merely speak to a 
lay Muslim and he will invariably know Bukhati (one of the Imams of 
the Traditionists), but likely won’t know al-Matutidi or the Mutazatites 


(except pejoratively). 


With the increased access to reading material of Ahk Hadith, mass 
distributed from London to Lagos and beyond by the Middle East’s 
officially and unashamedly sectarian Salafi-Wahhabi kleptocracies — with 
the blessings of all major Western governments, there has been a 
significant increase in the number of people who adhere to literalism, 
anthropomorphism and all of the harmful ideology concomitant to 
them. This includes a broad spectrum of people from those who are 
openly anthropomorphist to those who believe in these ideas without 
knowing or realising it. For example, many people who believe that God 
is ‘everywhere’, or that God comes ‘down’ to the lowest heaven, or that 
Adam was created in the image of God. This kind of belief is mainly due 


to people’s close affinity with literalism and Aadith. 


This further explains, at least to me, why this book was never translated 
and nor was it taught in its original Arabic in Islamic institutes. This is 
despite the fact that there are hundreds of Islamic establishments in the 
UK and thousands more throughout the world professing to follow 
Maturidi doctrine: none, or very few, teach the book. The reason is likely 
its staunchly rational and anti-anthropomorphist doctrine, which the 
Able Hadith /Salafists detest. 


Salafists are in fact aware of the obvious fallacy in their belief system, 


which can be seen from the unfortunate fact that many of them work in 


xxiii 


intet-faith polemics and in order to refute their opponents in “debates’, 
they abandon these anthropomorphist ideologies and instead use the 
arguments of the Mutazakies and non-Muslims in order to prove that 
Islam is the correct religion. In a debate with a Christian they will explain 
that Jesus isn’t God as something uncreated cannot reside in something 
created, as God would then be limited to a body and shape. The Salafist 
debater or person who receives his funding from Salafists will ignore the 
fact that they have the exact same belief and also ascribe location to God, 
just like the person they are ‘refuting’. Instead, these slippery individuals 
will use the arguments of the Musazalites (or equivalent ones from non- 
Muslim thinkers). And here lies the real confusion for many Muslims: 
they hold firm to hadith, they believe in anthropomorphist ideology (of 
course they refuse the appellation with various fudges that they don’t 
allow their Hindu or Christian brothers such as “God has a Hand but 
not like our hand’ or ‘He sits but without a how’, to which one is forced 
to wonder why He can’t incarnate or be part of the Trinity but ‘without 
a how’ — which is what the followers of these religions tend to argue 
anyway), but in a debate they will abandon these ideas to present the 
doctrines of the Maturidis and the Mutazalites. This demonstrates the 
internal conflict within Muslims. But in reality, it is the Salafists or those 


who conform to them that dictate the ideologies of Muslims today. 


Al-Maturidi is the founder of one of the major orthodox Sunni schools 
which follows the doctrine of Imam Abu Hanifa - the earliest and hence 
most authoritative Imam of the Sunnis. In my previous book, I argued 
that Abu Hanifa’s approach to sadith was being ignored and neglected 
for reasons of political expedience. Here I am forced to argue the same 
even for his theology. Yet to describe al-Maturidi as a ‘follower’ of Abu 


Hanifa would be a gross oversimplification because Abu Hanifa had 


XXIV 


wide-ranging students that included the Mutazalites, Murad" and those 
who would become followers of the Maturidi doctrine. Instead, it is 
more accurate to say that he introduced and presented Maturidi theology 
to the Muslim world. Vhe theological and philosophical methodology of 
al-Maturidi differs from his traditionist counterparts, which can be seen 
by the fact that he relays only a handful of badith and instead his 
argument either focuses on the use of reason, or in the case of scripture, 
it focuses on proofs from the Quran. He is a sorely needed 


counterbalance in our times — troubled as they are like his own. 


xvi Tmam Abu Hanifa was an enigmatic teacher who taught students from a wide 
variety of backgrounds. Those who learnt from him placed reason centrally. It was 
based on this that three branches of differing theological groups emerged from his 
teachings, the Maturidis, the Mu ‘tazalites and the Murji’a, who despite differing in 
theology, followed Hanafi Figé Gurisprudence). Abu Hanifa’s Maturidi students (even 
though they preceded al-Maturidi, their views aligned) were scholats such as Imam 
Muhammad (d. 189/805) and Imam Abu Yusuf (d. 181/798). The Mz ’‘tazafite students 
included Abu Hanifa’s son and his senior student Imam Zufar (d. 158/775). Munji’a 
students included scholars such as his senior student Bishr al-Matisi (d. 218/834). It 
was in the famous exchange of letters between Abu Hanifa and Uthmaan Al-Bathi that 
Abu Hanifa was attacked for holding to Mayi’a doctrine (an allegation he accepted 
without hesitation), Therefore, it is quite plausible that Abu Hanifa held certain 
opinions that aligned with the Muzi’a. The Murji’a were the diametric opposite of the 
famously violent Khawarij, they held that only God can judge if a person is a Muslim 
and therefore any conclusion made on this matter should be delayed for God to decide 
the outcome as to someone’s theism in the Hereafter. Many of these teachings were 
later adopted by Al-Maturidi and formed a part of Sunni theology. The major point of 
contention between them and their opponents was their view that sin, which included 
major sin, had no effect on one’s belief in God. Even though their position may seem 
inconsequential nowadays, they should be appreciated for being one of the main 
reasons for people not holding the notion that sin is equivalent to disbelief. For 
example, the Kawwarij held that major sin was equivalent to disbelief, the Hanbalites 
held that certain sins were equivalent to disbelief (such as simply missing prayers) and 
the Mu tazalites held that whilst committing a major sin a person resides in a state of 


limbo between belief and disbelief. Hence, this position of the Maryji’a was incorporated 


into Sunni Islam - to its great benefit, 


XXV 


A Short Biogtaphy of Shaykh Abu Mansoor al-Maturidi 


His full name is Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Mahmud Abu Mansur 
al-Maturidi™*, and he was born in Maturid, a district in Samarqand.™ 
The date of birth of al-Maturidi is unknown; he died however on 
333AH/944 AC and was buried in Samarqand. Despite his date of birth 
being unknown, his age at death is approximated at ninety, determined 
based on the year of death of his teachers and where and whom they 


taught. 


Al-Maturidi wrote many books in a number of fields, such as Tafser 
(Quranic exegesis), Tajweed (Quranic recitation), Ageedab (Creed) and 
Usu/ (Principles), with the number ascribed to him varying from sixteen 
to twenty-four.*™ However, the only books attributed to him that have 
survived until current times are ‘Kitaab at Tawheed, the present book on 
theology, which is located in University of Cambridge Library; “Ta’ wlat 
al-Ourar, a lengthy book of Quranic interpretation which is located in 
various libraries throughout the world; ‘4+Magala?, a pamphlet in 
theology which is located in Istanbul and ‘Rasala Fima la Yajuz ‘alayh fil 


Ouran’, a work on Quranic recitation located in Istanbul. 


Al-Maturidi’s teachers include: Muammad bin Mugatil ar-Raz, who was 
the student of Abu Muti al-Balkhi, a Muniate scholar who was the direct 
student of Imam Abu Hanifa and Muhammad bin Abi Hantfa, the son 
of Abu Hanifa @vho was a follower of the school of the Mutazalites); 


xxix Al-Ourashi, Muhammad ibn Abi al-Wafa’, Tabagat al-Hanafiyyah (Karachi, Mit 
Muhammad Kutub Khan, n.d), vol 1, p. 130 

** Tbid vol 1, p. 244 and Amin, Ahmad, Zahr a/Islam, (Cairo, Lajnat al-Ta’lif wa’l- 
Tatjamah wa’l-Nashr 1952), p. 265, 

xxi Al-Maturidi, Abu Mansoor, ‘Tamilat abl al-Sunnal’, (Baghdad, al-Irshad, 1983), p. 
693 (see appendix) 


XXVI 


Nusayr bin Yahya al-Balkhi, who was also the student of Abu Muti al- 
Balkhi, as well as Abu Sulayman al-Juzjani and Ahmad bin Is’haq al- 
Juzajani, who also studied with Abu Sulayman al-Juzjani and Abu Nasr 


al-lyadi, another student of Abu Sulayman al-Juzjani. 


Al-Maturidi’s most significant contribution is that he is responsible for 
establishing one of the two main Sunni theological schools. Despite 
holding such a significant role in Islamic theological and philosophical 
thought, there has not been much analysis of al-Maturidi’s ideas, even 


though he established his own school mote than a thousand years ago. 


XXVvii 
Chain of Teachers from Abu Hanifa to Al-Maturidi 
Aa ry plat 
(aio) 
Indm Abii Hanifah (150 AH) 
a ue ei grlae 5! coh! oy dat abel cay ji ple}! 
ABA) LS sgh gral (NAY) (AyAy) 
2 ye yy Ladur Mubammad bin al-asan Imam Abi Yusuf (182 AH) 

Alba Muti ab-ldakam bin Abd Allah (18? AH) : 


al-Baikbht (199 AH} narrated the 
book al-Pigh al-Akbar jfrom Abi Hanijab! 


CP getge Serghen gif 
Sle jg! Olas 


Abn Sulayman Misa bin Sulayman 
at-fuszani (280A}1) 


Sil ple oy bast rll gh ot a 
(4 V4) 
Mabammead bin Mugatil al-Ragi Navayr bin Yabye al-Balkbi 
(248 AH) 


(268 AH 


ghee 


Abs Bakr Abmad bin Ishag al-fuzjani(unknown) 


cn del petal nai yl 
Sait pial 
Abi Nasir al.Ayadi A hinad bin at-Abbas al-Ansari (276 AB) 


Says ygyaae gil ple 
/lbi Manfir al-Maturidt 
(944 AI. 332AH) 


XXVill 


Kitaab at-Tawheed 


The manuscript of *Kitaab at-Tawheed? was made known to the public in 
the 1950s, after the University of Cambridge acquired it from Dr Sethian 
in 1900 (MS Add. No. 3651). It is the only known copy and therefore 
for this translation I have relied on this manuscript, which has been 
edited and published by Fathalla Kholeif. 


In terms of its reliability, there are a number of passages quoted from 
‘Kataab at-Tawheed by later Maturidi scholars that we can check it against. 
The style and structure also match the description of the book attributed 
to al-Maturidi by those that came after him. Despite this, there are 
instances whete passages ate quoted by scholars which ate not found in 
the current manuscript of ‘Ketaab at-Tawheed, such as in the ‘Tabsirat al- 
Adilld of Abul-Mu'in Maymun al-Nasafi (d. 438/1046). In that book, al- 
Nasafi follows the same structure and content as al-Maturidi’s ‘Kztaab at- 
Tawhee?, but has sections not found in our current manuscript. The 
same format was also used in many later books written by followers of 
the Maturidi School such as the ‘Agaid Nasaf?’ of Abu Hafs Umar an- 
Nasafi (d. 5537/1142). 


My evaluation is that this manuscript is indeed the ‘Kitaab at-Tawheed of 
al-Maturidi - even though there could be some errors or missing parts in 


the current manuscript. 


Another point to consider is whether al-Maturidi himself wrote this 
book. When one observes the often haphazard structure of the book - 
its repetitive nature and so on - it gives credence to the theory that this 
was never meant to be the final comprehensive book. Rather, it is more 


likely that it was consolidated into one book by his students, or it could 


be that it was a series of smaller books, pamphlets or lecture notes that 


xxix 


were brought together to form one book. What supports this 
assumption is that in normal cases, Islamic scholars begin their books 
by wtiting lengthy supplications to God, but in this book, they are found 
in a number of places (such as in the case of footnote 403). In response 
to this theory, it can be argued that it was al-Maturidi’s style to write a 
significant number of extra supplications - which can be seen from the 
fact that he ends numerous paragraphs with smaller entreaties, which 


generally speaking is to the detriment to the flow of the book. 


I personally believe that this work was not meant to be in book format, 
but instead existed as notes from his lectures. These could have been 
systemised lectures, but were more likely Al-Maturidi teaching his 
students in an ad-hoc manner and they then wrote down his comments 
and talks which were later turned into a book. On the other hand, it 
could be a combination of both; smaller books and letters as well as his 
lectures all consolidated into one book. This would explain the lack of 
structure and the fact that a number of topics are repeated a significant 


amount of times. 


In addition, al-Maturidi assumes that the person ‘reading’ or ‘listening’ 
to his book already has the pre-requisite knowledge about certain topics. 
If this were a book meant to lay out a creed to be imitated by his 
followets, it would have been written differently, with a better structure 
and a more systemised approach. There is also the possibility that the 
book was written over a number of years and this explains why certain 


topics are repeated. 


XXX 


Notes on the Translation 


This is the first English translation of ‘Kitaab at-Tawheed (“The Book of 
Monotheism’); it being the first half of the complete Arabic book, To 
the best of my knowledge, there are no translations of this book in other 
languages. Why only the first half you might ask? Because this to me was 
the most urgent and relevant part — dealing as it does with God and His 
Existence as well as the origin of the Universe. The time and resources 
taken to translate this extremely difficult work, as well as the feasibility 
of publishing what would necessarily become a huge tome, have gotten 
the better of many. Hence, I felt that the first and most important part 
should be made available forthwith. I wish I had the resources to 
complete the second half and hire academic editors and so on, but it is 
my hope that this work will serve as a guide to make the attainment of 
the second half easier for those who come after me, especially vis a vis 
Matutidi’s somewhat obscure Arabic and difficult philosophical 
concepts that have been famously impenettable. Of course, if sales and 
resources permit, I should like to do this myself. This translation can be 
used as a blueprint for those who may struggle to relay this work into 
Finglish, even though they are able to understand Arabic, which is the 
multi-layered problem that academics have had with the work of al- 
Maturidi. I can ask no more than if this book were to become a guide 
and a roadmap for future scholars (and amateurs!) to engage with and 


translate the work of this great but sadly neglected scholar. 


I make some uncommon choices when translating this book for a 
number of reasons. Al-Maturidi has a tendency to divert away from 
standard Arabic towards a Central Asian style, with very significant 
anomalies in Arabic grammar and sentence structure. This occurs 


throughout the work, which may be one of the many reasons why this 


XXX 


book has not been translated before and nor has there been a significant 
work on al-Maturidi and his doctrines (despite luminaries such as W. 
Montgomery Watt lamenting this omission long ago). He also uses 
uncommon terms in his work, for example, the Persian word ‘Hastzyya’ 
for ‘existence’, as opposed to the various common Arabic terms. This 
also helps explain why this book was never formally taught in Islamic 
institutes or by scholars over the last eleven hundred years — despite their 
extensive use of its commentaries. In addition, certain theological and 
philosophical terms do not translate well into the English language; 
therefore, in order for the reader to understand the point that is relayed 
by al-Maturidi, there is a need for the translator to divert from the literal 
text and instead focus on conveying the meaning. I felt that conveying 
the meaning was more important than staying true to the literal text and 
providing an unintelligible translation. The profusion of my 
interpolations — clearly marked in parentheses — is also towards this end. 
No doubt the above will give ammunition to those who wish fot 


theological texts to be inaccessible to the general public. 


As a translator I was faced with the difficult choice of fidelity to the 
literal text and the readability of a book which is notoriously lacking in 
flow and teadability even in the original Arabic. Exactness results in a 
more literal text but circumvents readability and comprehension, 
whereas a more liberal translation focuses on ensuring that the book can 
be read and understood. My approach was to try and focus on readability 
whilst also making sure that I did not divert from the text. This meant 
that I copiously deployed brackets or notes to explain the points that Al- 
Maturidi wished to convey. I make no apologies if the English often 


lacks literary merit, as this is simply unavoidable. 


XXXII 


I have included some examples here of how I worked with the text so 
that it would be comprehensible for the reader. Here is a sample passage 


(and please note that this is not a transliteration): 


‘And ignorance is evil, and if it is from that substance, so that is knowledgeable and 
wise by tts substance, which can never be foolish and ignorant. Learning and seeking 
wisdom ts the duty of thase who do not have it. But if he is Jrom the substance of evil 
so he null not get affected by it, Because he by bis substance does not accept the good.’ 


This passage was reworked to better convey the meaning and was 


expressed in the following manner: 


‘Furthermore, they argue that ignorance is evil but [ef something comes] from the 
substance [of Light], then it must be wise and knowledgeable and can never be foolish 
and ignorant. Learning and seeking wisdom is the duty of those who do not possess 
them, [which ts considered good]. But [if a person] is Jrom the substance of evil, then 
he nill never be affected by [the good of learning and seeking knowledge). Because [af 
he ts from] the substance [of evil] then he will not accept that which ts good.’ 


Another example; 


‘and so, the one being tested does not find a path to overcome it and turn it to what 
he desires except by summoning the promise and the threat, even if he sees this, it ts 


easy for tim to give up pleasures and bear great pains. 
This was reworked in the following way: 


and 50, the [person] being tested does not find a path to overcome it and turn it to 
what he desires except using the motivation [of God’s] pronrises and threats, even if 
he sees [the pleasures of this life], it is easy for him to give them up and tolerate great 


pains, 


I expect much wailing and gnashing of teeth from some quatters over 
these choices, but I ask the reader to consider the naivety of such 


complaints in light of the complicated philosophy of translation that 


xxx 


besets any work, let alone a theological one that was not attempted for 
50 long despite its central place in Islamic history for overt a millennium. 
The main focus of the translator, in my opinion, is to convey the meaning 
of the text in the English language, so that the reader can understand 


and appreciate the point being made by al-Maturidi. 


There are cettain words in Arabic that do not have an exact translation 
into English, and therefore I] make the decision to translate them in a 
very specific way. An example of this is the word ‘Hadith’, it doesn’t have 
an exact counterpart in the English language and therefore different 
translators use a variety of terms to convey its meaning, such as 
‘origination’, ‘occurrent’, “transiently created’, ‘produced in time’ and 
“emporally created’. Therefore, based on these possible options, I chose 
to use ‘origination’ in this book. There are also some instances where | 
interchange between translations depending on the context of the point 
being made, and I did this so that the paragraph flows and the context 


is understood. 


Furthermore, al-Maturidi has a tendency to make points without 
elaborating on the ideas that he is presenting - instead he makes the 
assumption that the reader will understand for a variety of reasons - such 
as at times he takes for granted that the person who is reading the book 
has the ‘pre-requisite’ knowledge of the topic or book that is being 
discussed. This is a common tendency amongst pre-modern Islamic 
scholars. I have attempted to overcome this issue by translating in such 
a manner that the information being expressed can be easily digested, 
and to add to this I include detailed notes that elaborate on the ideas, 
explain specific points and elucidate terminologies. Unfortunately, it is 
outside the scope of this work to provide a detailed explanation of the 


issues discussed (the background to the Mafazalites alone would requite 


XXXIV 


a weighty tome), but I have strived to provide sufficient background to 


make the text readable. 


[ also felt that it was important that one who explores the book is 
furnished with a detailed explanation of the theology of al-Maturidi; 
therefore, my notes explain various positions in detail, even when the 
text metely touches upon them. In addition to this, I included a 
significant amount of the ideas of al-Maturidi which come later in the 
Arabic book in the footnotes. This was done in order to provide the 
reader with additional doctrines of al-Maturidi even if they are not within 
the scope of the translation (for example, I included the various 
theological positions on human free will in the footnotes, even though 
they ate not in the first half of the original Arabic text). Again, my 
intention was for the reader to receive an in-depth understanding of 
Islamic theology, and more specifically the viewpoints of al-Maturidi. To 
this end, I present Islamic theological dogmas from a number of schools 
of thought - to provide the reader with a holistic perspective on a wide 


range of doctrines. 


I refrained from providing a critical analysis of the strengths and 
weakness of the teachings of al-Maturidi for several reasons. One is that 
this book is the first ever translation of al-Maturidi’s work, and therefore 
I felt that it was important to present his ideas to the public without 
imposing my own thoughts on his doctrine. Furthermote, it would have 
caused further delays in the release of the book, as this would have 
entailed a significant amount of extra work, and I felt an obligation to 
telease this book at the earliest opportunity. Another reason is that a 
large proportion of Muslim readers in particular are prone to regarding 
any cross-examination of theit favourite Imams as tantamount to heresy 
— not realising that they have themselves made numerous, often harsh, 


judgements when selecting one School or Imam over another; although 


— 


XAXV 


sn this respect, not all Imams are created equal and the slightest criticism 
of the Imams of Hadith will lead to online and other anathematisation, 
whereas the Imams of creed and theology are often fair game. The 
degree of ‘protection’ afforded to various figures from Islamic history is 
nowadays more often a function of their utility in promoting populist 
and Salafist ideologies as well as funding and tenures obtained therewith 
as opposed to any inherent merit. In any case, Muslims in the West and 
elsewhere ate fast learning the painful lesson that even if they are not 
willing to critically examine the ideas of vatious ‘sacred cows’, there are 
plenty of non-Muslims inside and outside academia who are more than 


happy to do so. 


I also refrained from presenting the teachings of the Ashari School 
except in a handful of instances. The reason for this is that I wanted the 
book to introduce and explain the doctrines of al-Maturidi rather than it 
be a detailed analysis in comparison to the other theological schools. 
Furthermore, although Abu al-Hasan Al-Ashari (d. 324/933) was a 
contemporary of al-Maturidi, in all likelihood he never came across his 
opinions so as to attempt to tefute them. Therefore, I kept the focus of 
the comments on the doctrine of al-Maturidi and the groups he does 


engage with in his book. 


To give an overview of the scope and structure, the book begins with 
the topic of Tagleed (blind imitation) - an excellent opening salvo. It is 
clear that this was a problem in past times just as it is today; people 
blindly follow the statements and rulings of their preferred scholars 
without analysis or using philosophical inquiry to determine their 
veracity: and this when it is agreed upon by Muslims that Tagéeed is 
invalid in matters of theology. His next chapter moves nicely onto the 
subject of how knowledge of the religion is acquired through 


transmission and reason. It displays that in contrast to the traditionists, 


till respecting the importance of 


temology. This was a significant 
vhich later scholars within Sunni 
lear from the book that a number 
| the Mutazalites; he mentions the 
Mutazalite scholar, and one can 
ogy developed from the positions 
ts that were not taken from them 


ing his disagreement with their 


of for the existence of God. He 
; topic, attempting to prove the 
logical structure and that there is 
s based on reason and revelation 
ith a range of ideas. Despite this 
nents do need to be developed 
te are also some arguments that 

if they seem good based on 
im theologians, when one looks 
such as Aristotle and the likes of 


ideas can lack detail. 


ober of chapters to providing 
niverse. These chapters were in 
10 held this view, as well as the 
ve in his arguments, which was 
ians when engaged in debate. 


fs of his Muslim opponents are 


believe that al-Matutidi actually 


considers them to be disbelievers. The fact that some of the book gives 
the impression that it was written as a response to al-Ka‘bi, as well as 
other scholars, means that they were likely engaged in a debate, and as 
we don’t have the books of al-Maturidi’s opponents, we are unable to 
determine the nature of the writing that he is responding to: were they 
for example equally aggressive, which would explain al-Maturidi’s 


response? 


Al-Maturidi also writes at length against the Mutagalites in a number of 
topics which included issues related to the attributes of God. The fact 
that al-Maturidi dedicates a substantial amount of the book to refute the 
Mutazalites needs some explanation since al-Maturidi has taken a number 
of his ideas from the Mutazahites. The branches of the Mutazaiites doctrine 
come from Imam Abu Hanifa. Hanafi Usw/ al-Figh, which is followed by 
both of them, was also formulated on the basis of the principles of the 
Motazalites, and both of them are anti-anthropomorphist. Therefore, the 
fact that so much of the book is a refutation of the Musazalites could be 
for a number of reasons. Perhaps he felt that they were worthy 
opponents to engage in debate, whereas the traditionists didn’t value 
treason, so discussions with them would necessarily focus on scriptute. 
There were significant numbers of Mufazalite scholats in Maturidi’s 
locality, and therefore he was possibly focusing his contribution on those 
he believed were ‘his’ opponents. It could also be that since the rulers at 
that time were anti-Mvtazalite, in order to ensure that one’s work 
survived, one had to make abundantly clear that they differed with the 
Mautazalites and hence al-Maturidi balanced his refutation of the 


Mutazalites with that of the anthropomorphists to avoid ‘censorship’. 


If there are any mistakes with the translation and accompanying 
commentary, they are mine alone. My intention throughout the book 


was to help support the reader, and as such, I did take some liberties 


XXXVI 


he valued the role of reason, whilst still respecting the importance of 


transmission. 


His next chapter moves onto his epistemology. This was a significant 
contribution as it was the basis upon which later scholars within Sunni 
Islam developed their own ideas. It is clear from the book that a number 
of his doctrines have come from or via the Musazalites; he mentions the 
ideas of Muhammad ibn Shabbib, a Mutazalite scholar, and one can 
clearly see how al-Maturidi’s epistemology developed from the positions 
held by the Mutazatites. Those arguments that were not taken from them 
are obvious from al-Maturidi identifying his disagreement with their 


doctrine. 


Al-Maturidi then moves on to his proof for the existence of God. He 
dedicates a number of chapters to this topic, attempting to prove the 
created nature of the Universe, its ontological structure and that there is 
only one God. He uses many arguments based on reason and revelation 
and therefore he provides the reader with a range of ideas. Despite this 
vital contribution, some of these arguments do need to be developed 
further in order to provide details. There are also some arguments that 
could perhaps be stronger, and even if they seem good based on 
compating points relayed by other Muslim theologians, when one looks 
at arguments from Greek philosophers such as Aristotle and the likes of 


Avicenna and al-Ghazali, at times these ideas can lack detail. 


Al-Maturidi devotes a significant number of chapters to providing 
proofs against the pre-eternity of the universe. These chapters were in 
tesponse to the Greek philosophers who held this view, as well as the 
Mutagalites. A\-Maturidi ts quite aggressive in his arguments, which was 
common practice for Muslim theologians when engaged in debate. 
Therefore, he repeatedly states the beliefs of his Muslim opponents are 


a ‘denial of monotheism,’ but I do not believe that al-Matutidi actually 


XXXVii 


considers them to be disbelievers. The fact that some of the book gives 
the impression that it was written as a response to al-Ka‘bi, as well as 
other scholars, means that they were likely engaged in a debate, and as 
we don’t have the books of al-Maturidi’s opponents, we are unable to 
determine the nature of the writing that he is responding to: were they 
for example equally aggressive, which would explain al-Matutridi’s 


response? 


Al-Maturidi also writes at length against the Muazastes in a number of 
topics which included issues related to the attributes of God. The fact 
that al-Maturidi dedicates a substantial amount of the book to refute the 
Mutazalites needs some explanation since al-Maturidi has taken a number 
of his ideas from the Mutazalites. The branches of the Masazafites doctrine 
come from Imam Abu Hanifa. Hanafi Usa/ al-Fugh, which is followed by 
both of them, was also formulated on the basis of the principles of the 
Mutazalites, and both of them are anti-anthropomorphist. Therefore, the 
fact that so much of the book is a refutation of the Mu/azalites could be 
for a number of reasons. Perhaps he felt that they were worthy 
opponents to engage in debate, whereas the traditionists didn’t value 
reason, so discussions with them would necessarily focus on scripture. 
There were significant numbers of Mutazalite scholars in Matutidi’s 
locality, and therefore he was possibly focusing his contribution on those 
he believed were ‘his’ opponents. It could also be that since the rulers at 
that time were anti-Mutazaiite, in order to ensure that one’s wotk 
survived, one had to make abundantly clear that they differed with the 
Mutazalites and hence al-Maturidi balanced his refutation of the 


Mutazalites with that of the anthropomorphists to avoid ‘censorship’, 


If there ate any mistakes with the translation and accompanying 
commentaty, they ate mine alone. My intention throughout the book 


was to help support the reader, and as such, J did take some liberties 


XxXxvill 


with the translation so that the content of the book could be better 
understood, ‘The writing of this book was an enormous learning curve, 


and [ hope the result is an enjoyable and informative read. 


Minally, I can want no more than that the book opens the reader’s mind 
to new posstbilities and further research into the fields of classical 
Islamic philosophy and theology. I also hope that it provides impetus 


for further research for myself, other academics and the public into 


Islam and the ideas of al-Matutridi. 


In the Name of God, The Most Merciful, The Most Kind 


All Praise is to the One, and if anyone else is worthy of any praise then 
even this [praise] goes back to Him — praises which are sufficient for His 
grants as well as His rewards that reach the point of pleasing Him. We 
ask Him to send salutations upon the one by whom the message has 
been finalised, upon his brothers the Messengers and upon all of the 
saints. We ask Him to protect us from any errors, and we ate relying on 
Him to grant us the ability to use the correct terms and [the correct| 


deeds. 


Religion Must not be Based on Belief in Authority ( Taqiid) but 
Must be Based on Evidence 


[Shaykh] Aba Manéur said: In issues of faith we found that people were 
following various schools of thought and different religions. But all of 
them attested to one claim; that “what we follow is the truth and what 
othets follow is falsehood.” [Further,] most of them claim to follow 


someone who came before them. 


This proves that one is not excused for performing Taglid [following 
someone without knowing the evidence].' This is because by Tagld 
another person [can quite easily] claim the opposite to what you have 
stated. ‘There is no substance behind Tag/d except that it consists of a 
large number [who have stated it to be so], unless they are following a 
person whose position is supported by reason.” [This is based on} reason 
which results in the just person having no choice but to accept it due to 
its truthfulness. ‘The one who relies on proof for [issues relating to] his 
faith is the one who is following the truth. It is compulsory upon [each 
individual] to choose their faith by themselves and [as a result] know the 
truth. The proof should be such that when it is presented to them it is 


compelling to people [and so they accept it]. It should be of such a level 


* Tagid in this instance refers to issues related to theological matters. In current times, 
this problematic issue is present whete people blindly follow their religious leaders and 
ptiests on theological issues, without tesearching and analysing the evidence for 
themselves, 

* Shaykh Abt: Mangar al-Maturidi was the first theologian/philosopher of Islam to 
create a systematic approach related to issues of epistemology. There were works that 
made enquiries into epistemology written by the Mutazahites, but sadly none of these 


works have survived. 


that a proof with similar [strength] is not present on the opposing side 
[of the argument]. [This is] because the [strength of the] evidence for the 
ruth should be that which overcomes [the countering argument] and it 
must point out the etrors and weaknesses of the opposing contention. 


There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


3Tt is the habit of Shaykh Abu Mansur al-Maturidi to end each section with an 
invocation to God. These are general invocations which are not related to the specific 
topic being discussed. These invocations will be italicised in order to differentiate them 


from the main body of the text. 


Knowledge of the Religion is Acquired Through Transmission 
(Sam) and the Intellect (‘Ag/) 


Faith is tested and recognised by two methods: tradition’ and the 
intellect.° —° This is because in order to find the truth, people must have 
agreed foundational principles that are accepted by everyone who uses 


them, 


In relation to statements or tradition, there is no one who follows a 
patticular ideology who does not encourage people towards theit [own 
ideology]. Even the people who follow sceptical philosophy or a non- 
academic approach follow certain types of statements - never mind those 
who believe in empirical information. This is the way of the earthly rulers 
who govern the affairs [of their domains] by bringing the people 
together and ruling them. ‘This is also the way of the people who claimed 
Prophethood and wisdom, as well as the people who worked with 


different kinds of arts. God gives help and success. 


In terms of the intellect, the world being [created] solely [for the purpose 
of] destruction would not be [an act of] wisdom. An intellectual person 


acting imprudently is not acceptable, [similarly] the Universe [cannot] be 


* Shaykh Abu Manégur does not mean the literal word ‘text’ but in this section he is 
rather referring to ‘statements’, so he is developing the notion that a person can come 
to the truth by thinking and coming to the understanding themselves ot by another 
person explaining the proof to you. 

° In this book, based on the context, I will be using ‘treason’ and ‘intellect’ 
interchangeably, 

6 Where M-dash is used, it is to explain to the reader that this statement was made in 
the middle of the paragraph. Shaykh Aba Manéir uses the Central Asian style of 
making a linked statement mid-sentence rather than making the statement at the 
conclusion of the sentence. This is one of the reasons why many readers struggle to 


understand his books. 


established based on imprudent action and [it cannot] have been created 
without any reason. — This is because the intellect is created as a part of 
[the cosmos]. If we accept this, then we know that the Universe is not 
created for destruction, but rather that it is created for continuity. wie 
foundation of the Universe is based on divergent natures which 
|conform to one another] and have their direct opposite [natures],” this 


is especially the case in issues relating to the intellect. 


In terms of dividing a thing that is amalgamated or connecting a thing 
that is disconnected, this is what the philosophers call the ‘microcosm’ 
(micro-cosmos). It is based on contradictory desires, divergent natures 
and the egos which are created in them and [attempting to] overcome 
them. If one was to leave them to what their nature is demanding, it will 
lead to disputes and conflicts, as each [person] will be claiming the 
benefits, ownership and kingdom for themselves, which would only 
result in hatred and wars. This leads to mutual destruction and 
corruption which opposes the wisdom of creating the Universe. : 
Another aspect to consider is that the Universe is created with bodies 
[or things] which support the continuity of both humans and animals. If 
the Universe had not been created for continuity, then creating 
something that [helps to] support its continuity would not be wise. ‘This 
is why there has to be one agreed upon foundation that brings all [issues] 


together to stop all disagreements and disputes, and this will also stop 


’ Such as, for example, cold and hot or wet and dry 

8 Shaykh Abi Man$ur argues that since a body has these divergent natures, there must 
be an external force that brings all these parts together into a coherent whole. Then 
since matter relies on something external, it must then be of a temporary nature. He 
also argued that the finite nature of bodies which we observe proves the finite nature 
of the Universe itself. We know the world consists of these finite objects as we observe 
that they come into existence after not existing, so they are also temporal — limited in 
time. Therefore, the Universe has bodies that ate finite, and it is not possible to have 


objects which ate temporal and infinite together. 


[the resulting] destruction and evanescence. Therefore, based on one’s 
ability, it is necessary to search for the foundation that brings all these 
things together. This is based on [a person’s] ability to find the truth 
through contemplation and as a result come to the conclusion that there 
is someone taking care of the Universe who is awate of what they ate 
doing - someone who supports their continuity, who created them to be 
in need and does not leave them alone in their imprudent behaviour - 
allowing their desires to take over, as they need to know what keeps 
them alive and what ensures their continuity. They have to possess the 
ability to know this without there being a need for someone to teach 
them this [information]. It is necessary that there be proofs [in the world] 
by means of which they will come to realise and appreciate their 
responsibilities. This basis will help to support the claims of people who 
accept the arguments of the scholars which [they in turn have deduced] 
based on contemplating the Universe and this basis will be the 
foundation for people to use [in order] to find the truth fusing the 
intellect]. There zs no strength to find the truth except by God. 


Imam Abu Mansur stated that people disagreed about the method of 
finding the benefit and the truth and [being able to] distinguish between 


good and its opposite. 


Some said that whatever comes into yout heart is beautiful, and you need 


to hold onto it. 


Some said that a human is unable to comprehend the reason [for his 
existence] and this is why he has to follow that which inspires him, 


because this is from the one who governs the Universe. 


Shaykh [Abu Mansur] stated that both of these opinions are incorrect 
and are not acceptable in uncovering the truth. This is because using this 
method will cause obvious controversy and conflict within religion as all 


of them [can] claim that they are the people of truth, It is impossible that 


the mechanism for finding the truth can cause such confusion because 
this will necessitate that falsehood can appear as truth. It is thus 
impossible to trust something whose falsehood is so obvious: Even if 


some people believe that it is the truth, the people opposing them do 


not. 


As for using inspiration [to determine] that the people opposing them 
are wrong, [we use] the exact same proof [that was used against what 
the] people [who ate] opposing /iva (ability) are using, and these types 


of proofs cannot be used to disprove the opposite side.’ 


This is how it will not be acceptable for intellectuals to use this [as a 
proof] and the same goes for a random lottery’ or a face reader [as a 
method of divining truth]. Also, forcing people to accept such 
atgumentation cannot be valid, because arguments based on inspiration 
will be different [from person to person and time]. This is why these two 
ways cannot be the method [by which one can] find the truth. There 2s no 
strength to find the truth except by God. 


° Shaykh Aba Man§ar al-Maturidi is clarifying that I/bam (Inspiration) is not an accurate 
source for proof. As such, he is explaining that it is not valid for one to be using 
inspiration to support their argument and to justify that their opponents are wrong. 

10 Using a game of chance as proof for the validity of one’s argument is flawed. It is 
common practice amongst certain groups in cuttent times to partake in a game of 
chance to conclude which of them is on the ‘truth’, because they believe God will send 


a sign in support of the one who is right. 


Humans Have Essentially Three Means of Acquiring 


Knowledge: a) The Senses, b) Transmission, c) Intellect 


Shaykh Abt Mansur stated that the sources by which knowledge about 


reality is apprehended ate: the senses, transmission and the intellect.!! 


As for the senses’, this is the information that is gained by them which 
is the main source of knowledge and this does not have an exact 
opposite to it. Its opposite is ignorance. If anyone claims that there is an 
opposite, then he is known as a ‘Mukabar’ |(the one who arrogantly 
denies something or is stubborn)]. Even animals do not reduce 
themselves to this state, because each animal knows what keeps it alive 
and what causes it to die, what pleases it and what displeases it. ‘The 
person who denies common sense/sensoty knowledge is denying even 
this.” People agree that there is no reason for discussion with a person 
who is postulating in such a manner, because nothing is ascertainable 


nor falsifiable according to such a person. He ts denying dialogue about 


"| Imam Maturidi argues that there are three methods of acquiring true knowledge. The 
five healthy senses (hearing, seeing, smelling, touching and tasting), transmission 
(teports from humans and the Prophets) and the intellect. 

'? Shaykh Abu Man§ar uses the word ‘Iyan’ instead of the word ‘Hamaas’ (which is the 
tetm normally used by theologians and philosophers for ‘sensory knowledge’), 

'. Sophistic philosophers have a wide range of views - such as those who deny the 
existence of reality, as well as the existence of bodies. For example, they would state 
that the external Universe is not real and the proof is that a dream can be quite complex, 
but it has no basis in reality. Others state that there is no reality, that there is no way of 
teceiving and expressing information. For instance, the proof of receiving information 
incorrectly is when one person may describe a body as black whilst another may state 
that it is white; expressing information incorrectly is when a person relays information 
and later finds that the information presented was inaccurate as he had misunderstood 
the content he was relaying. Then there are those who state that you don’t know about 


the reality of things, and you do not know that you do not know, and then you do not 


know that you do not know Ad Lnfinitum. 


both the nature and the description of the issue. He is denying the denial 
coo. You can merely make a witty remark and say “do you know that 
you are denying?” If he says “no” then he is denying his own denial. But 
ifhe says “Yes”, he will be affirming his denial, by denying what he has 
affirmed [and therefore] he is denying his own claim. Or you scare him 
[with the threat of] significant pain by [threatening to] cut off his limbs 
so that he will stop pretending [to deny such things as pain experienced 
by the senses], since we know he has knowledge of his senses as it is 
common sense, but through his claim [not to], he 1s merely pretending 
and the [best] way of dealing with that type of person is by [doing] what 
I mentioned [which is] to scare them, so you will pretend [in the same 
mannet that he was] - pretending so that he will stop pretending." There 


is no strength to find the truth except by God."” 


Shaykh [Aba Manat] said that transmissions are of two types. The 
person who denies everything [2s-d-ws transmission] will be one of the 
members of the previous group [that was mentioned], as he will be 
denying his own denial. This is due to his denial itself being a form of 
transmission, so when he will be denying [the validity of all transmission| 
he will also be denying his own denial. It will result in him [stating that 
he does] not know his own name, his lineage, his own nature and the 


names of everything. It will necessitate imprudence about the things he 


'4 Despite Shaykh Aba Mansur disproving the position of his opponents, he did not 
provide a definition of knowledge himself. Although Imam Abul-Mu'in Maymun al- 
Nasafi in his ‘Tahsirat al-Adillab’, as well as Imam Abu Barakaat al-Nasafi in his “Sharé 
Umdah’, attributed the following definition to Imam Maturidi ‘It zr a quality by means of 
which the concerned thing will be clearly disclosed; the mentioned thing can be something that 
exists of not. 

'S Here Imam Maturidt is giving short shrift to those who deny the evidence of the five 
senses of humans, perhaps for example, Solipsists. Clearly, he sees the necessity of 
believing sensory information to be entirely self-evident and does not furnish a detailed 


argument in this regard apart from regarding the opposition as time wasters. 


10 


is experiencing, and the inability of expressing what he has seen. So how 
is it that he will gain knowledge of things which he did not observe when 
he is denying the [existence of] knowledge that he observed himself? 
Also, how will he know issues of his livelihood and sustenance, since all 
of that is gained through transmission [from others]? This [attitude] will 
result in the demeaning of the huge grants from God towards him, the 
things for which he [should] be grateful and the things that make him 


different from animals. This is the apex of stubbornness."* 


[Shaykh] Abt’ Mansur states that by using these two methods, one is 
unable to grasp cither the positive or negative [information] which the 
intellect is responsible for comprehending, and this can’t be done except 
by using speech to express, explain and listen to it'’, The method of 
having a dialogue with the person denying this - even though debating 
with these types of people is foolish — is that we joke with him when he 
denies and we ask him “what did you say?” So, if he repeats his 
statement, then you know that he has in fact accepted your transmission 
because it was your transmission that was questioning him. If he does 
not repeat [his statement] then you will have avoided his scepticism and 


you will thank God and you will make fun of him"*. 


The same goes for a person who denies sensoty knowledge: you ask him 


‘what did I just say?’ and if he repeats it then you know he knows [the 


‘© Shaykh Aba ManSir is saying that when information has been disseminated based 
on a fabrication, that does not mean that all information acquired based on reports is 
defective but instead this is a temporary defect based on this particular inaccurate 
information being reported. 

'7 Le. transmission 

"8 Again, Imam Matutidi is making fun of people who he feels are such sceptics as to 
deny all forms of testimonial evidence, as this would lead to a person disregarding even 
the language of the question in his example and hence preclude all discussion with 


them — not an undesirable outcome according to him. 


alan 


information from his heating] and is pretending. If he does not repeat it 
then you have avoided his scepticism and you should thank God for 
inspiring you. Or you can scare him by beating him or giving him pain” 
and he doesn’t have the right to be annoyed ot to blame you because he 
has to desctibe what you did and that is known by transmission - and he 
has already denied the validity transmission in general. There 2s no strength 


to find the truth except by God. 


It is necessaty to accept transmission based on reason in the same 
mannet that it is necessary to accept the transmission of the Prophets. 
This is because their transmission is more reliable in its truthfulness and 
is suppotted by obvious miracles. ‘There is no transmission from the 
remaining sources of knowledge for which the listener feels tranquillity 
which is more teliable than the transmission of the Prophets. Because 
rejecting the above-mentioned soutces of knowledge is a sign of 
stubbornness, thus rejecting the statements of the Prophets requires an 


even greater degree of obstinacy and duplicity.” 


The reports which come to us from the Prophets are passed on by 


people who can make errors or fabricate, because they do not have any 


19 Obviously, Maturidi is being humorous as opposed to saying that one should erally 
hit one’s ideological opponents -- much as in the manne of debates in western 
philosophy, where the position of solipsism or perhaps extreme idealism (denying that 
the physical Universe exists but allowing for the existence of one’s mind, a belief much 
like that of some solipsists, who would say that one could not be sure that one was 
anything other than a ‘brain in a vat’ receiving sensations artificially, as in a dream) that 
is being discussed here was sometimes threatened with a kick to the shin as a refutation. 
Mitutidi is mocking his opponents by saying that he could administer sound thrashing 
and they would neither feel it (as they deny that pain has any reality since it is from the 
sense of touch) and nor could they complain about him, since that involves 
transmission - and they themselves would not believe anyone’s transmission. 

20 Shaykh Aba Mangar argues that if reports based on sensory information are 
accepted, then the reports of the Prophets have a much stronger reason to be accepted 


because of the signs and proofs that they present. 


12 


proof for their protection ftom such errors and fabrications, nor do they 
possess proof of their infallibility. In that case, [the information they 
testify to] has to be tested, to examine if it is coming from a source from 
which hes cannot be found; then we have to approve and accept what 
the transmission is presenting because of its protection [from falsehood], 
and that is the description of mutawatir *' [massively attested] 
transmission. This is because even if thete is no proof of thei protection 
from error or lying individually, when the transmission teaches that level 
|mutawatir|, its trustworthiness is established and its protection from lies 
has been accepted, even though individually the opposite of this is 
possible for each of them.” It is the same for the issues which are known 
by gthad (independent legal reasoning) - even if error is possible in each 
of them individually, when they come together theit precision is 
confirmed®. This is because the intention and egos of human beings 
conflict and their concerns are controversial - except for the one who is 
protected by God, who can manifestly show the truth and protect 
creation. There 7s no strength to find the truth except by God 


*! The linguistic meaning of matavatir is ‘sequential’, In Hadith terminology it means 
that it is narrated by such a large number of people in each generation that it would be 
impossible for them to all collude on a lie. 

* Imam Maturid? could be directing this against some of the Mutazalites (and not the 
majority of them) such as An-Nazzam, who denied the authenticity of matawatir 
narrations. His beliefs were that one person can convince a number of people to 
collude on a lie. 

* Shaykh Abu Mansur Al-Maturidi seems to be approving of Ima (broadly meaning 
‘legal consensus’) but in a very specific sense. He is equivocating ‘Twa’ with his 
definition of ‘matawdtir’ - which means that for ‘Tjtibad Ima’ it would require a large 
number of independent scholats from a variety of backgrounds who could not have 


come together to collude on a lie or influenced one another to conform to a 


misunderstanding, 


13 


Another type of narration is the one that does not teach this level in 
rerms of necessitating certainty’ and in terms of knowing it is the truth 
from the metciful Prophet. [In this case] it is necessary to act upon it or 
reject it based on ‘itihad and testing the descriptions of the narrators by 
considering the possibility [of the truthfulness or falschood] of what he 
is claiming in his transmission and then acting based on the strongest 
probability - even if this can be wrong. Because this is possible in those 
issues telated to sensory knowledge from which the highest level of 
certainty [is achieved], [therefore] we can act on something which 1s 
established by weaker senses. Considering acting upon or rejecting 
something, neither of these need to be based on knowing 
comprehensively. Whichever of them you [decide to] chose, you will be 
rejecting the other transmission, and this is the [reason] why it is 


necessaty to act by ‘##hdd on one of two opposing testimonials.” 


The bases on which it is necessary to use Nagar (speculative thought)” 
are the following: One of them is requisite in the field of sensory 


knowledge and transmission, because of those issues that are beyond the 


44 Information can be either Pariri (obvious) ot Nagar (speculative thought or 
requiting further analysis). Darsr7 is something about which you don’t need to think 
such as ‘one plus one equals two’. Nazar? requires thinking, such as ‘3 times 9 plus six 
equals thirty-three’, 

25 Shaykh Aba Manéir al-Maturidi is relaying his principles of dealing with Prophetic 
narrations. If a narration does not reach the level of Mutawatir (which gives one 
customary certainty) then it requires one to deploy Ijtbaad (legal independent 
reasoning) in order to determine its authenticity. Once the truthfulness or falsehood of 
the narration has been verified, based on strong possibility, the report is then either 
accepted or rejected. 

26 Shaykh Aba Mandir uses the words “4q/’ (intellect), *Tstadial’ (deduction) and ‘Nagar’ 
(speculative thought) to present issues related to the intellect and arguments based on 


reason. 


14 


teach of the senses, and because in terms of transmission there ate 


certain types of testimonies that may be true or untrue. 


Being able to distinguish between the miracles of the Prophets and the 
illusions of magicians and being guided by the Prophets is within the 
ability and specification of the person who is receiving the signs because 
of their being able to differentiate between the light of truth and the 
darkness of falsehood. This is what God referred to in the Quran when 
it was said that humans and jizns will not be able to produce something 
similar to it: “We well show them Our signs in the horizons and within themselves 
until it becomes clear to then that it 1s the truth’®', where He stated “Then do 
they not look at the camels - how they are created?” In another verse [in the 
Holy Quran]: “Tudeed, in the creation of the heavens and earth, and the alternation 
of the night and the day...”” and in the verse “By looking into yourselves, you 
will find evidence to the presence and powers of God.’”? And in the many verses 
fof the Quran] requesting one to contemplate and analyse and ordering 
[people] to think and to reflect. He informed them that this is the way 
that will lead them to the truth and make the true path clear. There is no 
strength to find the truth except by God. 


The people who deny the intellect have no evidence to deny it except by 
using the intellect in the first place. This demonstrates that to deny the 
intellect they have to in fact use the intellect. It is necessary to recognise 
the wisdom in the creation [of the Universe] as it is not possible that it 
was created without reason.” It is necessary to recognise the wisdom in 


the creation [within the Universe, such as humans] as it is not possible 


*? Quran, Surah AL Fussilat (41:53) 

6 Quran, Surah AL Ghashiyah (88:17) 

»” Quran, Surah A/Bagarah (2:164) 

*° Quran, Surah Adb-Dhaniyat (51:21) 

*! Imam Maturidi dedicates a significant chapter later in the book on the issues related 
to the wisdom of God. 


LS 


that this was created without a reason either. This is proof of the one 
who created it and it also proves that if it does exist by itself, then it is 
either created or pre-eternal. All of this is known by the intellect. It is 
the duty of humans to govern creation, to struggle for it and to explore 
what is logically the best thing for it by giving preference to that which 
is beneficial and to avoid that which causes harm. This cannot be done 
without contemplating — by using the intellect. The intellect is the only 
soutce that can be used to clarify any obstructions or issues that ate 
caused by doubt. All of this describes the true nature of things and [the 
things that] lead to [this understanding]. ‘This is the same as when colours 
are confused and the eyes clarify them, when voices are confused but 
the eats ate able to distinguish between them and how each of the senses 
clarifies the things that they have been created [to clarify]. This is jone 
of the usages] of the intellect. There zs no strength to find the truth except by 
God. 


The ability to distinguish between the things that benefit or harm and 
the positive and negative acts is established by reason — this is after the 
senses have described it and its various angles have been explained by 
the transmission by which they were all created. The issues that have 
been mentioned above can only be disclosed by the intellect. This is how 
one is able to recognise beneficial and harmful things. Humans are 
created based on their natural disposition and the intellect. The intellect 
may determine something is good and yet this is different to the 
[person’s] natural desires. The intellect may determine that something 1s 
bad but this is different to what the person naturally finds repulsive.” It 


is also possible in certain instances that the intellect and nature may agree 


32 The intellect ensures that a person is able to reflect and think, so that he does not 


fall into the oblivion of his own cardinal desires. 


or disagree, and this is how the intellect determines which of the two 


[(good or bad)] something is. 


17 


proof for the Created Nature of the Universe: The Ontological 


Structure of the Universe 


Shaykh Aba Mansur said that the proof for the creation of bodies is 
demonstrated by the same three evidences which wete mentioned for 
the sources of knowledge. In terms of transmission, it is that which is 
established by God in a manner that it cannot be replicated by someone 
else.’ This is because [God] has informed us [in the Holy Quran] that 
“He is the creator of everything’, that He is “the Originator of the sky and 
zarth’ and the ‘sovereignty of what is in them belongs to Him’®° And we have 
spoken about the stipulations for the acceptance of [the truth of these] 
testimonies. There is none among those that live that claim that they are 
pre-eternal or even refer to anything that could mean [that they ate] pre- 
eternal and if someone was to do so, his falsehood would become 
apparent.” For all [created things] that we have observed in their youth 
[and adulthood], we have witnessed their beginning, which proves that 
living bodies are originated. As for the things that are inanimate, then 
[their existence] is under the control of the living bodies. Adah es the one 


who supports 


3 Shaykh Abu Manéur is referring to the Quran, that it is itself a miracle that proves 
its own veracity, in terms of its literary nature as well as its preservation. 

+ Quran, Surah Az-Zumar (39:62) 

> Ouran, Surah. ALAn’am (6:101) 

6 Quran, Surah A/Ma ‘dab (5:18) 

7 The premise of one of the arguments based on scriptural proof of Shaykh Abu 
Manégtr al-Maturidi is that the Universe exists, God has stated that He created all things, 
therefore God created the Universe. No living being has claimed that they are eternal. 
Substances are not eternal; therefore, substances ate temporal. . 

*8 Al Maturidi presents various evidences for the proof that the Universe is created. 
They begin with the fact that God revealed through reliable transmission, namely the 


Quran, that He is the Creator of the Universe. He then moves onto explain that based 


18 


As for the senses, everything that can be sensed is surrounded and is 
finite, and it has been created such that it is in need. [Something existing 
from] pre-eternity is that which has no need and it is because of its pre- 
eternity that it cannot be in need. [This is due to the fact that it] being in 
need or being compelled or forced, results in it being in need of 


something else - which necessitates that it is originated.” 


Anything that is naturally ignorant of something that benefits it when it 
is damaged, then it is potentially [but not naturally] perfect. This is if it 
is alive, but if it is inanimate then it is under the control of that which is 
alive. This proves that each of the two are in need of the other. 
Whenever the “other” is proven or established then this necessitates 
Creatio ex Nehilo, because the existence of the “other” cannot be pre- 
eternal. “’ All sensible things unify in themselves divergent and 
contradictory natures, the specific properties of which would cause them 
to repel and disperse from one another. The fact that they remain 
together, proves that their amalgamation was caused by something else. 


This is proof that things are originated.” 


on empitical information, we have observed that each living body experiences the 
beginning of their existence, and inanimate objects are under the control of living 
bodies. Therefore both of them cannot be pre-eternal. 

*? He then argues that the finite nature of bodies, which is established based on the 
senses, means that they are in need, and anything whose existence relies on something 
else cannot be pre-eternal, which means that dependency and need necessitate an 
external being. 

© Shaykh Abu Mansur is arguing that whenever something is relying on another for its 
existence, that thing necessitates that it is originated, that all things are imprudent and 
incapable of stopping themselves from being corrupted. If this is the case for living 
bodies, then that it is even more the case for inanimate objects. In this case both of 
them are in need as such both of them ate tempocral. 

1! The fact that things with divergent and contradictory natures combine together 


proves that the cause is something that is external to them, 


19 


The Universe has [many] parts and we know that most of these 
individual parts are known to have come into existence (after having not 
existed) and that they grow and expand. This must then apply to the 
Universe, because the sum of the finite pieces cannot be infinite. Which 


would mean [that the Universe is] originated. 


Furthermore, the Universe contains both good and evil, small and large, 
benefit and harm, light and darkness. All these opposites are signs of 
change and decay, and this change and decay is annihilation and 
evanescence. This is because it is known through observation that 
something contracting or amalgamating proves that it had previously 
been divided. When something is divided, then what we have now ts 
evanescent. All of this is proof of evanescence and anything that is 
evanescent cannot exist |independently| by itself’. It is necessary for 
what has been mentioned to have a start point. It is Ulogical for one to 
claim that something can disappear from sight but is not evanescent, 
because the Universe is known through observation, and one cannot 
claim [that something is] pre-eternal based on testimony or observation. 
Now [that the creation of the Universe] has become evanescent, it means 
one cannot observe its [being brought into] existence which does not 
mean that [that the Universe] is no longer present. This includes what 


we previously mentioned [in terms of the weakness of the argument]. 


“2 Al-Maturidi is explaining accidents changing from one to another such as light and 
dark. The shift from light to dark means that the light ceases to exist and when the 
rotation of the Earth changes, the darkness also disappears. Anything that ceases to 


exist and relies on its opposing accidents to exist cannot be eternal or exist by itself. 


20 


There is no difference between the life that is evanescent and the body 
that holds this life.” There s no strength to find the truth except by God. 


Based on teason, each individual body is either in motion or at rest, and 
both of these states cannot simultaneously occur in a body. [In terms of 
the body], some of its time is occupied by motion whilst some of its 
[time is occupied] by being at rest. Each individual body that occupies a 
part [of time] is finite. Therefore, if neither the motion nor rest are 
simultaneously pre-eternal then the both of them must have come into 
existence and non-existence. The impossibility of them being pre-eternal 
signifies that they are temporal. Therefore, both motion and rest are 
accidents, and it stands established that [since bodies] cannot exist 


without [motion or rest], then they are originated.” 


Fach body is either at constant rest or in constant motion, of it is 
periodically in motion or it is [periodically] at rest. Whichever of these 
two it is, another influence affects them and in this manner they are 
useful for the needs and benefit of others [than themselves}. If this is the 
description of an inanimate body [it is even more the case for a living 
body]; it signifies that it is not self-sufficient and is therefore created. 
Therefore its state is not because of itself but because it was created to 


be like that. As such, if the nature of bodies is proven, then living bodies 


8 Imam Maturidi explains that the Universe contains things with divergent natures, 
which ate signs of change and evanescence and that this leads to annihilation. Anything 
that is sebject to change and affected by annihilation cannot have come into existence 
by itself, 

“4 Al-Maturidi is presenting the argument that when a body is in motion, then test 
ceases to exist and similarly when the same body is at rest, motion ceases to exist. 


Therefore, both of them do not exist pre-eternally together, As such, both are temporal 


and the proof of this is their evanescence. 


ZL 


that are in need of such inanimate bodies can therefore only be created.” 


There is 10 strength to find the truth except by God. 


Another ptoof that the Universe is not pre-eternal is based on its 
descriptions, such amalgamation and separation, motion and rest, 
benefit and harm, good and evil, increasing and decreasing - according 
to the senses and reason all of which are originated. This is because two 
opposites cannot come together; therefore they alternate in their 
existence, which proves they are originated” [and] that these accidents 
exist after not existing. It is in this way that these things cannot be 
separated from the Universe and nor can they precede [the Universe]. 
Or they were originated from a source who possesses these [accidents], 
or they began to change by becoming a changeable thing. If these 
occutrences ate established, then it stands established that the Universe 
is Creatio ex Nihilo and it nullifies [the doctrine of] those who disagree 
about its origination. But if it is neither of these options, and rather it is 
from the one who created the Universe then that is what we claim, that 
He [(God)] is the Creator. However, they” call it “Hayzla’ (raw, pre- 
eternal matter). Instead, if this occurs by [the Universe} moving it, then 


that which originally [occupied it] is no longer there, because it has been 


45 Imam Matutidi is proving that constant or periodic motion is the result of another, 
and if this is the case for an inanimate object then it is even more the case for a living 
body. 

46 One of the stronger arguments of Shaykh Abu Manéur against the pre-eternity of 
the Universe is based on the temporary nature of accidents, such as in the example of 
motion and rest. He explains that it is not possible for matter to have neither motion 
not rest; one of these attributes must exist at one time, which means that at least one 
of them must be temporary, and as they rely on one another, then the other opposing 
accident must also be temporary. 

“’ Here Al-Maturidi is referring to the Greek Philosophers who proceeded him that 
believed in the existence of Hayzi/a. His arguments on pre-eternity do not touch upon 
the pre-eternal model of the Universe presented by Avicenna and Avertoes who came 


after him. 


22 


moved into, then that is Creatio ex Nihilo. It signifies that the subsequent 
one is also originated, since it appeared by moving into the initial one, 
bearing in mind that something cannot come from another thing 
without it being camouflaged within it. It then appears or it comes into 
existence after not being or comes into existence by being born and [as 
such it] appears, or the first one ceases to exist and the second comes 
into existence. An example of the initial existing thing would be a child 
ot a thing which is hidden within a container, It is not possible for it to 
be larger than the thing in which it is contained. In the same vein, it is 
impossible for a human to be inside of a sperm or a tree to be inside of 
a seed. This is the opinion of the people who say that the appearance 
lof a thing] is not natural, but instead it is optional. This [position] is 
incotrect because it would be necessary that one of the reasons [for its 
existence] is the thing itself as its existence is natural and not optional,” 
Or its initial existence will be originated, such as the [initial existence of 
the] sperm [which precedes the] human and so on. So, the initial 
[existence] is originated until it ceases to exist, and then the subsequent 
thing is originated, and there will be no sign of the preceding one, which 


proves the origination of [both] the preceding and subsequent thing.*” 


*8 When Shaykh Aba Mansur is referring to the child being inside sperm or the tree 
being inside the seed, he is referring to the 4#ra/ tree being inside the seed and not the 
potential tree being inside the seed. 

* Here al-Maturidi is arguing that there is a contradiction in the doctrine that the 
Universe came from Prime Matter, and the resulting Universe is an optional 
consequence of this, as opposed to a #atural consequence. Nonetheless, they also claim 
that one of the reasons for the existence of the Universe is the Universe itself, which 
they argue is a natural occurrence. 

°° Maturidi argues that the existing things come into existence through I[ntgall (a 
process of transition) from potential existence to actual existence and that the first 
existent transitions into the second, where the first ceases to exist. Nor does something 
camouflage its existence in another thing. That which actualises its existence from 
potentiality is God. 


23 


re to enquire as to the difference between [this and the] infinity 


[fone we 
of the things after the Day of Judgement [i-e. abiding forever in Paradise] 


since they are not infinitive in themselves, so then why is it that [one 
states that it is] not possible that something that is not pre-eternal in 
itself can yet be eternal? We respond with several reasons. Creatio ex 
Nihilo is |that it has an| existence after not being, so if it was not there 
previously [and then it came into existence], then that is actually [what 
js] known as Creatio ex Nibilo. As such, claiming in this situation [that it 
is a type of] pre-eternity is contradictory. ‘he meaning of infinity [as in 
perpetual existence in the Afterlife] is existence in a new time fot 
something that did not exist before, so this is how it is different [to the 
concept of pre-eternity]."' Another reason why it is incorrect is because 
infinity [of existence in the Afterlife] is something that is set up by 
scriptural evidence - either you accept [the scriptural evidence as a proof| 
and therefore its otigination is established, or you do not accept the 


scriptural evidence and as such this [specific proof] will not be relevant.” 


And God helps. 


Furthermore, if the existence of something relies on the existence of 
something preceding it, and this is the condition of all of the things |that 


ptecede it], then it negates all of the [preceding things]. The proof of this 


3! The eternity in paradise can be compared to a staircase with a beginning but an 
infinite number of steps. Pre-eternity on the other hand is like a staircase on which one 
finds oneself that has no beginning and extends infinitely in both directions, up and 
down. 

52 Here al-Maturidi is explaining that the second evidence that life after the Day of 
Judgement is eternal is based on scriptural proof, and with scriptural proof if you accept 
that specific text to be true, then you would accept that the Universe after the Day of 
Judgement is eternal. On the other hand, if one doesn’t accept that specific text as 
proof, then this evidence will be void. The Imam is likely explaining this issue because 
in Islamic theology there are schools of thought as well as individual scholars who do 


not believe in the eternal duration of reward or punishment in the Afterlife. 


24 


is that if you say to someone ‘do not eat anything until you have eaten 
something before it’ and [if] this same condition is applied to everything 
else [that precedes it], this person will remain in a state where he never 
eats anything. But instead, if someone were to say [to the second person] 
‘eat something after [having eaten] something [previously]’, this person 
will be continuously in a state where he is cating [without a break] and 
this would be the basis of an increase in quantity. If there is no start 
point from where it begins, then it cannot exist. But if there is a starting 
point, then it will continue to exist, increasing indefinitely. There zs no 


strength except by God. 


Moreover, all numbers have a beginning - they become whatever they 
do because they had a start point. But [pumbers] do not have an end 
point, and that is how the two differ from one another {meaning pre- 
eternity and infinity]. Even if one were to surmise that there were no 
bodies and only accidents, which had other accidents that pre-eternally 
proceeded them, none of these accidents can occur as long as thete is 
no start point, but they can [on the other hand] exist infinitely without 


an end [if they do have a start point].°’ Adah is the one who helps 


Also, each single motion and combination to which we tefer, is the end 
of what preceded it, and it is impossible to have an ‘end’ without having 


a ‘beginning’. There zs no strength to find the truth except by God 


It is also possible for a body to be described as Baga (existing in 
perpetuity) if it has only one [turn] of continuing to exist, even if this 
perpetuity does not continue. But bodies cannot be called pre-eternal 
even if they change once, never mind them changing a number of times. 


The perpetuity affecting a body is why it continues to exist. It remains 


* Shaykh Aba Mangir argues that each sequence, such as the numbets, must have a 


beginning but they do not need an end. Without a beginning, nothing would exist in 


the first place. 


eas 


as long as the perpetuity is continuous within it. It is not possible that 
the reason for the pre-eternity of something can be linked to [or affected 
by] an accident.** As a result of this, body and pre-eternity become linked 


and it is the reason as to why one cannot come before the other.” And 


Allah helps. 


The people who argued for these positions” and criticised our point 
asked the question that why is it not possible that something will come 
‘nto existence with no colour, and that it will [never] be affected by 
colour? This [question] is flawed, because the actual meaning of 
origination is that you are describing the existence [of something], after 
it not being in existence. If this other thing will come into existence 
without it being detached [from its body], and it has this description 
[existing after not existing], then it is necessary that it will have the same 
ruling of [origination as the body]. ‘The [accident of] colour is not a 
description [of a body] because it came into existence [simultaneously] 
with the body. This is the reason as to why they are both different. But 
a large number of bodies cannot be detached from colour, and that is 
why it [seems like] the body does not come before the colour. But 


instead the body will come before [the accident of] one colour which 1s 


54 al-Maturidi argued that there is no body that exists separately from accidents. These 
accidents are in turn dependent on bodies. Therefore, neither of them can exist on 
their own and instead they rely on the other for theit existence. As such, there must be 
something that is external which brought them into existence. 

55 Shaykh Aba ManSur argued that bodies can continuously exist because they ate 
always affected by perpetuity, which is an accident. For them to be pre-eternal there 
would need to be an accident which is similar. This is not possible because accidents 
are temporal and therefore it means that the body they affect is also temporal. 


56 ‘That bodies and accidents cannot be detached from one another 


26 


replacing the other colour and so on,*’ and this is what we know 4 
g 3 § 


Creatio ex Nihil. 


The one who argues that we don’t know of anything [in the present 
Universe] that was Creatio ex Nihil is making an analogy based on 
those things that can be sensed. But the analysis [pertaining to the 
temporal or eternal Universe] is itself outside of the [realm of the] senses, 
Furthermore, when they claim that the existing things disintegrate but 
never cease to exist, that it is something that is known as well as 
evaluated.” He might affirm all of this, because when there is a body 
which can apply reason, can hear, see and has a soul etc., but does not 
know the reason for his creation, it leads [a person] to make any 
conclusion that pleases him. In addition, if we have not been informed 
about the pre-eternity of something or if a particular pre-eternal body is 
a part of the Universe, there is no way of knowing [about its pre-eternity] 
except through analysis. [If one were not to use speculative thinking] 
then we wouldn’t know [the reason for] writing without a writer, or 
division without someone who divides. The same may be said of motion, 
rest and everything else in the Universe. This can be seen by the 
wondrous composition of the Universe, where the Universe is 


amalgamated and separated, and it did not amalgamate or separate 


>’ Because within the body, one accident will be replacing another - such as in this 
example one colour will be replacing the other in the body. So for instance, in a red 
shirt, over time, the accident of the redness begins to fade and eventually disappears as 
it is replaced by the accident of whiteness. : 

8 al-Maturidi is referring to those people who believe in the pre-eternity of the 
Universe and argued based on empirical information that we have not observed with 
our senses something that is originated from nothing. 

*° Shaykh Aba Mansar also argued that based on our senses we can observe that the 
Universe is not eternal, because we observe that a body depends on being a body and 
is dependent on accidents for its existence. Eternity is not dependent on anything 


because by its nature it must be independent, therefore the Universe cannot be eternal. 


2f 


except through something else [who created it]. Therefore, everything in 
the present Universe, including it compositions and writings, comes 
after the thing that has caused it [to come into existence]. As we have 


mentioned, this is the [nature and flow of] the Universe.® Adah is the One 
who supports HS. 

It would be difficult for people to list all of the proofs [that show that 
the Universe existed after not existing], because there is nothing in the 
Universe which can be sensed or heard that does not show signs of 
existing after not existing |[Le. shows signs of coming from nothing]. 
[That which is originated] does not know its [own] beginning, how to 
repair itself, of reproduce itself, or [is aware of] the inability to maintain 
itself, or [being able to] transform itself. [Not to mention] other signs, 
such as being helpful and being unhelpful. All of these things would not 
(have an] affect unless there was some other thing [that was] affecting 


them. 


In the present Universe, it is known that motion and test, amalgamation 
and separation, are all distinct from bodies. This is because it is possible 
that there are separate bodies which then come together, or [the body] 
is in motion and after that it comes to test. Because if this [act| were to 
occur on its own, it would not be affected by the opposite state of the 


body.” Itis on the same basis that something ceases to exist or is infinite. 


© Maturidl is presenting his argument by making the distinction between bodies and 
accidents. He says that motion and being at rest, durability and destruction, 
amalgamation and separation, are all accidents which ate different to bodies. We know 
through our own observations that motion follows rest, and that amalgamation follows 
separation and that something coming into existence follows non-existence. These 
‘accidents’ cannot be the same as the main body which is the ‘body’, because if they 
were the same then the bodies would not be able to hold two opposing qualities such 
as motion and rest. Therefore, this clearly shows that bodies and accidents are two very 
different things. 


6l Such as motion after being at rest. 


28 


It is possible that something does not exist and then [later] comes into 
existence. Or that something can come into existence but will continue 
to exist infinitely. For something to remain [in existence] or to cease to 
exist, it will be acting differently. That is how we know that existing for 
an infinite duration and [something] ceasing to exist are two different 


things, which occur due to something external and not the body itself. 


Many of the Mutazalites accept the first part of the argument, but deny 
the argument pertaining to something remaining or ceasing to exist. The 
refutation of their argument is if it can remain lin existence of its own 
accotd] then this also signifies that it can come into existence by itself 
and not [by being brought into existence] by something else. Their 
argument does in fact conform to their own principles, because they do 
not engage God with the Universe, except with the Universe in its 
entirety. This is because they make the attribute of [God’s] Will a part of 
the Universe. They include the Fi (active attributes) as a part of the 
Universe. According to them, the Dhat (the Essence of God) existed and 
there was no Universe, and then nothing occurred except that the 
Universe came into existence. If it came into existence by itself and 
remains [in existence] by itself, then this is the refutation of Tawhid 


(oneness of God). 


After this, there was a change that occurred [to the body] and the 
theologians disagreed regarding the essence of the name of that change. 


Some of them called it Ard (accident) whilst others called it Stfaa 


° Al Maturtdi argues that everything that can be sensed in the Universe will cause a 
person who reflects to come to the realisation that he is not pre-eternal and instead he 
was created, 

° Here al-Maturidi is referring to ALS jfaat al-Filiyah (Active Attributes [of God]). The 
Mutazalites do not accept that God has these specific attributes, as they believe that it 
would mean that God has parts. Instead according to al-Matutidi, they include these 


attributes of action as part of the Universe and not as part of God’s universal actions. 


Pac) 


(description). In fact, in reference to this issue, we should not get fixated 
oA what terminologies people use to describe it; rather [we should focus 
on clarifying their meaning. Hence, any of the terminologies that ate 
ased to describe it , because the names [of things] cannot be understood 
py teason oF by analogy. This is our response to the argument of Ka‘bi™ 


where he stated; ‘if it is not a body ithen] it is an accident.’ 


[Shaykh] Aba Manéir stated that this argument can only be correct if 
the entirety of creations except for bodies, are accidents. But in the book 
of God, Ard is used in reference to actual bodies/matter, such as when 
God says “You desire the worldly matters”, also God says “Had it been an 
easy matter.’®* Based on this, it is better to use the word ‘Szfaa’, as this 


more closely aligns with Islamic terminologies. There is no power but God. 


6 Abu al-Qasim Abdullah Ahmad was born in Balkh and as such was known as al- 
Balkhi. His family were patrons of the tribe called ‘Ka‘b’ and in many theological books 
he is refetred to as Ka‘bi. He was a famous Muatagalite scholar who died on (931/319 
AH) and a contemporary of Shaykh Aba Man$ir al-Maturidi and therefore many of 
teachings ate presented and refuted in this book. Ka‘bi’s own books ‘Ayan a-Masait’ 
(‘Sources of Questions’) ‘Magalat al-Islamiyn (‘Articles of Islamists’) are considered lost. 
Many theologians who came later such as Ali al-Jubbai dedicated long passages focused 
on refuting Ka‘ bi. 

© Quran, Surah ah Anfal (8:67) 

6 Quran, Surah a+ Tawbah (9:42) 


30 


Proof that the Universe has a Creator 


[Shaykh] Abu Mansur said: [One of] the proofs that the Universe has q 
creator lies in the fact that it must have been originated, as we have 
already explained, and in the fact that there is nothing in the present 
world which is amalgamated or separated by itself, but rather by 


something other than itself,’ 


In addition, if the Universe had come into existence by itself, there 
would be no time which is more suitable for its existence than another 
time, nor would there have been a state that is more appropriate than 
another state, nor would there have been a characteristic [or quality] 
more apt than a certain other characteristic [or quality]. But since the 
existence of the Universe has a specific time, state, and characteristics, it 
stands established that its coming into existence is not by itself. 
Furthermore, if it had been permissible for the Universe to come [into 
existence] by itself, the Universe would have created the best time, state, 
and characteristics which in turn would have eliminated all the evil and 
corrupt things [from the Universe]. Therefore, the existence of these 
things is proof for its coming into existence by a being that is other than 


itself. He zs the One who supports. 


Furthermore, everything in the Universe is categorised into two things - 
inanimate and animate objects. All animate things are ignorant at their 
inception and ate incapable of reproducing ot repairing themselves in 
order to attain the apex of their strength and perfection. This proves that 


they came into existence through [the action of] something other than 


*? Shaykh Aba Mansur argued that we know of the existence of the Universe based on 
sensory knowledge, but proving its existence is not based on the senses and instead it 
relies on the evidence that the Universe does exist, that it must have been created and 


that it follows laws that control it. 


aL 


themselves. Therefore, [this supports the proposition] that the inanimate 
component of the Universe has an even greater right to meet the 


: ne 68 
described conditions. 


In addition, all things in the Universe, through force, are affected by a 
variety of changes, and these changes that affect them do not exist by 
themselves and cannot exist without [the Universe]. This proves that 
each of them is also in need of the other, fic. substance and being 
affected by change are interdependent]. So, tt cannot exist by itself when 
it needs something other than itself to exist.” There is no strength to find the 
uth except by God. 


Furthermore, if it could exist of its own accord and would remain [in 
existence] by itself, then it would remain in the same [unchanging] state. 
Since this does not happen [as the Universe is subject to change], then 


we know this change is by something other than itself. 


If it is [kept in existence] of its own accord, then its [existence] occurs 
by itself after it has come into existence, which signifies it did not come 
into existence by itself. Because it [either] came into existence through 
[the action of] something else, or it already [existed] by itself. But how 
can something bring itself into existence before existing? Then it would 
be necessary that a non-existent thing is acting, which is impossible. ‘The 
proof of this explanation is the existence of buildings, writings and the 
construction of ships, which could not have come into existence unless 


some doer came before them. 


68 These arguments for the existence of a Creator of the Universe are independent of 
our experience of the Universe. 

Imam Matutidi argues that the accidents in the world continue to change, from rest 
to motion, separated things amalgamating etc, and that it is not possible for things to 
change autonomously. For example, the colour of a shirt doesn’t change by its own 


volition. As such, there must be an eternal cause that brought about that change. 


ae 


[Shaykh] Abt Mansur said that the Universe did not come into existence 
by itself is shown by the fact that nothing in it is lacking wondrous 
wisdom and a marvellous signification, which the scholats ate incapable 
of grasping as to its essence and manner of existence. In fact, every one 
of the [scholars] is aware of the deficiency of their wisdom and 
knowledge in grasping the true nature of that. Hence, this limitation as 
well as others, are signs of the wisdom of the originator and creator of 


the Universe.” ‘There zs no strength to find the trath except by God. 


Furthermore, if the Universe could begin existing by itself, then there 
will be a point at which it will also stop existing. Since this is not the case 
but rather it evolved gradually, then this change occurred through 
something other than itself, such as when living things cease to exist, 
separate bodies amalgamate, something that is small becoming bigger, 
and evil things becoming good. Such is the way in which all things 


change, as they could not have subsisted pre-eternally. 


As such, this points to the Universe’s existence being due to something 
other than itself.” Because if it can exist by itself, then it can change by 
itself, such as for example the colour of garments can [then] change by 
themselves and not through [someone] applying colour to them, or ships 
can be constructed and shaped into their [final] condition on their own 
accotd and not by something other than themselves. If this does not 
occur, then there has to be someone knowledgeable who creates them 


in this manner, who has the ability to create them. It is from. this 


™ Shaykh Aba Mangir proposes that a pre-eternal Creator can be proved from the 
nature of created things as He has left signs in the Universe for one to analyse and 
conclude that there is a Designer. But despite this, there ate still certain things within 


the Universe that cannot be grasped with certainty by scholars. 


7 "These arguments for a Creator of the Universe are based on our expelence or IE, 


ao 


perspective that we are [analysing| the way in which things occur. And 


God is the arbitrator of success. 

It is impossible for the Universe to come into existence by itself because 
of the knowledge and power that is contained within it, which cannot 
exist out of ignorance and inability. How can something come into 


existence if it did not exist? 


The proof that the Universe came into existence from nothing is that it 


is created. 


34 


The Issue of the Creator of the Universe Being One 


[Shaykh] Aba Manésur said: The proof that the creator of the Universe is 
one and not more than that is based on reason as well as tradition, and 


the transmission (proof) of the Universe. 


As for transmission, it is based on the general agreement among the 
people irrespective of how many creators they claim [to believe in that] 
they all agree that the Creator of the Universe is One. As for those who 
posit that there is more than one creator, they say so based on the 
assumption that the [number] ‘one’ is the first [term in a series of 
numbers]. Just as [the number] ‘one’ is the beginning of the numbers, in 
the same manner it is the name of [God’s] Power, Prestige and Grace. 
This is similar to when it is stated that such-and-such is ‘the one in his 
time” and he doesn’t have a second in his prestige, virtue and erace, 
Therefore, nothing more than that can be used, because more than that 


and anything above that, are simply numbers, and numbers ate infinite. 2 


The explanation of the numbers is that numbers are infinite and 
[therefore as a result] gods ate also infinite, which would make it 
necessary that there are an infinite number of universes. That is because 
if each one of the gods were to create one Universe, then it will result in 
an infinite number of universes, which is not possible. Furthermore, if 
each one of the infinite number of gods were to create one Universe, it 
would result in an infinite number of otiginations and that is also 


impossible. In teference to the quantity of numbers, they can increase 


Al Maturidi is arguing that in terms of those who believe in more than one creator; 
they still believe that the number one is the first number in the series of numbers, in 


terms of the beginning of those numbers. 


ele, 


of decrease”, and [one number is not] superior to another, not is [one] 
numbet more appropriate than another number, and it is due to this 
reason that the proposition of an infinite number of gods is not 


accepted.” And God is the One who supports. 


Furthermore, there is no claim of Divinity that was mentioned from any 
god except that which was narrated and accepted by the polytheists. 
Also, there is no proof that has been mentioned by them which would 
force [one to believe]. In addition, there is no indication that [they sent 
emissaties with] signs which were found [by the creation] and thete 1s no 
other thing that is in the present Universe [that would indicate a proof]. 
There is nothing in the present Universe which would point to [their 
proposition], and there has been no emissary that they have seen with 
evidence which overcomes reason and forces it [to accept]. This 
demonsttates that any other claim for the existence [of other gods] is 


based on misconception and delusion.” 


In addition, [the fact that] the Prophets were able to bring proofs which 
convinced those who received [the evidence]; if there would be a pattner 
[to God], then this [pattner] would be able to prevent [the mitacle or 
proof of the Prophet] from being expressed. No one has been able to 
stop these miracles from occurring, even though there ate many 
stubborn people who would love to have prevented them. The fact that 


the Prophets were able to [deliver the message without any 


73 ‘There is no number that cannot be increased or decreased, therefore it is invalid that 
there can be more than one creator of the Universe. 

™ Shaykh Aba Man§ur is using the evidence of finiteness to prove the oneness of God. 
If there were an infinite number of Gods and each of them were to create, there would 
be an infinite number of creations and universes, which is not possible. Furthermore, 
it would result in a contradiction, in that there will be an infinite number of originations. 
® Shaykh Aba Mansur also argues that we only have revelation from one God, that 


there are no other Prophets or signs that claim the existence of other Gods. 


36 


apprehension] proves that there is one and only Creator, who prevented 
the totality of stubborn and arrogant people from decetving and 


pteventing the truth.” There is no strength to Jind the truth except by Ged. 


’© al-Maturidi is attempting to argue that if there were other gods, they would have 
prevented God’s revelations and their failute to do so indicates that there is only one 
God. 


37 


The Issue of the Creator of the Universe Being One Based on 


Reason 


As for [a proof based on] teason, then the existence of the Universe 
would be based on the compromise [of the other gods], which conflicts 
with the [the very nature of] being God. A further proof [against multiple 
gods| is that what one would want, the other would not want, and 
whatever one wishes to Create, the other would not want it to exist. This 
will [result in a contradiction between wanting] its continuity and 
wanting its annihilation, and that is how [it would cause} conflict and 
conttadiction. Therefore, the existence of the Universe proves that the 
creator of the Universe is one. What we have witnessed from sovereigns 
[in the present Universe] is that they do their utmost to overcome those 
who ate similar to them, so that the strongest one [from them] can 
remain in control. Also, each one of them would try to enforce his own 
command and do everything in his ability take the kingdom for himself, 
As that did not happen [in the case of God and the Universe], and only 
the kingdom of the Majestic and Wise God was established, it stands 
established that He is the One. This is what is meant by the following 
verse [of the Holy Quran], whete it is stated “¢el/ them Muhammad, if there 
were a God besides the One God as they are claiming, then these Gods would try to 
take control.’””’ Our first explanation is demonstrated by what is meant by 
the following verse “If there would be Gods beside the one Allah, then the sky 
and earths would get destroyed.””” 


If there would be another ‘God’, he would demonstrate his wisdom by 


separating his creation from the creation of God, so that his dominion 


” Quran, Surah a/Isra (17:42) 
8 Quran, Surah a/-Anbya (21:42) 


38 


and strength would be appreciated. As this has not happened, it signifies 
that God is unique in His Divinity and His dominion. This is what is 
meant by the following verse [of the Holy Quran]; ‘9f there would he God 
beside him then each of them would take charge of what he has created” also God 
says; “Do they believe in partners of God who created as God created?’™ 


Furthermore, such a compromise signifies weakness and imprudence, 
and if this were to be the case, then none of them would have the right 
to create except by overpowering the rest of the gods and subjugating 
them [to his will] so that they were under his ownership and domain. 


And God is the one who helps. 


If there are other gods beside the One [God], then it will mean that 
[either] the gods are able to do to the other gods whatever pleases them 
[without any restriction], or they are unable to do [whatever pleascs 
them]. If each [one of the gods] can do [whatever pleases them], then 
each of them can [deceive] the others, which disproves their Divinity. If 
none of them are able to do whatever [pleases them], then it signifies 
[that] all of them are not omnipotent, and this lack of omnipotence 
disproves their Divinity. On the other hand, if only one of them can do 
to the others |whatever pleases him], then that one is God, and the 


others are created. 


Therefore, [He is] the one who has the knowledge of the Ghayb™ 
(everything) and the knowledge of Divinity. The one who does not have 


this [knowledge] is created. 


In addition, either each one of them is able to affect the others by 


stopping them from doing whatever pleases them, or he is unable to 


” Quran, Surah a/-Mua’minun (23:91) 
80 Quran, Surah ar-Ra‘d (13:16) 
8! Ghayb can mean ‘the unseen’, but in this context it is teferring to having knowledge 


of everything. 


39 


stop the others], which will prove that each one of them can be 


| 


compelled to become powerless, which signifies weakness and negates 


nis divinity. On the other hand, if only one of them is able to [affect the 


others then in that case] He wiil be God.” 


furthermore, in terms of proof from [the perspective of the] creation, if 
there were more than one God, then there would be a disruption in the 
natural processes of the Universe. For instance, the periodic change of 
the seasons such as [from] winter to summer, or the changing of the 
plants from growth to the releasing of sprouts and leaves, or the system 
of the sky and the Earth, or the rotation of the Sun, Moon and stars, or 
the [various types of] nourishments of creation, and the maintenance of 
animals. This entire process is controlled by one complete system, and 
the system cannot have more than one controller, As such, it is necessary 


that God is One. 


Moreover, another proof is from the different types of created things 
based on their variance and distance from one another, such as the sky 
[from the] Earth or the different parts of Earth [from one another]. They 
are connected such that they benefit one another. That which grows on 
the Earth receives sustenance from the sky.” The maintenance of all of 
the cities that are spread throughout the Earth,” which includes the 
livelihood of humans who ate spread [throughout the various cities] in 
a range of ways, such as by way of their different professions, which ts 


the case for all things. If there would be several Gods, then the benefits 


82 Imam Maturidi argues that it is impossible that there would be more than one God 
because then it would result in a form of compromise, which is either a compromise 
in one’s actions, power, tule or control. Any form of being stifled would mean that 
being could not be God, and the one who is not stifled is God. 

8 Such as rain benefiting the plants that grow on the Earth. 

8 Tt means that someone is maintaining all of the cities that are spread throughout the 


world, such as rain being sent for crops etc. 


AO 


of the Universe would not be mutually shared by all things in the 
Universe. This proves that He who is controlling all of it is One. 
Furthermore, the issues that I have mentioned - such as the times of the 
night and day, and the [fact that they are} connected to each other 
proportionally - this is what is most likely meant by the following vetse 
[where God states] “you do not see in the creation of God any controversy.’® In, 
addition to this, all bodies [are limited] by directions, and they are of 
different types, which are controlled by one God who controls this as 


one harmonious system, There és no strength to find the truth except by God. 


Another proof is that there is no body that carries out a range of things 
from only one perspective, such as being affected [by only] harm or 
benefit, [by only] good or evil, [by only] hardship or ease. Anything that 
is bad, from a different perspective has its good side. The rest of the 
attributes as well as [the created] things are the same, which is that 
[something] is not harmful from all perspectives nor is [anything] 
beneficial from all viewpoints. It signifies that the One who controls it 
all is the One who did not make something evil from all viewpoints nor 
did He make something good from all aspects. This indicates that these 
vatying [and conflicting] aspects of bodies cannot have come from 
themselves, nor could they have come from several sods, so that each 
god is creating one aspect of the body.” There is no strength to find the truth 
except by God. 


®° Quran, Surah a/-Mulk (67:3) 

*° Shaykh Abu Manésuir atgues that opposing aspects that come together in one body 
cannot have done so expect by one creator. Nothing in the world has only one aspect, 
such as nothing is completely good or completely bad, instead a body holds both 
opposing aspects. The fact that there ate these opposing aspects in one thing means 
that someone must have created these things together. Also these opposing aspects 


could not have been created by different gods, because then the aspect controlled by 


41 


in addition, we find that all bodies with their divergent natures coexist. 
This should not be the case and instead they should repel one another, 
because of theit contentious and contradictory natures. If they would 
have been left alone it would have resulted in [their] annihilation. This 
signifies that the one that is in control of it all is the one who unifies it 
by His Knowledge. [Also, each aspect of the body] avoiding harm from 
one aspect to the other [aspect], which is based on His perfect wisdom 
that cannot be comprehended. But if there would be several gods, this 
would result in clear conflict and contradiction, as each of them would 


try to repel the other and would attempt to display his own [specific| 


creation.”’ God 1s the grantor of success. 


Al] issues connected to monotheism and polytheism ate related to 
descriptions and actions. In terms of descriptions, if there are several 
gods, then they will be equal in terms of their Divinity, which will result 
in conflict and contention. Beating in mind that [Divinity] is [in all cases| 
the description of the One, which [in this case] some [people] are 
attributing to the many [gods]. On the other hand, they will not be equal, 
and therefore the most perfect One will have the right to Divinity. In 
terms of actions, so that is what I have [previously] explained about the 
hatmony of the Universe despite [its parts] being naturally divergent and 
contradictory, nonetheless [they] support each other to remain [in 
existence]. If it is in this mannet, then its composition with its divergent 
natures cannot be [unified] except by the Wise and Knowledgeable 


Creator, who is the One who does not contradict Tagdér (giving 


the stronger god would take precedence and as such all bodies would hold only this 
one aspect. 

8? All bodies have conflicting natures that should repel one another. The fact that they 
don’t repel and are instead unified in one body means that someone else must have 
brought them together. That creator of these bodies has to be one, as has been 


explained in the previous footnote. 


42 


everything its due worth). If the argument of Oneness is proven with 
the meaning of being unique and not the meaning of the number, then 
we should speak about God being free from anything that is similar to 
Him or opposite to Him, and that is because oneness of numbet wil] 
exclude the possibility of being in parts. If you believe that someone can 
oppose God, then it will negate His Divinity. Also, if you believe that 
someone is in His likeness, it will negate His Oneness. This is because 
all created things have something that is similar to them, as well as 
something that is opposite to them. These two things — namely similarity 
and dissimilarity, prove the possibility of annihilation and evanescence, 
and therefore negates the oneness of the created things. There is no Strength 


to find the truth except by Ged. 


God is One and does not have something similar to Him; His infinite 
existence does not have an opposite, nor will the One [God] have 
something that is equal [to Him] and that is what is meant by the verse 
“nothing ts in His similarity”.’ The basis of this argument is that anything 
which has [something that is] equivalent to it or similar to it is engaged 
under the [premise of being a] number. At a minimum there will be two 
of them and anything that is dissimilar to it will result in [its] annihilation, 
because one of the two opposites will be evanescent.” It is in this way 
that everything that has an opposite to it will disappear. Also, anything 
that has [something which is] similar to it results in it being more than 
one. Therefore, the meaning of being ‘One’ is uniqueness in Glory, 
Power, dissimilarity and not having an opposite. That is why the 
arguments of [God] being matter, body and accident are void, because 


these are the [attributes or conditions] of substances. If this argument is 


®8 Quran, Surah as-Shuraa (42:11) 
® This was also the position of the Mutazatites. For example, in his ‘Infisar’, An-Nazaam 
atgued that two opposites cannot come together in one substance by their nature, and 


if they have indeed amalgamated, then it must have been due to something else. 


a il sy? 


43 


established, [then] all of the attributes of creation will be negated from 
Him. And God helps. 


It shows the stubbornness of the Mushabayha”, and it is the reason for 
the misguidance of the ones that ate erroneous by comparing God to 
that which is present. Also, some of them considered He is a body, 
denied Him being the creator of the Universe and claimed that the 
Universe existed pre-eternally.”’ Some of them attributed change to Him 
put denied [that] He came into existence after not being, and claimed 
everything beside Him came into being after not being; and these are the 


people who believe in Hayz/a. 


Muslims however described God and denied any attribute which is 
applicable to anything besides God, because an attribute which is shared 
by others will raise the possibility of differences [and similarity] at the 
level of the essence, as well as the differences [and similarity] in the 
attributes. It will open the possibility of transformation and change due 
to either an increase or decrease [in the essence or attributes]. If it is as 
we (have explained], then it is a type of the above-mentioned thing, and 
it does not occur except by someone shaping it, making it into what it 
is, in terms of its continuity of motion and being at rest. Or it opens the 
possibility of contention and conflict, which is the calamity of existence 
and may lead to its annihilation. On the other hand, it is the existence of 
someone who is similar to Him, which would void the attribute of 
perfectness, it would bring forth the possibility of His end, as well as 
[His] limitations, which necessitates the possibility of having something 
more perfect than Him or something that is less perfect than Him, 


someone who is mote complete or less complete [than Him]. ‘These are 


 Mushabayha are a group who anthropomorphised God. ‘They also held the position 
that the Universe was pre-eternal. 


%! That there was no God and that matter is pre-etetnal. 


44 


the proofs for the Universe being originated and the proofs of its 
Creator. If one of the attributes of the Universe was that it was the 
creator [of itself], then it would not be able to bring itself into existence 
- based on the condition that if its [existence] is through itself then this 
would necessarily cause the annihilation of the Universe. This signifies 
that [the Universe] is an indication of a Wise and KKnowledgeable Creator 


who is free from things which are both similar and dissimilar to Him. 


If something is originated in all of its aspects, and if the creator were to 
have an attribute which is similar to one of these aspects, then [the 
creator] cannot be pre-eternal in that one aspect, as such the Universe 
cannot also then be originated [by the creator] in that same aspect. Also, 
in terms of similarity in all aspects, it is not possible for the creation to 
exist in that manner because then the Universe would become one and 


unique.” There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


Similarity is something which is only assumed and conceivable from one 
aspect; if God is similar to the creation from one of these aspects or 
perspectives, then [from the perspective of that| aspect it signifies God 
is like His creation.” There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


*® Shaykh Aba Manéir argues that if one aspect of God is the same as created 
substances then that would mean that God is not pre-eternal in that one aspect. If He 
is not eternal in one aspect, it means that He is not eternal in all aspects. Also, if the 
creation is the same as God in all aspects, and God is One and Unique, then this means 
that the creation is One and Unique, which is a contradiction. 

93 al-Maturidi is attempting to explain that when a person considers one thing to be 
similar to another, you begin by looking at one aspect of the similarity. For example, if 
Person A has an aquiline nose and then Person B also has an aquiline nose, they are 
similar in that one aspect, and when you draw on comparisons in order to deduce 
similarity, you begin by doing it from one perspective. When you deem that Person A 
and Person B have an aquiline nose, you ate stating that they are the same in that aspect. 


Thus, it is the same case for God and His creation: If you draw similarity in one aspect 


then in that aspect you are saying that God is similar to the creation. 


45 


kh] AbG Mansur said that as for attributing the names and 


[Shay 
Attributes to Him, this is not considered as [making] likeness [of God], 


because the nature [of these names and attributes] for the created things 
,s something that is impossible in the Essence of God. But because there 
is no other way of presenting and describing God, except in this way, 
that is why [these names are] used in [the world] amongst us [the 
creation| and it is only possible to do so in this manner. This is because 
there is no other way of knowing the absent thing except via indication 
of things that are present, such as describing [something by the 
attribute/name of] ‘Glory and ‘Prestige’, because we cannot 
comprehend something except through naming it by something that is 
present and something which we observe [in the present Universe]. Also, 
we cannot fathom being able to refer to something which we cannot 
sense and something we did not witness. But we describe [God] in such 
a way that similitude will be avoided. Thus, when we say that He is 
‘knowledgeable’ this is in no way similat to our knowledge. That is how 
we deal with the rest of the Names and Attributes by which we describe 
God.” God is the grantor of success. 


In reality, the similarity only occurs in our imagination and not by out 
tongue and language. This happens due to us knowing the similarities 
between two substances, of two people, and [two] actions; [this happens 


by imagination and not for linguistic reasons] and that 1s the actual 


4 Maturid? argues that when you name things, similarity is based on the mind as 
opposed to the words that are used. Because when we name two things with the same 
name, in our imagination they are similar. But in terms of God, He is not like anything 
in creation - so when the same name is used, it does not mean the same in its likeness. 
The reason why we use the same name is based on the customs of language, since we 
don’t have any other way of referring to something except through naming it. As such, 
it is our restriction in terms of being created that we need to use the names which we 
know based on language. ‘Therefore, we use these names with the added caveat that 


God bears no similarity to His creation. 


46 


reason for it. In this instance, that imagination is caused by [the action 
of] naming, ‘The example of this is that if things wouldn’t have a name 
by which they are known or by what they are described [we normally 
would not know them]. Also, if we knew God by His Oneness and 
believed that He is not similar to any of the existing things, even though 
He is the One, we wouldn’t have to call Him by [the words] ‘the One’, 
since calling Him by using [the name] ‘One’ can cause the misconception 
of similitude [with the creation] through using this name. There is no 


strength to find the truth except by God. 


The philosophers who rejected the names and descriptions [of God] did 
not reject the attributes {of God]. Because in reality, if anyone applies 
the meaning of the attributes, he is [doing so to avoid] the Tar#/ 
(opposing attributes), and that does not necessitate similarity’, and that 


is the issue related to the names. 


If they do not accept this, then how will they respond to the following 
questions: What do you worship? To whom do you call [for Divine 
support]? Which religion do you practice? Who is the one who ordered 
and forbade you? Who is the one who initiated the creation of the upper 
and lower universes? And by whom did everything start? [In order to 
answer these questions] they will use the meanings and words which are 
closest to being understood. Or [instead] they will join the ones who 
deny the Universe is created, or they will reject their own belief about 
the First Existing Thing, that it is the Mind or the initial existing thing 
ot the initial [super being] or the rest of the names given to the [Creatoy]. 


This causes corruption, leads to imprudence and causes the denial of 


» This is because the position is that we one can describe God by His Attributes 
without ascribing any similarity. One cannot describe the Essence of God, as God 
cannot be comprehended. Therefore, describing God in this manner was considered a 


form of avoiding similarity. 


47 


pmnething that describes [a] metaphysical being. There 2s no strength to find 


Ae truth except by God. 


48 


Refutation of Those who Dispute our Teachings on 


Epistemology” 


We have to mention some of the critiques which are addressed by people 
who are trapped by Satan, those who are denying very obvious 
knowledge. [These people are] trapped by their falsehood and the 
delusions of their enemy and not because God did not provide enough 


evidence. There zs no strength to find the truth except by God. 


We say Satan has trapped the people who deny the senses, by being 
mistaken in their assumption, which causes them to be obstructed from 
their submission to God. [They are using weak] proofs [such as proofs 
related to] a person who has a defect in his eye, ot one who is confused 
in his dreams or because of [looking at something from a] long distance 
ot when [the angle of vision is] too sharp to see properly. But the trap 
of Satan does not work on this person [proffering these arguments] 
when it comes to the enjoyments [of life] and stopping himself from 
falling into these [enjoyments], and it does not work on him to prevent 
him from [being hurt by] harmful substances. [The abandonment of the 
authenticity of sensory knowledge] does not [stop him from] protecting 
himself from [being burnt by] fire or sinking in the sea. But if he would 
be truthfully imprudent [sceptical] he would not remain alive. And he 


would fall into the danger [of starvation] by not eating food. This proves 


°6 This chapter seems out of place and would have had better flow if it had been placed 
earlier in the book where al-Matutidi writes about epistemology and sources of 
knowledge. This could be due to an error in transcription from the students who were 
transcribing the content. Or it could be that ‘Twwhid’ was never meant to be a ‘book’ 
and instead these were notes from lectures from Shaykh Aba Man§gar that were later 
collated into a book by his students. Less likely is that this was the intended positioning 
of the chapter by Maturid? as he felt it was important to re-address the topic because it 


was an important issue during his time. 


49 


he made his claim only because he loves hedonism and is inclined 
towards caprtices and what he has mentioned as a proof [against sensory 


knowledge] is of itself a proof that he [actually] believes in the knowledge 


of the senses. 


According to [out opinion], we say with regards to eyesight, the person 
with an eye defect, someone who is dreaming, and the [person] who 
cannot see clearly due to [viewing something from a lengthy] distance or 
due to the small dimension of the object, then that person cannot teach 
certainty, [specifically] certainty by eyesight. But when these obstacles 
[which block accurate vision] are dispelled, he will gain that [certainty]. 


The certainty which is gained by healthy vision cannot be denied.” 


As for people who accept visual information as well as their observations 
but deny transmission (&Aabr) by using the proof that people may lie, as 
well as the proof that although a transmission may be significantly 
widespread, we sometimes nonetheless find out it was a lie, [then we 
respond that] we know that pleasant things are proven by transmission 
and an intelligent person would not put himself in [a position] to test if 
the substance actually gives him joy. The same is said of harm from the 
harmful things which he has not tested [for himself] before; no one will 
put themselves in danger to test this but yet we know this by 


transmission.”* The rest of the things which benefit or harm bodies as 


*7 a|-Maturidi is explaining that perceiving something based on a defect in the senses is 
not a flaw in the information acquired based on healthy senses which are normally 
accurate, but instead it is rather something that blocks the senses from acquiting true 
information. Defective sight perceives things differently, such as man who sees things 
in his dreams that do not exist in reality. When these obstacles are removed, the true 
nature of the thing is revealed. 

** For example, a person would not drink poison in order to test its potency to kill, as 
we are aware of the fact that it kills based on the transmission we have received from 


others. 


50 


well as their lives are known by testimony. ‘That proves they are denying 
testimony only because of the prohibitions from enjoyments [that ate 
religiously prohibited]. This group has been deceived by Satan as other 
groups }were also deceived] and what we said about the other category 
can be found also in this category. The reason some of the transmissions 
have falsehood contained within them is because of a defect in the 
person carrying these transmissions [as opposed to the transmission 
itself]. Or otherwise, many transmissions ate well known as being 
truthful. Thus, we have to use some proof to find out whether a 
transmission is true or false, as neither side is given priority. God is the 


grantor of success. 


{astead you can act with them harshly, by beating them to cause pain” 
so they will be compelled to accept that they actually believe in 
knowledge that cannot be gained [by any other avenue] except by 
testimony.'”” As for the people who accept the knowledge of the senses 
and transmission but deny the intellect, we respond to them that there 


are a list of worldly benefits and expected results which cannot be known 


® Once again, Shaykh Abi Man§ur is obviously making his statement tongue-in-cheek 
as opposed to saying that one should literally hit one’s ideological opponents, again 
mocking his opponents by saying that he could administer sound thrashing and they 
would neither feel it (since they deny that pain has any reality since it is from the sense 
of touch) and nor could they complain about him since that involves transmission and 
they themselves would not believe anyone’s transmission. 

‘©? Tam not able to fully determine the point al-Maturidi is attempting to make, because 
by threatening someone, one can argue that it may give one an indication of his true 
belief - that he accepts information that is gained by way of the senses. But in terms of 
the reliability of testimony, this cannot be proven in this manner, and in fact evidence 
suggests that testimony gained through torture is unreliable. On the other hand, he 
could mean that a person will transmit that he is in pain due to the thrashing, which 
shows that in reality he accepts the validity of transmission, as he is transmitting that 
he is in pain to the other person. There is also a possibility that there is a flaw in the 


text, and it means ‘senses’ as opposed to ‘transmission’. 


51 


by the senses and transmission and can only be known through analogy. 
Besides the fact that the genuineness of testimony and its falsehood can 
only be known by analysis, we ask such a person about those things that 
cannot be known by the senses, ‘how would you know them?’ If he says 
by testimony, then we ask him ‘how do you know that the testimony is 
true or false?’ And the same method is applicable to his knowledge of 
the benefits and harms which must be avoided, considering the fact that 
the use of analogy is necessaty about those things that you see or hear, 
[so that you may] know the source of the Universe and its origination. 
In fact, there is nothing that stops one [from gaining knowledge] from 
analogy, ttansmission ot the senses. He will [fall into the contradiction 
of] using analogy to refute analogy. There 2s no strength to find the truth esccept 
by God. 


Indeed, a human or a fire or anything else which is scen only once, 
cannot be known except by analysing the [related] issues which are 
known by observing those things. But if one does not use the 
[mechanism of] analogy, this will necessitate that one would not build 
on that [acquired] information. Also, he wouldn’t accept the testimony 
of anyone because he doesn’t have any proof that this person giving the 
transmission is one from whom testimony [would or would not 
notmally] be accepted. So all of this is necessarily known by analogy. 


There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


52 


Deducing That Which is Present From That Which is Absent 


[Shaykh] Abu Mansur stated that people differed as to the Dalalah'' 
(signification) of the Shahid (present) from the Gha’th (absent).'” Some 
people have posited that [the present thing] is like the [absent thing}, 
This is because the [the present] is an As/™ (root) for that which is 
absent, and the A./ (root) does not differ from its branch.’ In addition 
to that, the way of knowing the absent is by [knowing] the present; 
because when one uses analogy, it is to equate the thing to its equal. [By 
way of this reasoning] they have established the pre-eternity of the 
Universe, for the present signifies or points to its likeness. So then, the 
one that is absent from it has come to know it too. Then, [the present] 
always indicates or points to its likeness before it; and in that is the 


necessity of the pre-eternity of everything [according to them].' 


Some of them argued that there is no [specific] time that is presumed to 
be the start of the Universe, but there is some other time that [has an 


equal possibility of being presumed to be the start of the Universe]. As 


‘1 An analogical method that is used in various fields of study to detive unknown 
knowledge from the known facts. In the field of Figh Islamic Jurisprudence) we have 
the As/ (foundation, root or known) and the Far’ (branch or unknown). In theology 
there is Shabid (known) and Gha2b (unknown) as well as Ma’lam (known) and Majhul 
(unknown). In Philosophy and logic there is Mugaddimah (premise or known) and 
Matlub (sought or unknown). 

'™ al-Maturidi used many logical methods of proof to present his position, one of 
which is using the analogy of the present for the absent (Qayas a/Gha’ib ‘Ala-l-Shabid) 
103 _45/ can be translated as ‘foundation’, ‘known’ or ‘root’. 

The foundational principles of an issue do not differ to the secondary branches that 
are linked to it. 

' The basis of Imam Maturidi’s argument is that if we were to know the attribute of 


the present thing and the absent thing were to have the same quality, then the thing 


that is absent is similar to the thing that is present. 


22 


such, making any such [presumption] and limiting [the start] time [to a 


specific point] is invalid. 


(‘The present] indicates the likeness of [the absent] as well as that which 
ig different from it, even the more obviously different thing.'"’This is 
because of the fact that whoever sees something of the Universe, that 
something indicates that it is [either] pre-eternal or originated; and that 
both the pre-eternity and the origination are neither its likeness nor its 
equal. Then, [in the same way] it indicates that either it had a creator ot 
that it came into existence by itself; and both of these two [possibilities] 
are different from it. This also indicates the wisdom of its creator or 
[His] imprudence, or either to its choice or predetermined nature. All of 
this is different to what he sees, and it docs not mean that there is 
likeness to it. If that were to be the case it would be necessary to imagine 
that anyone who sees himself, sees the whole world to be like himself, 
which is quite far from being the case. As such, it is established that 
substances ate not realised in their likeness to an absent thing. Only one 
aspect is realised as we have just mentioned. But if you know the quality 
of the present and you ate informed that the quality belongs to an absent 
thing as well, you will know then that tt is like [the thing that is present], 
but not that it is essentially like it. It is permissible, then, that [the 
present] is like [the absent| in this manner. For example, because he 
[possesses] knowledge of body and fire, he will have knowledge of all 
bodies and fires, even though he did not see them [all].""’ There is no 


strength to find the truth except by God. 


'06 Tt is clear that Imam Maturidi had some access to the Greek books of logic, hence 
him using analogical principles and relating the ideas of the Greeks - and later 
mentioning Aristotle by name. 

107 Al Maturidi is arguing that our knowledge of fire and substances is based on our 


knowledge of previous things, which is obtained by deduction. Therefore, he argues 


54 


In terms of what has been claimed about the As/ (root) and Far’ (branch) 
— they have been inverted because of the [alleged] existence of the pre- 
eternal [Universe] and [its} pre-eternity, But [the fact that] nothing elge 
existed would indicate |this to not be the case]. That is why you cannot 
make |the pre-eternal] a Far’ branch but instead it is the As/ (root), as 
this [Universe] existed in this manner. Furthermore, anything whose 
existence relies on something [other than itself] is different based on 
reason from the substance [upon which it depends]. ‘This can be 
observed [in the present Universe, in things] such as buildings [which 
differ from the builder], writings [which differ from the writer], and the 
vatious types of actions and statements that differ from [the person or 
thing that| brought them into existence. They cannot be similar in 
substance nor description to the thing due to which they exist, and this 
analogy is used for the Universe [and the Creator] - even though in 
reality, it is possible to prove [the existence of something] that cannot 
be sensed, and that which the senses cannot comprehend, such as 
hearing, seeing, the soul, the intellect, the ego and the many other things 


[that cannot be sensed].'” 


In terms of that which can be sensed, such as corporeal bodies, if they 
[originated] from a pre-eternal substance, it would be necessary that [this 
pre-eternal substance] produced a substance that is similar to it in all of 
its aspects, such as the intellect [of the pre-eternal substance being 


similar to the] intellect [that it produces], [and it is the same case for] 


that denying this deduction is actually the denial of knowledge, The Mutazalites also 
hold the position of using the present for the absent. 

"8 Imam Maturidi argues that people incorrectly believe that that which is visible 
always indicates something which is either the same or similar in the unseen. So they 
are taking that which is seen as the root and make the analogy to the unseen which 


they incorrectly deem the branch. 


55 


pearing and seeing,'” But in reality this is not the case; the originating 
thing and that which is produced from it cannot be the same. As such, 
if they are different, this indicates one existing after not existing. If the 
difference [between the two] is accepted, this dispels the possibility of 
the thing that is described as pre-eternal having knowledge or other 
[determining atttibutes}. This proves the Creatio ex Nehilo of the Universe 


by someone who is not similar to [the Universe]. 


Further to this, writing indicates that there is a writer, but it does not 
describe his qualities or similitude, in terms of being an angel, human ot 
Jinn. Therefore, writing does not signify the essence of the writer, nor 
his quality, nor is it his likeness. Writing can indicate any possible writer. 
Such is the case with the Universe and everything [that is contained 
within] it. [The Universe] and what is contained within it indicates a 
creator but it does not signify His quality or His Essence.''” It is the same 
with building, transcription, ships and the rest of the professions. 
Therefore, analogy is necessary in order to prove the creator of the 
Universe, to analyse the Universe with all of the wonders that are 
contained within it and things whose coming into existence cannot be 
but by the Wise and Knowledgeable One. However, these things do not 
desctibe His quality or His Essence. There is no strength to find the trath 
except by God. 


Shaykh Aba Manéir stated that the indication from the Universe is that 


it differs in a number of ways. [The fact that it is] changing and 


09 This is because they are being produced by the substance and more than that they 
are ‘coming’ from that substance and as such it would produce something that has 
semblance to it. 

0 al Maturidi means that when we see a letter, it signifies that a writer exists, but it 
does not give an indication as to the nature of the writer, and it is in the same manner 
that the existence of the Universe means that a creator exists, but it does not provide 


any indication to God’s nature. 


56 


evanescent, that opposing natures come together in one substance at the 
same time, indicates that it is not pre-eternal and that it existed after not 
existing. Its benightedness about its own origins, its inability to repair 
itself when parts of it are damaged, indicates that it did not come into 
existence by itself. Furthermore, [the fact that] opposing parts [within 
the Universe] amalgamate following the same harmonious system, 
indicates that the Maker of the Universe is [God]. Also this harmonious 
co-existence of the conflicting parts proves His Qudra (Power/ Will, His 
Wisdom and His Knowledge. It is in this manner that the various 
differing aspects of the Universe indicate [that there is a Creator]. 
Therefore, the proof [for the existence] of the Creator is the inability of 
the creation. The indication of His Knowledge is the harmony of the 
Universe as well as its benightedness o7s-a-ws itself. It is due to this that 
the indicatton [of Shahid (present) to Gha’ib (absent)] is based on 


differences and not on their equality. 


[The fact that one is] necessarily in need proves the existence of another 
[who is not in need]. It is not possible that this other has a need for 


another, as this would result in infinite ‘others’, and that is impossible." 


And God knows best. 


'M Shaykh Aba Mansir is using the well-known infinite regress argument. 


5/7 


The Refutation of Those Who Profess the Eternity of the 


Universe 


[Shaykh] Abu Man&ur stated that the arguments of the people who claim 
the Universe is pre-eternal are as follows: [All] bodies come from one 
another without there being a starting [point]. They are free from any 
maker that originated them, as this is what we have observed [up until 
this point], and what we see now is proof of what has occurred in the 
past; as such it is also necessary to apply this to those things that we have 
not observed. The reason for this is because if in humans and bodies 
what we observe results in the opposite of what we do not witness, then 


He shich i @ 


it will prove the existence of the Maga/ (non-body), 
conclusion based on an error in the imagination, a defect in the analysis, 
and the sign of an absent [mind]. The example of this is related to the 
nature of Time, because its appearance is dependent on a time that 
precedes it. To posit that Time was originated in time results in wa /a 
nihayah labu (Ad Infinitum) which is impossible. As such, if Time is pre- 


eternal then [the Universe is] also eternal.” 


\2 The argument of those who profess that the Universe is pre-eternal is that based on 
observation that we know that a body comes from another body, which comes from 
another, and so there is no statt point. Furthermore, what is true for our current 
observation is true pre-eternally, and therefore the Universe must have come from 
another body rather than be originated from nothing. In addition, if we deny proof 
based on observation, then it is only based on our observations that we know of bodies 
and humans and if one could ignore observation and posit the opposite, then one could 
argue for the existence of non-bodies. 

3 Ip this section, al-Matutidi begins by presenting a number of proofs of the 
philosophers, one of which is related to the nature of time, Time occurs as a series, as 
such there is no time in the present that did not have a time that preceded it, and dhat 
time cannot be without one that preceded it Ad Infinitum, which is impossible. Which 


means that if time is pre-eternal, then the Universe ts also pre-eternal. 


58 


Furthermore, some of them believe that things exist through something 
else, without having a start [which was caused] by the Wise Creator. They 
stated this as a reason for the Universe existing, as it is impossible that 
there would be an effect without a cause.''* This results in the following 
possibility," which is that the entity that is causing the specific thing to 
exist does not have Power and Majesty, indicating being in need and 
unable. On the other hand, it has both of the attributes fof Power and 
Majesty], as such it becomes necessary that something created it, who is 
able to express His Majesty, and is necessary for everything [to exist], 
which demonstrates their misconception which we have mentioned [in 


the previous patagtaphs]. 


In addition, some of them believe in the pre-eternity of the Hayzla''6 
(Prime Matter), which they claim is the foundation of everything, and 


the beginning of all things is due to [this Hayz/a]. 


[Shaykh] Abu Mansar said [that] as we have mentioned [when we refuted 
their argument] about a thing coming from another thing, some of them 
responded by [presenting their idea of] the pre-eternity of the Haydla, 
[They posit that] the First Matter |Haya/a] transformed [and] everything 


"4 The text states that ‘it is impossible for there to be a cause with no effect. This is a 
clear error made by the transcriber. I have cortected the error in the translation to read 
‘it is impossible there would be an effect without a cause’. 

"5 Philosophers also argue that something that is pre-eternal has the possibility of 
having come from the Creator. But in addition to this, because there cannot be an 
effect without a cause, and because the cause is pre-eternal, then the effect which is the 
Universe is also pre-eternal. 

"16 _Ashab al- Hayrila hold the belief that the entire Universe came from Prime Matter 
(Hayala), which is matter without size or shape: it is neither an accident nor substance; 
it has no qualities and is infinite in quantity, All of the fundamental building blocks of 
the Universe, which includes all substances and their accidents, all types of change, 
cause and effect etc, are then caused by a dormant power (Quwwa) which comes from 


within this ptime matter. 


ao 


originated from it. Then these things affected each other, and then this 
First Matter became evanescent las it no longer remained], such as what 
happens with the sperm [in relation to the human] and the egg [in 
welation to the chicken].""’ Some of them believe that the change in the 
Prime Matter occurred because of some incident that affected it Jand] as 
such it transformed into a varying, conflicting and conforming nature; 
whilst some of them believe that this change occutted because of a 
Creatot. Others claimed [that] the Foundational Matter known as Hayzla 


[acted independently]. 


Shaykh Abu Manéur said that their claim lies in the denial of that which 
they are unable to imagine or comprehend. This is because generally 
[speaking] whatever exists [in the present Universe] is not thus [i.e. 
created from nothing] and therefore they are unable to envision the 
possibility of the opposite of this occurring. As such, it should be said 
to [them]: ‘Do you perceive in your mind the rejection of that which is 
not represented in the soul?! If he answers ‘Yes’, he is atrogant because 
of our sharing with him the perception not to reject all things which we 
cannot perceive. If, however, he says ‘No’, we apply Taqdir (assumption), 


then he should be asked: ‘When can one perceive in his mind the pte- 


7 The philosophers argue that everything that is in existence is so through the process 
of transformation; something transforms from its initial state in such a manner that the 
initial state is no longer in existence - such as when a sperm transforms into aman, the 
spetm no longer exists. Thus, anything that actually exists had a potential existence 
from which it originated. In this manner, the Universe had its potential existence in the 
Hayiila, ftom which its actual existence originated; the Hayzila then ceased to exist. 

118 al-Maturidi is arguing that the premise of rejecting something on the basis that you 
did not observe it is flawed. This is because there are many things whose reality we 
accept despite the fact that we have not observed them or there are things whose 
existence we accept even if we cannot comprehend their form of existence. An 
example of this is the soul; we do not know what the soul represents, we do not know 
its makeup or whete it exists (despite there being certain theories about it), but we still 


accept that it exists even if we have not ‘observed? it. 


60 


eternity of something or its survival after it has disintegrated, or jg 
becoming that which the eye does not see?’ He might affirm all of this, 
despite the fact that it is not represented in the soul, while he denies 
hearing and seeing the course of a simple atom of food and the 
generation of the power of different atoms of hearing, seeing, cognition, 


hands, legs etc.'" 


We respond that if the entirety of time is coming ftom another thing 
then that can only happen in the following instances: One option is that 
the subsequent thing was camouflaged [and physically contained] within 
the preceding thing and then it appeared, which is impossible, Similarly, 
it is not possible that the entitety of humankind and trees wete 
camouflaged [and physically contained in their entirety] within the 
Flayala. [Another option] is that all aspects of humanity were 
camouflaged within the water which was [from the loins off the fitst 
[father], and that one thing [namely the sperm] will be enough to include 
an inestimable number of humans, and this atgument cannot be 
accepted based on reason as well as vigorous analysis. This proof refutes 
their claim that a thing comes from a preceding thing because all of 
[humanity] did not come from one sperm, nor can they claim that [the 
fact that an increase in the size of individual humans] occurs due to the 
[consumption of] food, because there is a time when the bones [of 
people] stop growing, even though they continue to [consume] the same 
foods. On the other hand it could be that thete is an inctease in only 


some substances, as it can be that some substances can increase in 


ee ee 
"9 Maturidi is making the areument that even though there are things in the present 
£ gu g g Pp 


Universe which we cannot perceive by our senses, we know they exist based on reason. 
As such it refutes the argument that everything we observe in the Universe comes into 
existence from something else and therefore it is the same case for the Universe, This 
is because one is able to imagine the possibility that God created the Universe from 
nothing. 


certain 


61 


creatures [by eating certain foods], but other creatures will eat 
jrhe same type of food| all their lives, but the [same amount of increase] 
will not occur. Such as [we have a wide variety of] animals that eat from 
the leaves of the mulberry tree or from dates, but the waste [products] 
of these animals differ, which signifies that it is not just the foods that 
are causing the effect. Furthermore, foods are dead substances, so their 
effect can only be by the knowledgeable Creator, because none of 
ffoods’| effect occurs without them being designed in this manner." 


This [discussion] proves our argument." 


Another option is that only some of the subsequent thing is as a result 
of the preceding thing; which signifies that the entirety of the subsequent 
thing was not within the preceding thing. It stands established that the 
Universe is originated because a part of it was originated. Further, we 
ask them that if everything which is observable in the present world, and 
which you have assumed to be the proof of the Universe, is finite, then 
why is it not possible that the rest of the Universe is also finiter Jf it is 
possible that something can come into existence from something which 
is finite and its whole is not, why then is it not possible that something 


comes into existence from something which is not its whole? In the same 


120 a|-Matutidi is arguing that an increase, whether it is due to length, weight etc, is not 
based on nature but instead God is the ultimate cause of everything. Two people may 
eat the same food, yet the result is different, as one grows taller or gains more weight. 
Therefore, the effect of the cause not being exactly the same in all instances means that 
God is the cause of all things. He further adds to this by stating that things which have 
no life cannot cause this variation in the result. Please see the next footnote for al- 
Matutidi’s underlying principle on this issue. 

121 Matutidi holds in terms of the relationship between cause and effect, that based on 
observation, it seews like the effect the result of the apparent cause but in reality, 1t 1s 
God that causes the effect. Therefore, when someone brings fire and paper together, 
the effect is that the paper burns - but it is actually God that is causing the paper to 


butn. So it is seen that al-Maturidi follows Occasionalism. 


62 


mannet, we see parts [of the Universe] being space for other parts, but 
they cannot bear to be space for the whole due to the excessive weight,!22 
In all of this lies the necessity of otigination.'* There is no strength to fing 


the truth except by God. 


In terms of the assumption that a thing comes into existence after the 
thing which precedes it, this necessitates origination. If there is no 


beginning, then there can be nothing [that exists]. 


Furthermore, if it is possible that the whole or the foundation of the 
Universe can be detached from the occurred incident, then it means that 
on the basis of reason anything is possible, [which means that it can be] 
simultaneously animate and inanimate. This signifies that its origination 
cannot be separate from the whole. There is no strength to find the truth except 
by God. 


Shaykh [Abu Mansur] said that as for this issue being beyond the 
capacity of reason and being such that it cannot be comprehended, then 
this issue has been explained. ‘This is a deficiency in the intellect of those 


people who do not apply reason, because they are attempting to 


'2 In the original Arabic text the supplication was placed here and the following 
sentence was after the supplication and in the next paragraph. It has been adjusted for 
better flow and so that there is no break in the point that is being articulated. 

'** al-Maturidi is explaining that if his opponents believe that only a patt of the 
Universe is finite, then this means that this part is originated, because something 
originated cannot be eternal. Furthermore, if a part of a thing is originated then the 
whole is originated, because something that is pte-eternal and something that is 
otiginated cannot simultaneously co-exist. In addition, we know that within the 
Universe a part of its space contains other originated things and hence that specific 
space cannot contain another thing from within the Universe, because the dimensions 
and limits of that space already contain the already existing thing. lor example, within 
the Universe the space that contains the planet Earth; that specific space cannot 
contain anything clse due to its dimensions, limits, and finitude, which demonstrates 


the finiteness of part of the Universe, and if the part is finite then the whole is finite. 


63 


understand something with their senses which in itself cannot be sensed. 
J is the same as one who is unable to distinguish sounds using [his| 
vision of to distinguish colours by hearing. [The same can be said for| 
any other thing which is recognised by using a specific sense, but 
| [instead] one wants to identify it by using an unrelated sense and one is 
anable [to do so]. This example is {similar to that which] cannot be 
recognised by any of the senses, but he is attempting to identify it [with 
his senses]; however, based on teason he is unable to comprehend it. 
The same tesponse is given to those who [posit that| things come from 
that which cannot be comprehended by teason. There is another answer 
to the two positions, which is that if by comprehension it is referring to 
an existence that requires approval, and that [approval] is necessary [for 
its existence], then we do not accept that which is not similar [to what 
we have observed].'** However, if by that it is referring to the likeness 
of God, then God is not [similar to anything]. In fact, He is the One 


who created the things which are similar to one another. 


Another proof for the origination of the Universe is the possibility of 
life existing in that which is dead. This is because it has life after it not 
existing, and it is living after having [the potentiality] of life within it. 
However, because it lives [due to the actualisation of the potentiality], 


then this signifies that the life of things [that are actualised] is originated, 


124 al-Matutidi is explaining the issue of trying to comprehend something that you have 
not observed with the senses. If one is attempting to argue that the Untverse has come 
from something that cannot be comprehended, then al-Maturidi explains that if this 
thing needs the approval of another (meaning God) for its existence, then we do not 
accept that it is not like that which we have observed, such as the case with Hayzla 
(Prime Matter), where its description cannot be understood based on what we have 
observed, but it needs approval from God for its existence. But if it is God then it is 


accepted that God cannot be comprehended and is not similar to creation. 


64 


‘This is because death comes after 


and their death is in the same vein. 
life!?° Shaykh [Aba Mansur] said that as for the statement of the people 
who say that God is the cause of the Universe, if by that they mean that 
He is like that due to the necessity of His nature, then that is absurd 
because of the fact that it will necessitate [that God] is compelled [to 
act|,'°’ because whoever possesses such an attribute [then] it is not 
possible for him to be the Creator of the Universe. On the other hand, 
the Universe is divergent, while the one who has natural necessities is of 


a certain fixed kind. But |if the Naturalists] mean by [that statement] that 


> Here Imam Maturid? is using the Aristotelian argument for the proof for the 
existence of God; that things have the potentiality of life and it is only when this 
potentiality ts actualised that they come into existence. In the Aristotelian argument 
there needs to be something outside of the chain of potentials that are actualised, that 
itself does not need to be actualised, which is God 

6 He is arguing that the temporal nature of the Universe is proved by the possibility 
of life existing in non-living matter, because it has life after it not existing, and it is now 
living after once having only the possibilty of life within it, proving that living things are 
temporal just as those things that are non-living - because things are moving from life 
to death, demonstrating their temporal nature, 

127 Maturidi is rejecting the possibility that the Universe is created naturally without 
intention. The Naturalists believe that the Universe is made up of the Four Elements: 
Fire, Earth, Air and Water. Maturidi argues that their idea is flawed for the following 
teasons; these elements are naturally caused and ate compelled to act based on that 
which is naturally caused, According to the Naturalists, other than that which has been 
naturally caused by these elements, everything else can increase or decrease or be 
reduced to neutral, and therefore according to al-Maturidi these elements cannot be 
the cause of the Universe but instead there must be a Creator who is not compelled to 
act based on the natural laws of the Universe. The naturally caused elements will only 
affect those things that they are naturally made to effect and therefore will not affect 
those things that it is not in their nature to. Furthermore, there cannot be things that 
have been affected but there is no cause, thus there must be someone who combines 
the effect of natural and non-natural causes, and the combiner of these two aspects is 
God. (In this footnote T have explained arguments that have been made by al-Matutidi 
later in the book against the Naturalists, so that the reader understands the scope of 


the point that is being made). 


65 


God] has created [the Universe], [then] that is correct but calling Him 


ecessitates the coming into existence [of a thing] after not [existing]. 


[on that basis] is incorrect. The notion of [God being the cause] 
n 
“his is based on the following reasons: The first is Tanagud (mutual 
contradiction), which is that if there is non-existence, then there is the 
need for someone to bring it into existence, and that is the proof for |the 
existence] to be a necessary accident. The second is the coming into 
existence of the entirety of the Universe [by someone], and it is known 
that {something| Creatio ex Nihilo comes into existence after it did not 
[exist]. The third is that [if the Universe was created from pre-cternal 
matter], it would be necessary to assume that it was simultaneously in a 
state of amalgamation and separation, motion and rest, life and death - 
and in all of these there is a contradiction. Therefore, it is established 
[that the relationship between God and the Universe| is that of 
succession, [God] being the first and [the Universe] the second, in that 


order.’ There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


[Shaykh] Aba ManSur stated that we believe that God is Pre-eternal, 
Knowing, Powerful, Acting and Benevolent in such ways that are sound 
to reason. ‘Therefore God is pre-eternal in the way that by His act He 
brings a thing into existence at its appropfiate time, in the manner that 
itis correct to describe Him as having no need for creation and as being 
the Creator in His self-sufficient existence, as well as to refrain from the 
notion that His ability to create was originated. This is known by 
) observing the will and knowledge of those things that did not exist but 


then later came into existence. It is similar in terms of Power, Will and 


28 Tn terms of Shaykh Aba Man§ut’s statement that God is the first and Universe is 
the second, he is not referring to numerical succession, as he has explained previously 
that God is not numerically ‘one’ but instead it is tefers to God being the Unique 


Creator and the second refers to the creation coming from the One. 


66 


Benevolence, as well as what has been mentioned previously. There is no 


strength to find the truth except by God 


Purthermore, it is common for one to make an assumption based On 
theit comprehension, [such as when one observes] an elderly person, 
one may assume that he was always in [this state] but [in reality that wag 
hot the case]. Similarly for motion and rest, amalgamation and 
separation; if one were to state that it is not possible, then it is in the 
same vein that origination occurring pre-eternally is also not possible, 


Lhere is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


In terms of the people who believe in two gods, namely Darkness and 
Light and yet still believe in the pre-eternity of the Universe, they in fact 
have a stronger basis to deny its [pre-eternity], as they posit that the 
Darkness and the Light were sepatate and later mingled, and therefore 
the Universe came into existence due to their mixing. However, it is 
accepted that the process of mixing is known to be originated, since 
before mixing they were separate, and at that time they were not called 


‘the Universe’.'” God is the grantor of success. 


However, they say that the Darkness and the Light were two separate 
substances that mixed [such that they moved] but before that they had 
occupied theit own [respective] places. In the place of Light was all that 
was good and in the place of Darkness was all that was evil. ‘The fact 
that they [later] mixed negates belief in the pre-eternity of Universe. 


Significantly, it not only refutes the doctrine of the pte-eternity of the 


"29 Shaykh Abt Mansur is refuting the argument of the Dualists who also argued for 
the pre-eternity of the Universe. They held that there were two originators of the 
Universe, that Good and Evil are diametrically opposite and thus they cannot be from 
the same entity, Hence, one of these gods is the originator of all things that are Good 
in the Universe and the other god is responsible for everything that is Evil. They 
considered it to be impossible for a good and merciful God to be responsible for the 


evil and destruction in the world. 


67 


Universe but even more so it refutes the statement of al-Mani'” where 
ie argues that when the Light saw the Darkness penetrate it and mixing 
nto it, the Light created this Universe in order to separate the parts of 
Light from the parts of Darkness. Therefore, according to this 
statement, this Universe came into existence after the mixing [of the 
Darkness and the Light], which happened through its origination, after 
the inability of the Light, at the apex of its strength when it possessed of 
all of its assets and all its goodness, but despite this it was unable to 
defend itself from the penetration of the Darkness. When [the Light| 
was penettated and unable to escape [from the Darkness], its 
benightedness became evident. They then claimed [that the Light| 
created this Universe in order to separate its parts, after it had been 
confined by the Darkness, which is absurd. ‘They believe [in] and give 
supremacy to [the Light], which they claim contains all that is good and 
initiates goodness and knowledge, despite the fact that [in reality it was] 
ignorant as we have explained. They believe in its good, tts majestic 
strength, even though it was unable to protect itself [from the Darkness] 
at the apex of its own strength. Furthermore, if [goodness] is the creator 
of the Universe, then why is the majority of the Universe evil? So [it 
allegedly] created this evil in order to free itself from the confines of evil, 
as such, by doing so it supported evil and Darkness, as it then increased 
the parts of the Darkness which were in the parts of the Light when it 
created the Universe, so in those parts of the Universe [the Light was} 
destroyed and became even more confined. There is no strength to find the 


truth except by God. 


30 Mani was born in western Persia and lived approximately 210-276 AD. He was 
considered a prophet by Manicheanism, which was a religion in ancient Persia. Most 
of his writings have been lost despite the fact that he has been discussed in the books 
of many Muslim philosophers and theologians such Alberonius. Manicheanism teaches 


dualism, whete the two natures of Light and Darkness have existed since the beginning. 


68 


[Shaykh] Aba Mansur said that the Thanawees'' disagreed on the 
meaning of ‘mixing’. Some said that it was the Darkness that mixed Iwith 
the Light] but even then they [also] disagreed [in the specifics of the 
issue]. Some of them attributed [the mixing to] a deliberate act whilst 
others denied this and believed that [the mixing of the Light and 
Darkness] occurred naturally, [that the Darkness] is dense and shielded 
whereas the Light is thin and attached [and that] it was due to this that 
the Light fell into the Darkness and they mixed. Some of them also say 
that the mixing occurred [solely] because of the Light. But all of these 
positions are absurd and how do they know [that to be the case]? Initially 
the Darkness and the Light were changing and transforming, with 
[everything having] an equal possibility of being a part of good ot evil, 
and that which is beneficial or harmful. If the both of them ate 
considered as a part of the Universe, then it comes into existence due to 
its own existence, and it will be annihilated due to its own annihilation, 
This signifies that neither of them can be God, because the both are not 
omnipotent and are ignorant. The [existence] of the Universe proves the 
Wise, Knowing and Majestic [Creator]. ‘The [issue of the] Darkness and 
Light also proves this point. 


Furthermore, if neither of them can produce the [evidence] which 
proves them [to be God then] both of them are originated and are not 
the Creator. In addition, the proof that both of them are not created by 
one [of them] is that there is nothing which by its substance is good and 
so no evil comes from it, nor is there anything which [by its substance] 
is bad so that no good comes from it, which signifies that it is not 


possible they were created by [either] one [of them]. In addition, when 


‘8! In terms of the Dualists, not all of them held the same view and there were a number 


of different doctrines held by the various groups of Dualists. An example of this are 


the Thanawees who disagreed on what is meant by the two entities merging together. 


69 


it [Primal Light or Dark] is in the process of mixing, it is neither positive 
nor negative. In the instance when it is positive then it means that it is 
coming from Darkness, which means that good will be coming from 
Darkness [or Evil]. Thus, it will negate their belief in two gods, because 


their position is that Evil does not create Good, and nor does Good 


create Evil. On the other hand, it is Evil, so Good is sharing its 


[existence with it] and so then it also became Evil. 


If this mixing is initiated by the Light, then both options are present 
(namely, whether the occurrence was a deliberate act or natural]. 
Furthermore, if they were separate from one another and then they 
[were later] mixed, then their mixing will occur in one of the following 
ways: That they are mixed in their [essential] substance but they remain 
different in their substance - which is paradoxical because if that is 
possible then it is [also] possible for [substances to be simultaneously] in 


motion but still at rest, alive but still dead, standing but still sitting,” 


Another argument that counters the belief that something can be 
separate and then mix on its own is the fact that the accidents by which 
substances change can only exist via something else. Therefore, it is in 
this manner that amalgamation and separation [occur]. This proves that 
they were amalgamated due to some other thing, and it was also due to 
this other thing that they wete initially separate, which signifies that they 
are otiginated. ‘They believe that it is prohibited to sactifice, but in fact 
[their own premise] dictates that they have a stronger reason to accept 


its permissibility. This is because the act of slaughtering separates the 


12 The argument being made is that two opposing accidents cannot occur in the same 
substance at the same time. Consequently, when something is mixed it no longer 
remains as its previous two separate entities. For example, when you mix the colours 
red and yellow you produce orange. When it is orange one cannot say that it is also red 


and yellow. 


70 


body - that is Darkness - and the soul - that is Light - as well as [that 
which is] between the Light and the Darkness [which is the] shielding. 
They ate the ones who posited that the Light is thin and connected, 
which is [found] in the soul and not in the Darkness. According to this, 
it would be necessary for sacrifice to be permissible.'* There és no strength 


to find the truth except by God 


Their main principle is that they deny that Evil can come from the 
substance of Good, nor can Good come from the substance of Evil and 
that is why they believe in two gods. But they accepted the fissue related 
to the] admission of [guilt in relation to] the murderer. Because 
according to them, to admit [to the murder] of someone, when one did 
not commit the murder, ts a lie and subsequently evil. On the other hand 
if the admission [of guilt] was by someone who is telline the truth 
regarding his sin |then this also considered evil according to them], 
which signifies that they do not understand the wisdom behind creating 
evil and therefore it necessitates their belief in two gods.’ There is no 


strength to find the truth except by God. 


In addition, they have the least right to speak about issues related to 


wisdom and seeking knowledge, since they believe that the substance of 


‘SS He alleges that the beliefs of the Dualists about theit two gods do not effectively 
follow through to their other doctrines. This is because the soul is considered to be 
from the Light and the body from the Darkness, and as such separating one from the 
other by killing something should be permissible according to their principles, as you 
are removing the evil of Darkness from the good of Light, but instead they say such 
an act is not permissible, 

‘+ The Dualists are said to hold that if a murderer admits to a murder and a person lies 
about committing a murder, then these até both equivalent evil acts, as they come from 
Darkness, even if one is murder and the othet is merely a lie. Furthermore, they do not 
analyse the complexities entailed within the act, in that, the one who has admitted to 
murder has a mixture of good and evil in his act, because he murdered - which is evil - 
but the he told the truth, which is good. 


7A, 


Light would never produce evil. Furthermore, they argue that ignorance 
is evil but [if something comes] from the substance [of Light], then it 
must be wise and knowledgeable and can never be foolish and ignorant. 
Learning and seeking wisdom is the duty of those who do not possess it 
[which is considered good]. But [if a person] is from the substance of 
Evil [as he is ignorant before learning], then he will never be affected by 
ithe good of learning and seeking knowledge]. Because [if he is from] 


the substance [of Evil], then he will not accept that which is Good. 


If that is the case, then it is fruitless to engage in debate with them, and 
using arguments telated to wisdom and knowledge is useless. This: is 
because debating with them results in one of the following options: If 
[the debate] is with [someone from] the substance of Light, he is 
knowledgeable even before the debate, so there is no reason to debate. 
(On the other hand] if it is with [someone from] the substance of 
Darkness, then Darkness does not accept knowledge, and thus it 
becomes useless. This will necessitate knowledge as well as ignorance in 
both of them, and in [ordet] to continue the debate with them it would 
mean combining both of them into one, [but mixing them both into 
one] is the reason why they compelled themselves to believe in two gods. 
And we have [already] refuted [this argument]. There is no strength to find 
the truth except by God. 


The main principle regarding this [in terms of the] wisdom of discussing 
with them, is that it will be based on one of the following options; If you 
were to have a discussion with them about [their substance in terms of 
whether it is from Light or Dark| if they are aware of it so that 
[discussion would be deemed] useless [as there is no basis for knowing]; 
ot fon the other hand] they don’t know. Whichever one of these two will 
be disproven, the second will be disproven automatically. The other 


option is that the discussion will be a debate with the [person who 


72 


doesn’t have the] substance of either fof them]. So even [in that case One 
of the substances] cither affects [him] or it is useless, and whichever of 


the two are proven [to be correct], our case will be proven. 


Further to this, we ask them that you believe it is impossible for one 
thing [i.e. Light or ‘Good’ to generate both good and bad, so if they 
believe in this, how can they claim the Universe is created by both of 
them [ie. Light and Dark, Good and Evil], when each thing in the 
Universe has both good and bad [contained] within it? Their claim 
refutes that the Light and the Darkness are two creators. Have you 


seen anything with greater foolishness than what they have done to 


i themselves, or anything with more obvious ignorance? There és no strength 


to find the truth except by God. 


. If one of them were to say; ‘how can you claim that it is not possible for 
that which is wise to do something imprudent?’ We respond that this 
can never happen from someone who is wise by himself, but it can 
happen from someone who is imprudent. You claim that the Light is 
imprudent in its interaction with Darkness etc, but God is more Majestic 
than any [of these claims]. It is possible that God will do something that 
is wise but human reasoning may not [be able to] reach [that 
understanding], otherwise God is more Majestic than [to not act by His 
Wisdom]. 


rightful place, giving everything what it {rightfully] deserves and not 


| Furthermore, wisdom [is defined by] putting everything perfectly in its 
| 
| decreasing the right of anyone. It is only the people who do not know 


the limits of wisdom who deny what the monotheistic believers attribute 


'° Al Maturidi argues that the claim that good and evil do not come from one Source, 
negates the possibility that Light and Darkness ate involved in the creation of the 
world, since they then lack the ability to create on their own, which is observed by the 


fact that each substance contains both good and evil. 


73 


O God by giving [His| rights to those who do not deserve them, and we 
yill speak about this issue [of wisdom] in its appropriate place, in a much 


mote detailed way. 


74 


God’s Names and Attributes: God may not be Described as 
‘Body’ (Jism) 


Shaykh Abu Mansur said that the reason why God cannot be called 
Jism’ (body) '’’ lies in the fact that its meaning in the present [world] 
implies that it has directions, or it indicates that it has limits or it jg 
confined by three dimensions.’ Therefore, it is not permissible that 
God be called by such a name. Because [directions, limits and 
dimensions] ate the signs of the creation and are an indication of 
origination, all of which denote the meaning of having parts and limits, 


and that is a sign of being Creatio ex Nzhilo.'” 


We have previously 
explained that nothing ts similar to God, but by using that name [of Jism 


for God] it will necessitate that He is similar to the rest of the things. 


But if it is just [an issue of] naming something without applying the 
meaning [of the word to God] then it means that [a petson is] using the 
word for something by which it is not known [to be used]. This cannot 


be explained by reason nor can it be [deduced based on] analysis, rather 


'°'The thing that exists by itself as a combination of many Jowhar (simple parts) is 
known as Jes. Jowhar is the smallest point and a fisw is three or more Jowhars. The 
Philosophers and An-Nazaam deny the existence of the simple substance (Jowhar), 
which is a substance that cannot be split into two. They say a small substance can be 
split into two infinitely because for anything that is in space, its right side is different 
to its left side, which is why it can be split. Imam Maturidi didn’t use the same 
definitions and instead divided everything in the world into two categories; substances 
(a'yan) and accidents (a’rad) 

'57 Jism can be translated as ‘body’ or ‘matter’. For the purposes of this section I have 
translated it as ‘body’. 

88 Shaykh Aba Mansur argues that fis cannot be attributed to God as the term 
denotes directions and limits. It would mean God is finite, temporal and created. 
Imam Matutidi is most likely directing this against the Karamites, who were 


anthropomorphists located in the same region as al-Maturidi. 


75 


jecan only be established by scripture from God - and Jism (body) is not 
of the names [that have been mentioned by religious scripture]. [t was 
not transmitted by [God] and [neither was it] transmitted by anyone 
whom it is permissible to follow [such as the Prophets]. It is due to this 
fact that using [this name] for Him is not permissible. This is because if 
were acceptable to use ay name without a proof based on reason or 
scripture, then it would also be permissible to call Him Jasad (the 
corporeal body) or a Shakbs (the figure). That is not acceptable based on 
scripture, and it would result in [a person] naming Him using those 


names that belong to the creation and that is fasid (unacceptable). 


Furthermore, [in terms of the argument that] the word Jism does not 
have an essence, and it specifically refers to [the concept of] ‘existence’, 
in that case it would be acceptable if it did not have any other meaning. 
But in fact, no one uses the word Jism’ as a name for ‘existence’, which 
is because descriptions and accidents cannot be called ‘Jzsm’, even though 
both of them exist. It is due to this reason that it is not acceptable to use 


the name [J7sm for God]. 


In addition, if someone were to criticise us because we call God ‘the 
Agent’ and ‘Knowledgeable’ etc, [then| the answer to this is two-fold. 
The first is that if one is unable to comprehend their meaning, it is 
acceptable to describe [God] by that which has been setup by scripture. 
But in this instance [of Jés|, this condition [of it being revealed in 
scripture] is not found and therefore ‘fail’ Agent’) and ‘Knowledgeable’ 
ate different [to Jis (body)]. The second |is that in the case of] ‘the 


Agent’ and ‘the Knowledgeable’, the meaning cannot be understood in 


“40 The main argument by Shaykh Abi Mangur is that any word that implies or gives 
one the impression of corporeality cannot be applied to God - unless there is scriptural 
proof for that name, Even then, one uses the name but with the proviso that 1t denotes 


no similarity to God. 


76 


what we observe, and it does not necessarily mean that they ate 
otiginated. Also, in the things that can be recognised, it does not 
necessarily mean that it is possible to describe God with [these names] 
and therefore using |those names] is permissible with the condition that 


one denies similarity to the creation. Gad is the grantor of success. 


Furthermore, if some [people] were to argue that how are you not able 
to accept that everything [in the present Universe] that is called Fa’ 
(agents) are bodies? It is the same for a/-Oaadir (The Omnipotent) and 
al-Alim (Knowledgeable), because based on what we have obsetved, 
everyone that is called by these names are bodies. We respond, that 
based on our observations, they are not called by these names because 
they are bodies, and the reason we do not accept it is because there are 
many existing bodies which are not given these names. Furthermore, we 
have mentioned the instances in which these names were attributed to 
Him, and we have mentioned the principles [of application that are used] 
based on reason and sctipture. These conditions are not found in the 
names that they oppose.'*' If it would be acceptable to use any name, 
then others would attribute the body, the person etc. [to God]. In 
addition, based on our observation, the word Jism is not used for those 
things that cannot be split, such as the act, the accident, motion and rest. 
Therefore, it signifies that it is a name for something which has parts, 


such as being tall, wide and amalgamated. 


If we reject the notion that God is [made up of] parts Jas we know that 


parts are complex and can be amalgamated] which are the effect of an 


4UTn the sense that based on our observations, created things are not called by these 
names merely because they are bodies but rather these names have other meanings in 


the created Universe. 


77 


act, then it will necessitate the pre-eternal existence of God.'” [If God 
is complex] then we can attribute the following names [to God such as| 
all, body, colour, taste, which explicitly result in the meaning of 
‘combination. But it is not permissible to use any of these words because 
of what their meaning entails, even if the explicit meanings of those 


words are not similar to the [word] ‘Jes’ God is the grantor of success. 


\42 Imam Matutidi seems to be following the doctrine of Aristotle on God being 
simple. This is because according to Aristotle, God being ‘complex’ would mean that 


He is made up of ‘parts’, which would mean that God is not pre-eternal. 


78 


God May be Described as a ‘Thing’ (Shay) 


[Shaykh Abu Mansur stated that] if someone asks, why do you say God 
is a Shay’ (something),"” but not as other things, but you do not say He 
is a Jes (body) but not as other Jism (bodies)? The reason why the same 
comparison cannot be applied is that the Say’ is not [something that is] 
found in Jisv (bodies). Furthermore, [vis a v/s] the person disagreeing 
[with out position] regarding the word Jésm, based on our fuse of the] 
word Shay’, our response [to them] is that we have observed descriptions 
and accidents [in the present Universe] and they are not known as Jism 


(bodies), which makes the Jes (bodies) different to Shay’. 


If they want to dispute our statement [of God being] ‘not as other 
things’, our response to them is that this statement is not affirming any 
essence to [God], so there is no reason for the dispute. This 
disagreement is equivalent to the one who atgues about whether it is 
lacceptable to say He is a] thing but not as other things; then why can 
you not say He is human but not like other humans? There is no strength to 


Jind the truth except by God. 


Shaykh [Abu Mansur] said that the response [to such a statement] is to 


state that God ts not a (Jism) body and nor is He [in any way similar to] 


‘8 Rejecting the attribution of Shay’ to God was initiated by Jahm bin Safwan who 
stated that Say’ is ‘somethingness’ that is created and has likeness; as such, this cannot 
be attributed to God. 

' He argues that one cannot negate God’s somethingness, because that would be 
denying His E’xistence, but at the same time God is not a body as that would be limiting 
God within three dimensions or directions, As such, God’s somethingness is His 
Existence, but He is not similar to anything else. 

 al-Maturidi is arguing that unlike in the case of Jism, the word Shay’ is not used to 
denote a body, Also, one does not refer to an accident as a Jism (body) but you can 


refer to an accident as a ‘thing’. 


79 


other bodies. This disagreement is not an argument about expressions 


put instead it is argument about judgement [about the use of terms 


relating to God]. Furthermore, we do not set up [principles in relation 
to| God so that people may argue [regarding issues such as] if He can do 
[one specific thing] then why can He not do another thing, but [an 
important point to consider is that] God’s Divinity does not allow 
[people] to act with Him in this manner, But [instead] He shall be 
described by [that which is befitting of His Majesty]. There 7s no strength to 
find the truth except by God. 


In addition, an expression [related to| the essence is contentious, because 
when they pose the question that how are you able to state that He is a 
thing but not as other things, but [still maintain] that He is not a body 
[even] not as other bodies, [our response to them is that] when we say 
‘body’, our statement of [God’s] ‘somethingness but not as other things’ 
will mean that [God’s| somethingness is not as that of the other things. 
This is because a body is one of the two types of things [i-e. substances 
ot accidents], which signifies why it is not acceptable to say that He is a 
body but not as other bodies. There is no strength to find the truth except by 
God. 


[Shyakh] Aba Manéiar said when we relay [God’s] ‘somethingness which 
is not as other things’, it eliminates the [ascription of the] essence of the 
thing, and to this there are two aspects. ‘The body - which is a substance, 
and the description - which is an accident, therefore our statement 
eliminates the essence of substances - which is [to have] a body and of 
descriptions - which are accidents. It is in the same way that when we 
eliminate similarity [to God], we affirm [the attribution from scripture] 
whilst also [simultaneously] tejecting Ta’#/ [which is denying the 
attributes], and therefore this disproves their statement. There is no strength 


to find the truth except by God. 


80 


We have two arguments pertaining to [the issue of Say]. The first is 
that we consider the [word] Say’ as a name, and when [two different 
things] share the same name it is not necessaty that it implies similarity, 
because the same name can be used in the instance of denying its 
meaning, such as by the expression ‘this person is [the most] unique in 
his time’ or ‘[he is] unique amongst his tribe’."“° It is used to mean that 
amongst [his tribe] there is no one who is similar to him, despite the fact 
that they all share the same [tribal] name. If it was necessary that by 
sharing the same name it would denote similarity, then you would not 
be able to use names in the situations where you are attempting to deny 
this similarity. It is in the same way that we find that in the present world, 
{opposing} words such “disbelief and ‘Islam’ are both known as wotds, 
despite the fact that they are different in their meaning, and it is similar 
[in other cases such as in] motion [and rest] and actions [and inaction] 


etc!” 


The proofs of [being able to] use the word Shay’ [to express God’s 
existence] are two-fold. One of these proofs is found in transmission, 
where it is stated [in the verse of the Holy Quran]: Laysa Kamithlibi Shay 
(I here is nothing like bim)”"* So if God was not Shay’, His resemblances to 
the [created] things would not have been denied by the term 
‘somethingness’, For in reality, this [use of] Say’ is the opposite to that 
which you can call ‘a thing’, Also, God says “What thing is greatest in 


testimony?” Say, “Allah is witness." So if it were not permissible to use the 


6 Which means that he is different to everyone from his time. 

‘7 Maturldi is saying that they are both words, but their meanings are completely 
different. 

"8 Quran, Sutah As-Ashura (42:11) 

® Quran, Surah ALAnaam (6:19) 


81 


m ‘something’ for God, it would be impossible that it is relayed in this 


ter 


statement such that it ts applied to [God]. 


[In terms proof based on reason, the [word| “somethingness’ in 
customaty usage is used for nothing more than to express affirmation, 
for the saying ‘Bila Shay’ (nothing) exptesses a denial when it is not used 
asan expression to undermine. Therefore, it stands established that [the 
rerm ‘something’ signifies affirmation and avoids the Ta‘#/ (denial of 


the Attributes). 


If some people ate not aware of the fact that Say’ only signifies 
affirmation and avoids Ta’#/, [then] they are excused from applying it as 
they are afraid of conceiving something of God in their hearts which is 
detestable. Instead they apply the term Flasttyyah (external existence) 
which is cleater in expressing the affirmation, even though it is the same 
as how the term S/ay’is understood among the linguists. Saying La Shay’ 
(nothing) is used to mean denial or diminution. It stands established that 
using the word Say’ can only [be used to] affirm existence as well as for 
glorification, and God is the one who has [the greatest] tight [to be 
affirmed and glorified]. But the words ‘no body’ do not denote either of 
the two fie. affirmation or glorification], and it is in this way that the 
wotd ‘body’ does not mean something whose existence is praiseworthy 
and Glorious, and [this is the reason as to] why they are different. In the 
same mannet, saying ‘not knowledgeable’ and ‘not powerful’ are words 
which ate used to deny glory and prominence. But [stating that 
something that is] knowledgeable and powerful means to attribute glory 


and prominence. God is the grantor of success. 


(50 Ty’#/ is the denial of the Attributes of God, which is the position that is held by the 
Mutazalites. 


82 


Further, in common speech, by the expression ‘[this] man is something? 
one does not understand the man’s essence, nor does one understand 
his attributes when it is said ‘man is knowing and able.’ However, what 
is understood in the first instance is both his abstract and concrete 
existence, and in the second instance, him being described by these 
attributes. ‘Therefore, the term Shay’ is not meant to explain the essence 
of man, as the essence is explained by the expression ‘man is a body’, 
meaning that he possesses certain dimensions and directions and is 
predisposed to limits and accidents. The same goes for the rest of the 


humans and substances. There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


In all of these issues we have to use the names which have been affirmed 


based on Scripture. God is the grantor of success. 


[Shaykh] Abt Manégur said that the main principle in the statement of 
the Tawhid is that it starts by attributing similarity and ends by attributing 
uniqueness, and it becomes necessary to do so. In order to get to 
something we cannot comprehend, we use what we can sense. It is the 
same [case when one is attempting] to understand the rewards of the 
Hereafter and the punishment for the [sinful] pleasures of this world as 
well as the harms [that are contained within it].'°! That is how the 
desctiption of God with something which is recognised in creation is 


solely to give [one an] indication and [an opportunity for] reflection. 


'!' The Imam is arguing that using what we can comprehend, one is able to get an 
indication of something that is not comprehensible, such as the rewards of 
punishments in the Hereafter. So, for example, if we are told that in Paradise there will 
be rivers of milk, it does not mean that rivers will flow with actual milk, because what 
if you don’t want ot like milke Yet because we can only comprehend such rewards 
based on our experience in this Universe, we are given words to express them - 
therefore they indicate that the reward in Paradise will leave one completely satisfied 
in all ways. In the same way, God’s Names do not have any similarity to created things, 
but instead they indicate, for example, that God is knowledgeable, so He knows all, 


even if that knowledge is not like human knowledge and it cannot be comprehended. 


83 


nis is the reason] why we [attribute names such as] ‘Knowledgeable’ 
and ‘Powerful’ etc. [to God], because by not using [those names] we will 
end up denying that [God has such abilities and attributes]. But by 
believing in the actual meaning which is understood [from these names| 
by the creation, we ate affirming similarity, so we add the denial of 
similarity [to creation] whilst affirming the Attributes. It is necessary to 
apply this to teason as well as Scripture. But when there is no evidence 
based on Scripture or [such an attribution] is not necessary based on 
reason, then it is extremely problematic to ascribe such an attribute [to 


God].'°° There is no strength to find the truth esccept by God. 


In addition, SAay’ is not a name, because each name has its own 
specification, which is understood when it is mentioned; for example, if 
someone asks; ‘what is a body?, we answer that it is that which has three 
dimensions. [When we ate asked] ‘what is a human?’ we mention the 
recognised description, such as it is a living or dead body, that has the 
possibility of dying. It is in this way that each substance has its own 
description which is stated by its specific name. It is in this manner that 
[using the attributes of] ‘Knowledgeable’ and ‘Powerful’ does not 
describe the Essence [of God] and nor does it limit [God and His 
attributes]. But what it does mean is that it is not possible that [a person] 
is uncleat about [God] and that he is unable to comprehend these things; 
but it does not describe [God’s] Essence and it is because of this that it 
is permissible to [ascribe] Attributes to the Essence but this is not [the 
same as] attributing similitude to the Essence [of God]. It is possible that 
one may misunderstand the fact that Knowledge and Ability are 
different to Him, as we have witnessed [and] this is why we add [the 


statement ‘not like others’|, which is [something that should always be] 


152 Imam Maturidi is rejecting the possibility of S/ay’ meaning that one is makin 
J g p vy S g 


resemblances to God. 


84 


mentioned so that everyone understands that He is Knowledgeable and 


Powerful by Himself and not because of others. God és the grantor of success 


85 


Shaykh Aba Manétr was Asked About the Meaning of ‘The One’ 


Shaykh] Aba Man$gur was asked for the meaning of [the expression| ‘a/ 


Wabid’ (the One’) and answered that it is used to describe four things. 


[The first is] a Kw// (totality) which cannot be doubled. |The second is| 
the Juz’ (part) that cannot be halved. [The] third is something which is 
between these two that allows for both operations, larger than that 
which cannot be halved and smaller than that which cannot be doubled, 
since there is nothing beyond the totality. The fourth is that through 
which the [first] three exist; Him, not Him; and He has concealed who 
He is. He is the One before whom the tongue falls silent, and the One 
that you cannot comprehend, the One before whom the imagination 


fails, and reason is at a loss. ‘hat is God, the Sustainer of the Universe.’”’ 


In terms of a person who is willing to attribute a body to God with its 
[literal] meaning, after they [have read and understood] the explanation 
that bodies are substances upon which accidents occur and that they are 
finite etc, then with that person the discussion will turn to the attributes 
of bodies based on our observation, in terms of the possibility of 
attributing their description as a whole. It is not acceptable to attribute 
that to God, because of their description which includes signs of their 
otigination. [In terms of ascribing something to God], if it is not possible 
[then] it must be named |as something that is not possible for God], but 
if it is possible then it must be attributed [to God].'"" There is no strength to 
Jind the truth except by God. 


'S3 al-Maturidi is using Neo-platonic philosophy, that God being ‘One’ is not in terms 
of numbers, but rather in terms of God’s uniqueness, 
‘St Tmam Maturidi is explaining that in terms of the anthropomorphists who still insist 


on attributing a body to God, then the discussion will turn to when it is possible or not 


86 


God’s Essential Attributes: Free Will (‘Ikhtiyas) 


Describing God as the Powerful, the Knowledgeable, the Alive, the 
Bountiful and the Generous - using [these attributes] to name Him jg 


known by reason as well as scripture.' 


As for scripture, God is named in the Quran as well as the other 
[revealed] books in the way in which the Names have been reported fas 
well as mentioned] by the Prophets and the rest of the people. But some 
people have converted these names to mean something other than Him, 
thinking that in the affirmation of God’s name there would be likening 
of every name to anyone else who has these names. If that wete the case, 
that would be also with regard to the concept of Ta’#/ because by 
denying the Attributes of God there is a sort of likening Him to the 
things that do not have these Atttibutes, Irrespective of this point, we 
have already explained the impossibility of likening [merely] by the 
equivalence of names. Therefore, God is to be named in the way He has 
named Himself and He is to be [known] by the atttibutes that He has 
attributed to Himself. 


to ascribe names and attributes to God. Thus, as he explained previously, his principle 
is that you only attribute those names that God ascribed to Himself, whilst denying any 
similarity to the creation. 

'S5 "There are eight eternal Attributes of God for Sunnis, which are eternal with His 
Essence. One has to believe in these attributes to have belief in God and according to 
the Maturidis one can come to belief in these attributes based on reason. These are the 
same as the seven attributes that are the qualities of God according to the Asharis, with 
the additional attribute of Mukavnin (Creator), though one may add more attributes to 
these based on the Matutidi School and so they are not limited to these eight. The eight 
attributes are: Qadir (Powerful), ‘Adi (Snowledgeable), Hayy’ (Alive), Mutakallim 
(Speaking), Murd (Willing), Sami’ (Hearing), Basir (Seeing) and Mukanmin (Creator). 


87 


As fot reason, it establishes (that God possesses qualities] that make Him 
gifferent to the cteation in His Essence and Attributes. It is therefore 
established that God’s action is not that [of His innate necessary] nature, 
put it is the action of His own choice.’ In addition to this, the harmony 
of the sequential act, in which there is no appearance of any defect, nor 
any void of wisdom, proves that the acted upon comes [about] as the 
result of the will of an agent, which proves that creation was His real 


act.) There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


When God initiates something, He either creates or destroys it in its 
entirety, which includes the things He recreates, such as the night and 
the day. It stands established that His act is by His choice, because He 
sepaits what He destroys and recreates something which He previously 
completed. He brings the absent into existence, and the existing [thing| 
into absence. This signifies that [all acts are by His] Will. This is because 
the one who acts by being compelled or [acts unwillingly] by his nature, 
cannot eradicate that which is existing nor the other way around. There 


is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


Furthermore, we spoke about the Universe being Creatio ex Nibilo, and 
this [act] can only be done by one who has the optimum level of free 


will, and not by one who acts naturally or is compelled [into acting]. It is 


156 What al-Maturidi means here is that when we see that a cause has resulted in an 
effect, this can happen in a number of ways. One of these ways is that it can happen 
naturally without there being the intention of someone to bring said effect into 
existence. For example, those who do not believe in a Creator and argue that the 
Universe came into existence naturally without there being the intention of a Creator 
to bring it into existence. For example, saying that the “Big Bang’ happened naturally 
and this resulted in the expansion of the Universe, but no one caused this “Big Bang’ 
and instead it happened naturally. 

157 As we have explained, the issue of God causing the Universe naturally without 
intention is the opinion of some Greek philosophers. Shaykh Abt Mansut’s comment 


is not completely matching, so most likely there is a missing paragraph. 


88 


not possible that one who can initially originate [the Universe from 
nothing] is compelled [to act] or that [the act] occurs naturally and that 
He does not have free will, which would signify that He, Himself, is not 
ommipotent and that He is originated. God is far from [being ascribed] 


all of these defects.!8 


In terms of proof based on the customs of people, [we see that they] 
ptay to God, pray to Him for ease, [and] they [hold the] belief that God 
is in control, [that He] helped [in the] support of some and disowned 
others. Considering the [fact that the] holder of power can initiate 
anything by that power, but the one who is compelled to act cannot do 
any of these things, and there will be no one who will have the desite to 
[do these things], [then this] proves that God created the Universe by 
His own Will.'°? 


8 Naturalists held a wide range of views in Classical Times. Some of them believed 
that the world is a result of the Four Elements (Fire, Air, Water and Earth). Others 
believed the Universe or God was as a result of the Heat, Cold, Wetness and Dryness. 
The Astrologers believed that there are seven Planets which control the Universe. 

'S° According to al-Maturidi, something that is an example of God’s free will and the 
fact that He is not compelled is based on that we pray when we want something in the 
hope that God fulfils our wish; if God was not freely able to act then all forms of 
praying to God would become redundant since God would not freely be able to fulfil 


these requests. 


89 


Power (Qudra) and Will (Irada) 


if the Wil ' of God] has been established, then His Qudra 
Ability/ Power)'*' to create as well as free choice that the creation be the 
way that it is have also been established. Things coming into existence 
through [the action of] one who has no power, do so by way of 
compulsion [being applied to that being]. He will be unable to [perform 
an act} and nor will he be able to [perform] the opposite of it. Therefore, 
it stands established that whatever comes into existence which is 
assumed to have come through Power, comes by His free choice. ‘These 
are also the signs of the reality of actions in the present Universe, a fact 


16 


which leads us to the knowledge of that which is absent.' There is no 


strength to find the truth except by God. 


160 Tt is by the Will of God that the Universe has been created, in opposition to the 
docttine of the Naturalists. Thete is a difference between Maseeha and Irada. Masheeha 
is considered Tabkweeni Irada, so for example God’s Will is carried out infinitely; He 
wants to create the World and as such it comes into existence. Then there is Tashreebi 
Trada, which is an order issued to test people, such as God ordering people to pray. 
Thus, if we refuse to adhere to Tashreehi Irada by not praying for example, this doesn’t 
mean that God doesn’t have the ability to carry out His order. 

161 Oudra (power) is attached to possible things and not necessary or impossible things. 
62 Shaykh Aba Mansur argues that if it is accepted that God has Free Will, then He 
has other related Attributes, such as His having Qudra (Power) over everything, the 
Trada (Will) to create the Universe. He must have i (Knowledge) of His creation 


because everything in the Universe is part of a harmonious sequence. 


90 


Knowledge (I/m) 


As we mentioned previously, the harmonious sequence of the act such 
as what is performed by the act as well as its perfect continuity, all signify 
that His act is based on perfect knowledge.’ There is no strength to find the 
truth except by God. 


Furthermote, [the fact that God has] created substances which ate not 
tested [held accountable by God] to be in the service of those that wil] 
be tested [such as humans], and [created] those that are supposed to be 
perpetual in the service of ones that remain in perpetuity, signifies that 
they were created by the One who knows everything, who knows what 
they need and what supports their continuity and livelihood. There is no 
strength to find the truth except by God. 


In addition, God’s Creatio ec Nihil is a sign, along with the proof [that 
the Universe} has a Creator and the Oneness of this Creator, If He were 
not to have knowledge of what He created, He would not have been 
able to create them as they [have been created].'" God ir the grantor of 


SHOCESS, 


Likewise, following the Prophets who brought the command lof God] 


avoids disputes, divisions and corruption. If God did not know, then 


'©? Based on our observation we can sce that the Universe is harmoniously organised, 
which is based on a deliberate act of the Creator. 

In “Ta'wilat Abl as-Sunnd - his commentary on the Quran, Surah Nabl (16:66-69), he 
argues that this verse is the strongest indication of God’s power to create, as well as 
His knowledge and control over creation. The fact that substances in the Universe 
produce something different from their essence proves that they were created by one 
who has the knowledge and power to create things out of nothing. He uses a similat 
proof in his commentary on Surah Ya-Si# (36:37), which relays that the Solar System 
has a systematic order indicating the Knowledge and Power of the controller of the 


Universe, 


91 


ehis would not have happened due to the Knowledge of God, which 


includes knowledge of the differences [in the creation]. 


Moreover, the statement of the ones who say, ‘God was there when 
there was no creation, then creation came into existence without the act 
of creating by anyone beside the creation itself - this statement is the 
same as the ones who mention [that the creation came into existence 
through something] without mentioning the [extra] condition of “other 


than the Universe [itself]”. 


In fact, one who attributes creation to Nature has a greater right to 
believe in [knowledge and free choice] than the ones who attribute it to 
God, without anything coming from Him except creation, Therefore, by 
them attributing [the creation to Nature] they are in fact affirming [that 
whatever is the cause of creation has knowledge and free choice] even if 
they [do not agree] with the attribution of the second group [who ascribe 


it to God]. There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


In the same manner, we do not in the present world find that one who 
is able and not prevented from acting, is nonetheless unable to act. We 
also do not find anyone who is able to speak not speaking. What we 
experience in the present is an indication of the absent. So [these 


qualities] are bound to God too. God ts the grantor of success. 


Furthermore, creation is described as being corrupt, evil, harmful and 
negative, and if these occurred naturally from God, then they would also 
be attributed to God. He would [then] be called the corrupter, the 
harmful and the evil fone]. The fact that this form of attribution is 
considered [an act of] disbelief signifies that the way [creation] 1s 


attributed [to a natural act of God] is [not acceptable] based on what has 


92 


been mentioned.'” It would be on the same basis that giving birth 
obeying, disobeying and performing all types of acts would be literally 
ascribed to God, so He would be attributed those [names].'°° There js wn 


strengib to find the truth except by God. 


In addition, if it is not possible [for God to act willingly, meaning] that 
initially it was not possible [for God] to act [willingly], but then later this 
became possible, then there are two possible options [for such 4 
position]. The first is that it was innately impossible to act [willinoly| and 
if that it is the case then He would remain in such a state indefinitely, 
The second option is that it was impossible [for God] to act [willingly] 
for some other reason, and that is the focus of the discussion. So the 


impossibility [to act willingly] was not due to Himself, and therefore this 


'° al-Maturidi argues against those who state that we cannot attribute anything to God 
which is attributed to humans by claiming that it is impossible that God is similar to 
created things merely by sharing the same name, as for example when we say ‘Hayy’ 
(living). According to the Mutazalites though, you cannot attribute any of those things 
to God, such as using the real meaning of ‘Hayy’ because it is only applicable to the 
creation and thus is an error. For example, black and white ate similar in that they are 
colours, they are accidents, and in that they ate created. Hence they argue that God 
knows, but there is no such thing as His ‘Attribute of Knowledge’. 

The Matazalites have a second objection. They argue that when you attribute ‘power’ 
or ‘knowledge’ to God, the question arises of whether that Attribute is separate to God, 
within God, or is it God? If you say it is separate, is it created or pre-eternal? If it is 
pre-eternal, then that means due to the many Attributes, there is more than one pre- 
eternal thing. If it is created then it cannot be God, because if that is the case then there 
would be more than one God, as someone has to make the Attribute. Additionally, the 
Attribute cannot be within God, because when this Attribute is applied it means that 
some change is occurring in God. For example, God being angry means that a change 
happened to God and so then He cannot be God, 

1 The Mufazalites including Ka‘bi held the view that God doesn’t have Attributes in 
reality (f#-+bagiqga). What this means is that for example I/w (Knowledge) is not an 
attribute of God but instead it is His act, so it is not permissible to describe God using 
these attributes. Instead His ‘real attribute’ is solely God saying that He is ‘the 
Isnowledgeable’. 


93 


vould mean that it was possible for Him to [act willingly] by Himself all 


of the time. God is the grantor of success. 


it retrns Of] the people who believe that creating is a literal act in the 
same [manner in which] praying is also a literal act, Aba Mansur said 
[this position is based on] a misconception. [This is] because that is 
God’s name in the present Universe, but creating is His act, and we have 
falready| explained the conditions of naming [something] which proves 


the impossibility of [literally applying it to God}. 


God’s Attribute of Action: Creating (Taqwin) 


If someone asks: If the Attribute of God Laqwin' is pre-eternal, then 
why is Mukanwan (the created thing) not also described [as pre-eternal]> 
We respond to him that this is because God brings things into existence 
as they are supposed to be. Similar to this is His Oudra (power over 
things) and His Will for them, as well as His Knowledge about them - ip 
such a way that everything occuts at its proper time. Creatio ex Nibilo is 
viewed in the sense of what it will be! and not of the knowledge about 
it, despite the fact that neither the knowledge of existing things nor the 
power over them are changed. The core ptinciple of this issue is that if 
God is described by an Attribute [such as His Power and ISnowledge] it 
necessitates that these are attributed to Him pre-eternally. On the other 
hand, if the thing is mentioned together with Him using a description 
that is similar to His, such as, ‘the thing known’ [by His Knowledge], 
‘the thing decreed’ [by His Power], ‘the thing willed’ [by His Will] or ‘the 
thing originated’ [by His Origination], one would need to indicate when 
these things were created, so that there is no confusion by applying pre- 


eternity to them,'” 


The proof of the first argument is what has been mentioned previously. 


The proof of the second argument is that if the time of the creation of 


—_——————— 


‘87 Taqween is the pre-eternal Attribute of God, Shaykh Aba Manéir al-Matutidi makes 
a differentiation between Lagween, which is the pte-eternal Attribute of God and 
Muqganin, which is an existing thing which is the result of the Tagween. What Maturidis 
call ‘Magawin’, the Asharis call “Laqween’. 

‘88 Creatio ec Nibilo effects the creation that comes into existence 

' al-Maturidi differentiated between Essential Attributes (such as God's Power) 
which are eternally applied to God, and God’s Active Attributes (such as God creating) 
which have an application on the created thing - with the understanding that the 
Attributes bear no similarity to God. 


ss be 


the thing that is acted upon is not mentioned, the thing acted upon might 
indicate its pre-eternity or its benightedness [about its timing] as well as 
to the inability [of its originator]. Therefore, when it is stated that an 
object was otiginated at a specific time, it indicates that it was originated 
at that specific time. This has the same application ws-a-vis [God’s| 
Knowledge, Power and Will. There is no strength to find the truth except by 


God. 


96 


Proof of the Existence of the Attributes: Against Equating the 


Creation with the Created 


In terms of alternative viewpoints concerning the creation ang 
destruction of the Hereafter; in regards to God creating the Hereafter, 
the options ate two-fold. He either makes it so that this time is the time 
of the Hereafter fi.e. it already exists], or the time is made by the Tagmiy 
of God coming into existence to create the Hereafter. The first meaning 
is not possible and is incorrect, and the second is invalid because it 
specifies a time for the Attribute of Tagwin, which indicates [its] 


ofigination. 


If one were to posit that the Tagwmm (creation) [of God] without a 
Mugamin'” (created object) is an affirmation of inability, the argument 
would only be correct if the creation were meant to occur at a certain 
time, but it [then] did not occur at that time. It is the same case for the 
Trada (Will) and Knowledge [if their effect did not come into existence] 
it would then mean benightedness and compulsion. But if the objects 
come into existence at a specific point in time, then this is not the case, 
as we have already explained with regards to Knowledge. The same 
applies to Heating, Seeing, Benevolence and Goodness. All of these 
Attributes of God are eternal even though the thing which is being heard 
and that which is being scen as well as the rest of the similar things are 
Creatio ex Nihilo, This is the general ptinciple of the operation of Creatio 
ex Nibilo. Therefore, the time of the heard thing must be mentioned, 


whilst mentioning these two things, and the same is applicable to the 


170 The result of the Taqween. 


ay 


former [meaning God and the object of His creation].'" There is no 


cprengtl 10 find the truth except by God. 

“The basis of this argument les in the fact that one who is not capable of 
performing an act at the time that he intends to perform it, signifies 
inability, whereas if it were to be performed [at the described time], then 
that is the sign of power. In the same way, the one who can perform an 
act as well as its opposite [displays greater traits] of perfection, 
furthermore, the one who can perform an act in one way is [not as 
strong] as the one who can perform an act in all of the [possible] ways. 


This is the attribute of God, because it is an attribute of perfection.'” 


In terms of the act of a person, it occurs at the time [of performing the 
act|, whilst he is engaged with [the act], which is performed by [the use} 
of a mechanism. On the other hand, God’s act is by Himself, because 
He knows by Himself and is able by Himself, whereas everyone else 
petforms facts] through [the use of} something else. Without this 
[mechanism], they would not be able to perform the act, whereas God 


initiates from nothing. This is why theit attribution is incorrect. 


171 Al Maturidi is attempting to explain the concept of God’s eternal Attribute of 
Tagwin - which is the attribute of ‘Creating’. Tagwin according to Imam Maturidi is not 
the actual act of ‘creating’ but rather it is the Knowledge about it and the Power over 
the creation. Therefore, God brings something into existence at a specific time without 
being controlled by the rules of cause and effect. 

172 'This is explaining how the relationship between cause and effect, something that is 
normally linked to time, is not something that can be applied to God and His creation 
of the Universe, an issue that is overcome by the notion of Taquin and something 
coming into existence. Furthermore, al-Matutidi is arguing that God has the ability to 
create whenever and in whichever way He wants, and the one who is able to act on His 


volition is the One Creator. 


| 
| 
| 


98 


Furthermore, another proof is that there are acts of the creation that 
oceut by Tamalud'” (after some time), such as throwing a stone, Or 
committing a crime, where the [individual] will gain the attribute of 4 
criminal or a killer only after the end of his teal act. This analogy jg 
cortect even if the act [of creation| is not hidden as a natura] 
consequence or due to Tawalud. This is because even if one of the two 
sides of the issue has been witnessed [namely, a person performing the 
act (throwing the stone) and the result of the act (the stone hitting g 
person)|, it would negate the possibility of attributing the act to the 
person, which indicates [an aspect of the act] that was not seen. Bearing 
in mind that it is not in the same mannet as we have mentioned, in terms 
of the permissibility of attributing Say’ without it being a body, to God, 
This is because it does not mean that it is an accident, despite the fact 
that based on our obsetvation of the present Universe, anything that is 
Shay’ and is not a body is definitely an accident. This is not [the case 


with] His name. There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


3 ‘Tawalud is when the result of the act occurs after the initial action. For example, you 
throw a stone and after some time it hits something; only when the object has been hit 
can you be attributed with the action of hitting the object. 


Bo 


Creating is Just as Eternal as Knowledge and Power 


Furthermore, their proposition is a claim of [applying] inability [to God]. 
This is because a person is unable to perform an act without [using] the 
thing that causes it to occur. Moreover, he is unable to perform [the act] 
without using himself [to execute the act either] by [cither] being in 
motion ot being at rest. Further, no one denies that he has been ordered 
and forbidden [to do things by God] at a [specific] time, without the time 
of applying the command being given, and this is [an example of God| 
promising and warning - whereas the Prophet has to immediately obey 
the commands and prohibitions that have been revealed to him. As such, 
there is no reason to teject that [the command or prohibition] can be 
immediately brought into existence by the pre-eternal [Attribute of 
God,|] Tagwin. It is in this manner that God is described as having 
Knowledge of everything that exists, even though He knew it pre- 
eternally. Therefore, origination is applicable only to [created things, but 


not to God]. God és the grantor of success. 


Since the intellect of people falls short in their comprehension of the 
meaning of the concept of ‘Tagwin, the easiest way to express it would be 
implied in the simple statement of ‘Kua’ (Be’)'™ Everything is according 
to [God’s] knowledge of that which is going to be. Therefore, everything 
is being created, as it is created, at a certain time without repetition. ‘This 
category also includes the question of Amr (Command), Nahy 


(prohibition), I’a’d (promise) and Wad (warning), This [statement of 


"4 Maturidi is explaining that the act of God does not occur by the word ‘Kau’ (Be’). 
The source of this argument is the interpretation of the Quranic verse “When He decrees 
a matter, Ele only says to it, Be’, and it is” (Quran 2:117). But rather, the word Kuz was 
given as an example by God to demonstrate that it is really easy for God to create. 


Therefore, when God states ‘Kaw’, it means that He creates with ease, 


100 


Kun| would then mean information about an existent and what that 
existent is going to be, including the different states of that existent, theit 
times and places. But people are unable to comprehend again Without 
associating it with effort and hardship. There zs no strength to find the truyp, 
except by God. 


A comprehensive explanation of the issue [of ‘lagvin| would divert yg 
from the focus of the work. But the hope is that the clarification 
provided will be sufficient to give one an accurate understanding of the 


topic. 


101 


Presentation and Refutation of al-Ka‘bi’s Doctrine on The 


Attributes 


"so that you will be able 


We will now mention the position of al-Ka ‘bi 
to understand the level of his knowledge and his [ability] to recognise 
God, with the putpose of providing a comprehensive understanding of 
the School of the I#zaa/. Since he is, according to the |Matazadzes|, their 
best scholar in the whole world. There is no strength to find the truth except 


by God. 


[ka bi] said that any attribute that can be different in the sense of state 
or person is to be regarded as an attribute of action, such as God giving 
Rizk (providing for someone) ot God showing metcy in one state and 
not showing {mercy] in another [state]. The same is applied to speech 
which differs [from person] to person. This, however, is not the same 
for the Attribute of Power, Knowledge and Life. Therefore, these are 
the Attributes of Dhat (the Essence of God). Further, [Ika bi] said that 
anything which is connected to the Attribute of Qudra, is an Attribute of 
action, such as showing mercy or speaking. [Equally], anything which is 
not connected to the Oudra is an Attribute of the Essence [and] as such 
it is not acceptable to ask questions about whether or not [God] can 
have knowledge of something, [as it is an essenttal Attribute of God]. 
[In this instance] we seek clarification about the Dat (Essence), [The 
question arises that] why is it not possible to attribute the opposite? 
[Ka'‘bi] said because it is referring to the Essence, and the Essence is not 


changeable. ‘Then he continued that if God’s Essence is not changeable 


\5 Ka‘bi is mentioned extensively through this book, the reason is that al-IKa‘ bi was a 
contemporary of al-Maturidi and there is reason to believe that they wrote a number 
of books refuting one another, even though we don’t have the books of al-Ka‘bi in 


cutrent times. 


then as long as He exists it is not possible to attribute change to Hit, 
He proffered that if something exists due to some reason, then it wij 


continue to exist as long as that [reason] is still present.'”° 


Shaykh [Abi ManSir] stated that [Ka'bi] also said that in reality God 
does not have Attributes, but this is [just] the manner in which people 
name Him. Both conditions are met in the descriptions of people, 
because they have described Him using ‘Knowledge’, ‘Power’ and 
‘Agent’, making a distinction in terms of their description. But then he 
lic. Ka'bi] by himself described God as being _ realistically 
knowledgeable, realistically a creator and realistically powerful. Thus, 
there is no reason to attribute it to the description, because it is agteed 


upon in reality, in terms of the meaning of both of the conditions.!” 


It is possible that it can be said that God heard the ptayer of such-and- 
such [a person] but did not hear the prayer of such-and-such [a person], 
Also, some may say that God does not know that I am performing a 
particular act, or they may say that God knows that I am performing an 


act at a ceftain time but does not know that I am performing the act at 


LL 


%6 The Mutazalites reject the Attributes of God for a number of reasons, but one of the 
arguments made by the Mafagalites is that if you posit that God has Attributes, you are 
arguing that God has parts - in that each of His Attributes are different ‘parts’ of God, 
so His Essence is one part, His Knowledge is another part, and it is the same case for 
each ‘one’ of His Attributes. Another reason for rejecting the Attributes is that by 
applying them, one is indicating the similarity of God to His creation, in the context 
that God’s knowledge and human knowledge are similar, The Mutazakites believed that 
this anthropomorphised God. 

"7 Shaykh Aba Manéir is relaying the position of the Mutagalites who denied the 
existence of the Attributes of God. They maintained that God is One, pre-eternal and 
is not mote than one. As such there is only His Essence, which is self-contained, and 
He does not have any attributes, because each attribute would mean that God is in 
parts. This would then pose the question that do all of these parts make up God, or is 
each individual part God? 


other time. It is not necessary that the [attributes of| Hearing and 


all 
Knowledge are Essential Attributes in the same vein as the attributes of 


Speech and Mercy [ate Essential Attributes]. [If in response] this person 
js attempting to deny the thing which is heard or known, then (in reality 
qhat he is doing] by not ascribing the attribute [such as being heard or 
knowledge] is that he is in fact denying that that [act] occurred |in reality]. 
Therefore [if he, meaning Ka‘bi, denies these attributes vis-a-vis the 
occurrence of the act], then in the same mannet Ka‘bi would deny 
Pharaoh being judged [for his actions] by denying [God’s] speech to 
(Pharaoh, which would mean the willing of the judgement [towards 
Pharaoh by God’s eternal speech]. This is known by the promise [of 
God] to the believers that He will speak to them and |in equal measure] 
removing this hope from the disbelievers, which is our stance on the 
‘ssue. Therefore, Ka‘bi’s argument is not valid because his condition ts 
based on the permissibility of describing and we have (already explained 
this [issue]. From the above-mentioned arguments, we know it is not 
permissible to describe God as being ‘Creatio ex Nuhilo’, and if it would 
be permissible, then it would be permissible to describe Him as the one 
who tepairs and the one [who] breaks. The positive and negative 
[attributions of] all of these [names] ate not permissible, which proves 


that what Ka'‘bi said is incorrect.'” 


Furthermore, anything which is not a voice, you cannot say that [one 
can| hear it, but instead you can state that [from it one] knows. But this 


distinction is not necessarily the same [case] for the Attributes [of God] 


78 Shaykh Abu Mansar argues that the position of the Mutazalites is ineffective because 
they describe God by His Attributes, but they then temove the application of the 
meanings of these Attributes. Thus, they maintain that God has Knowledge but He is 
not Knowledgeable. Furthermote, if you are able to ascribe an attribute but not its 
meaning, then you can apply any attribute to God, as the meaning of said attribute will 


not be applicable. 


104 


nor does [the ascription of these Attributes] necessitate a change in the 
Essence [of God]. [In fact], when one does not ascribe these Atttibutes 
[to God the result] is the same as those who deny the Attributes of 
[God]. There ts no strength to find the truth except by God. 


In addition, it is unacceptable to not attribute Justice to God. Even 
though God did not say that it is an Attribute of Essence. It stands 


established that their definition is not valid and incorrect. 


Then we asked him [Ka‘bi] that what do you mean by ‘the Attribute of 
the act’? Is it the act itself - which is creating? According to you, is it an 
act or not? If he states that it is creating, then we say to him that why do 
you maintain that creating is an Attribute and whose attribute is that? 
Because no attribute exists except for the one to whom it is attributed, 
If he says it is an attribute of God, then to apply the attribute of creating 
is a dangerous claim because in the [act of] creating there is disorder, 
incapability, filth and harm. Everyone is described by their own 
attributes. No intelligent person would agree to being described by these 
attributes, so what do you think about God? If he says it is not creating, 
then he has to accept that he is attributing an action. And we have 
[already] explained that God is described by [the word] ‘creator’, which 


proves that His Attribute of action is an Attribute of His Essence, 


We also say that God is the Creator, Ar-Rahman (The Beneficent) and 
Ar-Raheem (The Merciful) and these [Attributes] are ascribed to His 
Dhat (Essence). Similarly, His Essence will be described by the 
Attributes of His acts, as we say that wise words or words of truth ot 
falsehood are the attributes of their owner ~ and it is in this manner they 
are attributed to God. Further, we ask Ka‘bi that ate you implying that 


Mercy and Forgiveness are attributes of F2/ (Action), and according to 


105 


you cursing as well as insulting are also acts of F7/.'” [The question then 
arises that] what are the acts that are called ‘mercy’ and ‘forgiveness’ so 
that God can be described with them? If he says that they are Paradise 
and Hell, acceptance and rejection etc., this refutes his belief about the 


;ssue related to the As/aah (most optimum)!” 


, justice and oppression. 
This is because God is Merciful, and [according to this position] God 
does not do any of these [things| to His creation, but in reality [God] 
does do all of [these things to His creation] - unless he provides a 
different response and [claims that] these two Attributes are related to 
something that was not created."*' Beating in mind that if he states that 


God insults, it is not acceptable to attribute this to God. 


Then we ask him: Did you consider what you mentioned in order to 
distinguish between the Essence and Act, when you know the Essential 
Attributes are different when using them and describing [them, meaning 
attributing them to God] such as Knowledge being attributed about the 
issue where there is no connection with Ozdra (Power), God’s Oudra 
being connected to the things where there is no hearing present, [His| 
Vision being connected to the things where generosity is not applicable, 


[His] Wisdom being applicable to the issues where hearing’ is not 


79 Al Maturidt argues that both the Essential Attributes and the Attributes of Action 
are eternal. So for example Ta&meen is the eternal attribute and Makannin in the created 
thing, or that Knowledge is the eternal attribute but that which is known is created, 

180 The issue of As/aah will be discussed in detail in the section on ‘“God’s Wisdom’. 

81 Imam Maturldi argues that when we apply an attribute to God, we accept both the 
attribute in reality as well as its description. Thus, when we call God ‘the 
Knowledgeable’, it means both that He knows and that He has the Attribute of 
Knowledge. 

'82 There is a theological disagreement as to whether one can come to the realisation 
of God’s Attributes based on reason, or whether the basis for the asctiption of God’s 
Attributes is solely scripture. God being All-Heating is one of these attributes. The 
argument for coming to this understanding based on reason is that when one 


contemplates, they understand that their Lord must be All-Hearing, because if He were 


106 


applicable, and the many other things where there are differences Which 
do not necessitate distinguishing / separating, Not all of these facts and, 
the results of these acts] are attributed to Him pre-eternally. Why did 
you [IXa’bi] not make this claim about everything that is attributed tg 
Him, considering [the fact that] it is impossible for Him to transform 
and be defective, as both of these are sions of Creatio ex Nibilp 
Furthermore, you know that creating is of different types, and you name 
Him by some of the [names], and do not name Him by some of the 
other [names]. Why does this not indicate towards the differences of the 


Attributes? God is the grantor of success. 


[Shaykh] Aba Mansur,’*’ stated that [Ka‘bi said that] anything which is 
connected to the Ozdra is not an attribute of God’s Essence, which 
according to his opponents signifies that Gad is not described as having 
Power towards His Attributes, except in the metaphorical sense to mean 


the Mafool™, such as the commanded thing is called ‘command’. 


Furthermore, we have explained the differences with regards to the 
Essential Attributes in terms of their application,'® therefore this same 
application should also be ascribed to other things that have been 


mentioned. 


not All-Hearing, then this would entail that God is not perfect, and this is similarly 
applied to the other Attributes of God that one realises based on reason. 

‘89 ql-Maturidi is called the Fageeh (the Jurist) in a number of places in the book, but 
because it disrupts the flow, I have chosen not to include these into the main body of 
the text. We also do not have any of his legal texts currently in existence. They were 
either lost or never written, despite him providing legal rulings to his community hence 
him being A/Fageeh. 

‘8 Tm Ma fool is a term that is used in Arabic grammar describing the object of an 
action. 

"8 Such as Seeing being applied to that which is seen, and Hearing being applied to 


that which can be heard (but not in a corporeal sense). 


107 


According to [I<a‘bi’s] School, God was not a Creator and He was not 
Merciful but was able to make His Essence such that He is a Creator 
and is Merciful. According to Ka bi’s position we can worship the 
Creator who is Merciful, because He was able to create [the Attribute] 
chat is wotshipped by people because these Attributes are connected to 
' God’s Qudra (Power). Therefore, in reality, according to this idea, the 
one that is worshipped is not God and based on these principles [God] 
ig also originated because His QOuxdra is connected to [the other 


Attributes]. 


hen we ask him, can God not create the creation? If he says ‘no’, then 
it becomes necessaty that Ka‘bi has made [this attribute] into a creator 
and his statement will be void, but if he says ‘yes’, then it becomes 
necessaty that the non-created thing can be created by the Qudra being 


connected to it, and that will necessitate the pre-eternity of the Universe. 


[Ka‘bi] also claimed that the speech [of God] is created based on the 
notion of the ‘coming’ [of speech], a notion that entails an aspect of 
being created. [Al Matutidi responded that] God has also relayed the 
notion of ‘coming’ to Himself but that does not mean that He is 


originated, but He put it in such a way that is befitting of His Divine 


nature. The same is to be applied to the previous [notion of speech], 
where we have explained that God is described [using the word] ‘speech’ 
based [on the premise] that His changing is impossible. The notion of 
‘coming’ should also be applied to the aspect of His Divine nature, and 
not to the aspect that is commonly known among created things such as 
changing and vanishing. Similar to this is the reality of Action and 
Speech; an example of this is the statement of [the Prophet] Ibrahim 
who said “f do not like the things that disappear and set.” Anything that is 


86 Quran, Sutah aAn‘am (6:76) 


108 


once in one state and then transforms into another state is among the 


things that disappear. And God Rnows best. 


He supports his position that the word Hz [is applied to the] 
memorisation [of the Quran]. [He adds to this point by stating that] the 
word [fiz] is also applicable to God. It can mean taking care of 
[something’s] constitution or being concerned with what is included in 
[the content of] speech. The speech that is attributed to God by people 
is a metaphor, for speech which is understood is His Attribute. What we 
said about [the meaning of] God ‘coming’ and ‘going’ is also applied [to 
the Quran], which is that it is a metaphor. The commitment and the 
support of God etc. are literal meanings which are not attributed to God 
and this is similarly [applied to the] Quran. Ka‘bi supported his position 
by using the same type of argument to prove [the Quran] to be originated 
and created, such as the scripture attributing Naskh (abrogation) to [the 
Quran] and the fact that Swrahs [and] Ayahs [are words and letters} which 
cannot be attributed to God. Then [Ka‘bi] built on his position by 
arguing that it cannot be an Essential Attribute such as Knowledge, and 


further claimed that it is not literally called ‘knowledge’.'”’ 


Shaykh Abu Mansur said that this claim is incorrect. His claim of the 
Essential Attributes has been refuted, therefore he should follow Jour 
position] in the Attribute of Knowledge without taking it literally, and [it 
is the same for] Hearing as well as the other Attributes. We have 
explained, thanks to God, [with strong proofs] when much weaker 


proofs would have sufficed for a person of reason. [Ka‘bi] then refuted 


'87 The Mutazalites hold the position that the Quran is created (by God) and it is not 
the eternal speech of God. The Hanbalites (whose dogmas Imam Matutidi explains by 
way of the Hashanites in the Tamilat) believe that the Quran as well as its utterance and 
the speech of God are all eternal. See Footnote 206 for an explanation of the position 
of Maturidi. 


109 


the Kalam (Speech) by [using the example of| the Acts [of God], but 
according to [Ka'bi’s own] opponent there is no difference between 
them. He attempted to refute that position by using the argument that 
based on our observation [of the present Universe], it is possible that a 
person who is able to speak [decides to remain] silent or is mute. His 
refutation is incotrect because he should be [giving the example of a 
person who is} incapable or silent. [His position] is also rebutted [in 
relation to his belief regarding the attribute of] Action. This is, as he has 
mentioned, even accotding to his opponents, where he stated [his 
position related to| Action and [the verses that when taken literally, 
create the issue of God ‘coming’ and] ‘going’. Furthermore, ‘going’ is [in 
itself an] action, but he [made this error] because of confusion and he 
then [attempted to] refute this by using the example that an immature 
child is not mute, even though we said that the [child] is unable (speak].'° 
This demonstrates his great incompetence in providing the correct 


examples for God, instead giving a child and an insane person as a proof. 


There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


In addition, when [Ka‘bi] was criticised, he responded by using |the| 
examples of [God] acting and speaking [being similar to creation], which 
lis a simple proof that] every competent person is [able to use|. That is 
the ignorance of the Mufazalites, may they be blessed with the Tawhid for 


which we ate using such proofs. 


Shaykh Abu Manégur said that the main basis of the issue is the 


attribution of Speech, Knowledge, Action, and being praised. These are 


88 In this paragraph Maturidi is referring to a point of contention he had with Ka‘bi, 
but I was not able to find the details of this discussion in this text. This could be 
because the current manuscript of ‘“Kitaab at-Tawheed 1s incomplete - which we know 
to be the case, but in this instance it lends credence to the idea that I posited earlier 
that this was never meant to be a book by Imam Maturidi but instead were notes taken 


from unstructured lectures that were later compiled into a book by his students. 


all attributed to Him without consideration, with Him being: free from 
defects, and with His Glory being devoid of any deficiencies. He is like 


that pre-eternally. 


Bearing in mind [the fact that] if He became the Creator, and the An 
Rahman (The Most Merciful) and the Speaker due to something else, 
then He cannot also [possess these qualities} - which would mean calling 
[out to] Him by saying ‘oh the One who is not the Most Merciful or is 
not the Creator’, and [if] these words were fused they are] words of 
degradation. Furthermore, applying [a link between God] and His 
creation, proves He is the Most Merciful and a Creator by Himself. ‘Tere 


as no strength to find the truth except by God. 


More than that, if God can be named by anything that can occur in 
something else, then it would be acceptable for God to be named with 
everything that occurs in anything else. If that would be possible for 
God, something similar would be possible in what we observe, and if 
that is impossible with regards to someone to whom changes occut, so 


it has a greater right to be impossible for Him.'® God is the grantor of success. 


[Ka bi] then said that by ‘the Attributes’, what we mean is that they are 
[not an entity] separate to God, fat the same time] they are not [identical] 
to His Essence. In addition, any attribute which belongs to the pre- 
eternal or the originated, none of them are Him. ‘This is [the case for the] 
word [iie. Speech of God] or the Book [he means The Quran]. The 


'° al-Maturidi is arguing against the possibility of naming God by any name. He argues 
that if the principle is that if you can apply any name to God, then you can apply all 
names to God, meaning applying degrading names to God would also be possible. 


Also, it is not possible to apply corporeal names to God that would entail change, 


sal 


Attributes of God are either words by which we ate describing Him, ot 


they ate His words and the Book, and both are originated.” 


[Shaykh] Abu Man&ir said that I have mentioned Ka‘bi’s main statement 
through which he completed his argument, so that you can sce the level 
of his knowledge about God and His Attributes. So at one [point] he 
said there is nothing else that is present [other than the Essence of God] 
and he does not mean that the Attributes are Him. [When he ts referring 
fo an act occurring] and he does not mean that [this occurs] by the 
Attributes [of God], then it means that [this act] does not occur by [God] 
ot by anyone else, but he does not know that these ate statements of the 
ones who attribute. Then |[Ka‘bi] said [an example of this 1s] that if it is 
my word, then this is actually my word and it would not be anything 
besides [my word] so that one may claim that [this word] is someone 
besides me. Furthermore, he said that the Attributes of God are those 
which have been mentioned [by God], but then he also said that these 
[Attributes] are Essential Attributes, so [according to him] if it is 
mentioned, then it is an Essential Attribute, which are His pre-eternal 
Attributes and they are different to Him. God’s glory [does not allow 
the attribution by] which confused people ate describing him. [Ka bil 
then said that if someone inquires as to the reason why [he did not hold 
the position that God’s] Mercy is a literal Attribute of God without 
stating that [God] is Merciful, then his response is that being Merciful 1s 
an attribute whereas Mercy [is not an attribute]. This is because when 
anyone performs an act, he is then described by [that act]. For example, 
if someone insults or curses another person, then he is described as “the 


one who insults or curses’ and it is the same for creating and mercy. It 
y 


10 The Matazalites argue that the Quran is created. Imam Maturidi argues that the 
speech of God is uncreated, but the Quran is letters and words that are the indication 


of the Speech of God. See footnote 206 for a further explanation. 


112 


is not permissible for Him to be described [as being Metciful] unti] He 
says; ‘lam Merciful’, it is in this way that we know that His Attribute is 
Him stating “I am Metciful.’”' There is no strength to find the truth except by 
Ged. 


[Shaykh] Abu Mansur stated that in what way has this confused person 
gained knowledge about the Attributes [of God] to allow himself to 
interpret the Attributes of God by this type of confused illusion? God’. 
Divinity does not allow for such attribution. If in the present Universe, 
an attribute would be a description of the person who ts describing it, 
then the claim of the Universe being a substance or an accident will be 
void.” Tt will also negate [the notion] that it is amalgamating and 
separating, in motion or at rest. There would be no substance which 
would be free from this [issue]. These [issues] are used as proofs for the 
origination of the Universe, but the description of the person who is 
describing [these proofs] can be detached from [that which he is 
describing, meaning that in its essence, the words of description are not 
the same as that which is being described]. This proves that it is a 
condition which is necessary for substances and not as he is claiming, 


There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


We then complete these types of senseless arguments, so that my 
brothers you may thank God for guiding you to His recognition. [We 


continue this discussion] so that you are able to realise the great 


"To summarise al-Maturidi’s perspective on this issue, it is that the application of the 
Attributes is not a form of anthtopomorphism, maintaining that God does not have 
any similarity to created things, whilst affirming the Attributes. So, God is ‘powerful’, 
but it is not like the power of created things, and therefore His power ts not like our 
power, 

 al-Maturidi is continuing his argument from the previous paragraph; that when one 
describes something, the fact that you are describing it does not mean that it is a part 


of you or that it is you. 


113 


misfortune from God towards the people who claim that they know all 
of the benefits that are coming from God within the religion. Even if 
God wanted to increase something He would not be able to give 
‘something extra beneficial, instead it would cause harm.'”’ Therefore, 
you can assume that when He disowns, He considers it a [form of| 
guidance in religion, and His misguiding [people] is one of the bounties 
of God. [Ka‘bi] said that we do not say that God created [the colour] 
red in a dress [but rather] He made it so that ‘red’ was a description of 
[the dress]. Because if the redness was not a description or an attribute, 
then it would be permissible to say that, rather than [say that] God 
created that fwhich is} described. It is the same with motion and rest. 
Furthermore, if someone is writing a letter to another person and he 
describes the length of an object, it is acceptable to state that he 
desctibed [the length] in his letter and claimed that tt was extremely 
obvious. We do not say that it is not permissible to say that the ‘redness’ 
is the attribute of ‘red’, or being merciful is the attribute of the act, but 
instead it is metaphorical, but literally it is as I have explained. He was 
then asked the question of if it is permissible to describe the description, 
to which he replied ‘yes’, with the meaning that ‘yes’ tt is permissible to 


describe, as long the person who is describing it is articulating the 


description, but when he stops describing it then it is not permissible." 


13 Maturidi is referencing his position which he will expand on in greater detail later in 
the book, that Ged creates everything at its most optimum, therefore it is not possible 
for God to cteate the Universe in a better way, because what He creates is always at 
the optimum level of creating. 

14 A] Matutidi relays the position of al-Ka‘bi where his argument is that the Attributes 
of God ate our description as opposed to being the actual Attributes of God. 
Therefore, ‘Mercy’ is not an Attribute of God, but instead it is His action, and therefore 
He should not be described using it. Thus, His attribute is merely God’s saying He is 
merciful, {t ig in the same vein that when God creates redness in a dress, He does not 


give the dress an attribute. Thus, God merely describes the dress in this manner and 


114 


[Shaykh Abu Mansur] said just analyse the ‘great’ level of the Mutaxalites 
by this person, who has this level of the Svjaa and Mawsoof, and Flaqeega 
and Majaaz."”’ If it was to be presented to the most ignorant monotheigt, 
he would find it terrifying. On the Day of Judgement [Ka‘bi] will he 
leading his followers [to Hell], and then he will be the reason for them 
[to get] that which has been described [in terms of punishment in Hell], 
There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


one can say that it is an attribute tropologically, but in reality, the attribute is God 
merely stating it. 

|  Tmam Maturidi is ridiculing Ka‘bi and the purported weakness of his arguments by 
saying he doesn’t even know basic grammar. In Arabic grammat, the Mawsoof is the 
noun that is being described by an adjective, and the adjective is called the Sifaa. 


Hageeqah refers to the literal and Majaaz refers to the metaphorical. 


Li5 


Speech (Kalam) 


[Shaykh] Abt Manéguar stated that God has the quality of speech and this 
is established on the basis of both tradition and reason, As for tradition, 
we find [the following statement from the Quran| “God spoke to Musa 
firecthy’°° Since this is mentioned in the source [the Quran], there should 
be no dispute among people about the speech of God. Furthermore, 
there is also a general agreement that God is Matakallim (Speaking) and 
that He possess Kadam (Speech) in reality, despite the fact that there are 
disagreements as to the nature of [the speech].'"’ Moreover, [God] did 
not negate the demands of the people who said “why does God not speak to 
ys.” ® [Instead] God only described them by [attributing to them] 
artogance, ignorance and stubbornness.” God also said “some of them 


used to listen to the speech of God. 22 


As fot reason, if anyone who is able and knowing does not speak, he 
does so because of some defect such as a disability, or [due to] some 
hindrance. But God is free from having [these defects]. Therefore, it 
stands established that He is speaking. Furthermore, the one who does 
not speak in the present Universe, the cause for this is his not having the 


means by which to see or hear because of a defect. But God is free from 


196 Quran, Surah aa-—Nisa(4:164) God mentioned it by using Masdar in order to 
emphasise the meaning. 

17 The Speech of God is His Eternal Attribute. God does not speak with letters and 
words 

8 Quran, Surah a/-Bagarah (2:118) 

199 Maturid? is arguing that God does not deny that He has speech in these verses, but 
instead rebukes those who question why God doesn’t speak ¢ thew. As such, [mam 
Maturidi argues that God does have speech in reality, even if there are differences with 
respect to the nature of the speech. 

200 Ouran, Surah a/Bagarah (2:75) 


116 


any modes which result in deafness, blindness and dumbness. In fact 
God possessing speech is known by the strongest argument because 
through it [God] is being praised in the present world. It is based on the 


faculty of speech humans are superior to animals.””! 


Consider one who possesses speech yet does not speak; this is because 
of a defect or [due to] silence. Furthermore, suppose it is the speech of 
someone else, it will result in similarity [to God], [as God mentioned the 
following statement in the Quran]; “wothing is in his likeness.’** [Therefore 
it is patamount that one] denies similarity in the attribute as well as 
within the nature of the speech. He supported the [point] by [mentioning 
the following statement in the Quran] “did they create as His creation??®® 
This results in the similarity of the act, [which] results in similarity {in the 
nature]. In addition, if the entirety of creation were to work together, 
they would not be able to produce something similar to it fie. The 
Quran], which refutes [any type of] likeness that would necessitate 
similarity [with God]. It stands established that the speech fof God] is 
different to the creation, as His ‘nature’ is different to their [nature]. 
Moreover, the various aspects of the speech of creation have not been 
examined [in order] to find the parameters of theit meaning, [For 
example], God has mentioned the speech of the ants, the Aadbud bird, 
and the éasbee of the mountains, as well as the [various] other creations 
[whose speech] is not understood by alphabetic letters nor are they 


recognised based on human speech. If it is confirmed that there is a 


"In terms of reason, Maturidi argues that anyone not speaking is due to some 
disability or defect and God is above the attribution of any defects. Speech is also the 
attribute that distinguishes the humans from the animals. In. this section, Imam 
Maturidi is using the analogy of the present for the absent. 

2 Quran, Sutah Ash-Shuraa (42:11) 

703 Quran, Sutah Ar-Ra’d (13:16) 

* Sound is not an attribute, as your attribute does not leave you. The attribute is what 


reacts to everything around you and this can be either positively or negatively. For 


117 


type of speech that cannot be comprehended [from amongst the speech 
of the created things}, then it is imprudent to attempt to comprehend 
the Speech of God. It is in the same manner that the acts of God are 
peyond the comprehension of the creation. When we have established 
the differences from all perspectives, it demonstrates the impossibility 
of the creation being similar to God. It also negates the notion that 
accidents ate amalgamated or in parts, [and that they} increase or 
decrease. Ali of these are descriptions of the speech of the creation.“ 


God is the grantor of success. 


Furthermore, if it is due to something else, then the application of the 
issue that has been mentioned towards God will be avoided by the other 
[mentioned thing]. That is the sign of [being in need] and the proof of 
origination. On the other hand, if it will not be through something else, 
it will be [God] by His Speech, Power and Knowledge. It is permissible 
to say that what we hear from the creation is the Speech of God based 
on the common fusage of the word ‘speech’, as it is said about the 
letters, poems and statements. It is evident that [the letters, poems and 
statements] ate things that have been produced by the creation, but it ts 
not possible God is speaking by Himself. Bearing in mind that the heard 
thing is either an accident, which cannot [simultaneously] be in two 
locations, or it is a body, which is in the same manner, of it 1s neither [of 
them]. These ate locations, and it is not possible [for God] to be in in a 


location, [even though] He heats [that which comes] from a location. It 


example, eating food of sitting. It is the processing of information around you. Your 
thoughts are there to analyse in your mind or to express verbally. But when the process 
is in your thoughts there is no sound. Hence the main process of speech before it ts 
expressed is in your mind, which may consist of pictures etc, But none of this ‘process’ 
of speech is applicable to God. 

205 Matusidi is explaining that the Speech of God bears no similarity to the creation, 
because the Quran clearly states in multiple verses that God is not similar to the 


creation. 


118 


has been established that the reason for it being attributed to God is [the 


evidence] that we have [previously] mentioned.”” 


Bear in mind that God can make us hear His Speech through somethin 
P 8 g 

which is not His Speech.” For instance, each one of us makes another 

[person] hear our speech, even though this does not have the exact 


“This is because He made us aware of His 


[nature] of our speech 
Power, Knowledge and Divinity through His creation, even though His 


creation bears no [similarity] to [God]. God is the grantor of success. 


If someone [were to] ask ‘Did God really make Moses hear His speech, 
as He said, “God spoke to Moses.’?*” , we respond to him that ‘God made 
Moses hear by the letters and sound that He created in the language of 
Moses. ‘Therefore, God made him hear something which was not 
created.” The opinion of waq/"' is applicable in two ways. The first is 


that it is not [the Speech of] God, nor is it [the speech of] someone else, 


2% Tmam Maturidi argues that the Speech of God is etetnal, uncreated, and non-verbal, 
The Speech from God cannot be heard by the creation but instead God creates letters 
and sounds through which the creation can hear His Speech. He argues that the 
recitation of the Quran and the Speech of God ate different, but not ontologically 
different. God causes His creation to hear His Speech by the means of hearing created 
sounds and letters. Therefore the Quran is the literal indication of the Speech of God. 
“7 The position of Maturidi is that the Speech of God is not audible. He never clarified 
whether it is not audible at all or whether it is only audible by way of a miracle, although 
this was the position taken by later Maturidi scholars; that God creates something 
which describes the speech of God. 

“8 i.e, our ‘speech’ is our internal monologue or thoughts and we express these 
thoughts and feelings verbally in an inexact representation of what they really are. 

2) Quran, Surah Ay-Nisa (4164) 

“1 Al Maturidi argued for the eternity of the Quran, but not the physical created Quran. 
He also made a distinction between the uncreated Speech of God and human speech 
(say while reciting The Quran), which is created. 

“\ Waa in theology is remaining silent on an issue, ot sitting on the fence, as you feel 


that no one position is stronger than another. 


119 


ag it is in terms of [the other Attributes such as] Knowledge and Power. 
The second is that we do not know if it is created or something else, and 


that is a distant (conclusion|*"” 


because it may mislead [a person] in terms 
of the fundamentals of the School of Thought. The majority of scholars 
reject [this position], there being Iywa (Scholarly Consensus) that we 
must know whether it is created or something else. In addition, it is 
either that we know that He is speaking by Himself - then its meaning is 
what we have [already] mentioned, or it is not by Himself and therefore 
it will be through something else but everything other than God has 
been created by God. All things being created by God has been proven 
based on Scripture. Therefore, this signifies that the position that it was 
from something other than God would necessitate origination [of that 
thing], and origination as well as creation ate from God. On the other 
hand, it is unknown if God is speaking by Himself, so then wagf occurs 
due to a lack of knowledge about the issue. In that type of situation, it is 
necessaty [for a person] to learn and study, as there is no proof that 
forces one to do wagf, but it is only his lack of knowledge that is causing 
him [to hold that position]. Or he may be doing wagf as he does not 
understand the intention of the one who is asking him about this issue - 
in the sense that what does he specifically mean by the speech of God 
and the Quran? Does he mean that this cannot be described by anything 
that we have mentioned? if that is the case, then he has the right not to 


answer this question until he understands what is specifically meant.7)? 


212 Meaning that it is an erroneous conclusion. 
13 Maturidi is arguing that those who rely on the position of agfdo so due to a lack 
of knowledge on the issue and not because it is viable position on the issue of the 


Speech of God. 


120 


The Correct Understanding of God’s Free Choice ( ‘Tkhtiyac) in 
Repudiation of Ka‘bi 


Ka‘bi stated that the actions of God are by His choice, because natura] 
actions are performed [only] in one manner. [Shaykh] Aba Mangu¢ 
stated that |Isa’bi] makes a good point and that this is [the position] of 
the School of the Ahk Tamwhid (People of Monotheism). But his 
statement does not correlate [with the position of] his own school of 
thought. This is because [when the question is posited about this issue 
and we ask] is the creation God’s choice, or [the choice of] some other, 
and we also ask the same [questions] about His actions; if he states that 
it is God’s chotce, then it signifies that His actions are His choice. [The 
fact that he is stating] that the actions of God are by His choice signifies 
that itis His choice and there is nothing else to add [to this point].*'* But 
if he posits a different position and states that if it is the Act lof God] 
then it becomes necessaty {that the Act will] infinitely occur by choice 
without having a start, that is not possible because creation is finite. On 
the other hand, if it will be an action devoid of choice then his claim is 
negated. ‘The same argument is applicable to the one who desctibes God 
by His pre-eternal [vada (Will), which is the choice of creating anything 
at its [appropriate] time. Our proof regarding choice is the [fact that] in 
their essence, created things are different to one other; they have wisdom 
and they are signs of the Oneness of God, which proves the choice of 


everything being as it is. There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


Pn ee a 
214 Tn terms of stating that actions are different to choice. 


121 


Against Those Who Profess an Autonomous Process of Nature 


The people who believe that creation came from natute and [what ts in| 
food, and the ones who believe it is a circumstance of the stars, the Sun 
and the Moon, and the ones who believe it is an effect of the rotation of 
otbits, ot those who believe in descendants [occurring through] 
procreation by parents - all of this is based on the existence of something 
through something else. If it does not have a starting point, then we have 
mentioned [its proof] with evidence. [On the other hand] if it has a 
starting point, then fit is bound by] the condition that it is impossible for 
it to bring itself into existence, or alternatively it is non-existent [and then 
brings itself into existence], which is also impossible, as this would mean 
that it is compelled into supervising all [created things], and the absent 
thing cannot pass on [this ability to supervise]; [the reason for this is] 
because if it can bring itself into existence at [a specific] time, then it call 
also cause itself to be brought into non-existence, which 1s problematic. 
The other option is that it will bring itself into existence, after [already] 
coming into existence, which proves existence through something 


else”? God is the grantor of success. 


Furthermore, everything that has been mentioned are types of inanimate 
things, except for parents, whose knowledge does not extend to 
arranging the basis of their children, [they] who are oblivious that [their 
unborn child] may not be as they had hoped, and if their [children] are 


cotrupted they ate unable to reform them. They do not possess the 


215 al-Matutidi spends a significant amount of time refuting the position of the 
Naturalists. He states that God caused some things to perish whilst other things He 
kept in a state of change such as motion and rest, which is one of the proofs that God 
acts by His free choice. He also argued that since God has the freedom to choose, He 


then must have the power to create the Universe according to His own Will. 


il 


competency to comprehend the things which are hidden from them 
never mind being able to control [manifest] things, as well as the many 
other things that disprove that they are the reason for their lown] 
existence. In terms of inanimate things, they do not possess knowledge 
about that which benefits them, and neither are they aware of things that 
may protect them. It signifies that the things which occur through 
nature, as well as nourishment, transpire by the design of a Wise and 
Knowledgeable [Creator], who created them so that they contain both 
benefits and harms. Seeing as though [some] animals have needs that do 
not exist in other [animals] which we have mentioned, such as |the 
vatying processes of] hearing and seeing, this is particularly [found in] 
humans, who have the capacity to speak and are able to distinguish and 
discover [the various created things] - despite [the fact that this ability] 
does not occut immediately [in humans] but instead develops as they 
grow |and this development] occurs by being nurtured by their parents, 
This has no effect Jon the parents], so then how can such a thing 


influence their children??"® 


All things have finite limits, and once these have been reached, they will 
stop growing in their length, width, hearing, seeing and reason. Instead, 
all things [then] begin to decrease despite their nourishment and 
perpetuation, which signifies that their nature is such, not because of 
what the [Naturalists] mentioned but because of the One who is 
Knowledgeable, the One from whom nothing escapes. And [God is] 


Divine by Himself, so [there is] nothing [that can] incapacitate Him. 


Furthermore, [in terms of] the various types of substances that have 
been mentioned, it is possible for them to be harmed and [equally] it is 


possible [for things to] to benefit them, and these [various attributes are] 


16 The fact that God restores what has perished and brings into existence things that 


do not exist can only happen by having choice. 


123 


contradictory. [t is not conceivable [for them] to converge in order to 
help one another, which signifies that whatever the thing may be, it has 
peen formed by another. This is because anything that is in a specific 


configuration by itself cannot change as long as it remains itself. 


In addition, based on our observations, all living things yield to their 
needs and desires. If that was not the case, they would not be in need of 
noutishment and as such that would then be a reason for them to not 
be in need. It is not conceivable that [something can] provoke its [own] 
desire and create its [own] need. Furthermore, it cannot be that the desire 
as well as the need [exist] by themselves and this is because of the 
following details: Existence by itself signifies not being in need, and it 
cannot be the existence because of something else that is unable to cause 
the need. The thing which exists by itself cannot disappear, because it 1s 
not in need of something else. This is because it is not possible that 
something can make itself so that it is in need of something else. Instead, 
ifit were to create itself so that it was in need of something else by itself, 
and then without being in need it would no longer remain [in existence], 
it stands established that there is something else that initially created it 
so that it was in need, and [this Creator] designed them so that they had 
desires and created them with needs and the capacity to fulfil their 
desires. So, in [reality the proof that is] used to deny the Knowledge of 
the Creator, is [in fact] the proof of His existence. There is no strength to 


find the truth except by God. 


Furthermore, there is no substance in the Universe which is not 
controlled by something, and that without this control its existence 
would be easiet and gratifying. [Which would mean that it could] remain 
in one place [at rest] or in continuous motion [on its own], [or it could] 
nurture the livelihood of something else. This is the system of the entire 


Universe, and it is not possible that something which is controlled by 


124 


[something external to] itself will possess the ability to contro] 
jsomething else], since to do so is Givaa (making something else self. 
sufficient) and it cannot [even] dispel [the condition of] being controlled 
from itself. It signifies that all these things have a Knowledgeable 
controller, who knows their needs and who causes them to not be in 
need and He created them in this way. We need each other to live and 
to continue, even if we do not possess the understanding of the ways in 
which we need each other. We also do not know how to dispel from 
ourselves the quality of being in need. This signifies that there is 4 


IKnowledgeable supervisor who supervises everyones’ condition. 


If we were to find the most perfect condition and expert supervisor, and 
were to ask him to control his own condition and citcumstances, in 
terms of Space and Time with all [specific] details, he would be unable 
to do so. [This would be even more the case] for those ones that ate less 
[able] than him. No one is able to break free from the patameters of 
Time and Space, never mind those lesser than him. No one is able to 
escape the condition of dependence on Time or Space by oneself. 
[Elence,] it stands established that it is not possible that the Universe be 
as it is without someone who is [not affected by] its parameters, In terms 
of being in need, it needs someone who is Self-sufficient, 
Knowledgeable and Powerful. There is no strength to find the truth except by 
God. 


125 


Against Those Who Profess an Eternal Material Substance 
( Tina) 


[In terms of] one who believes that the Flay#/a (Prime Matter) of the 
Universe is pre-eternal, if he believes its substance meets the same 
conditions as the Universe itself, then all of the issues fie. of createdness| 
which ate applicable to the Universe will also be applicable to the 
substance of this raw material - in terms of it being in need and it 
suffering from inability fie. it is non-omnipotent]. Both of these are 
signs of the origination of the Universe and that tt came into existence 
via something else. Whatever we explained about the Universe will also 


2A? 


be applicable to the raw material, 


On the other hand, if it is not a substance [and instead] is self-sufficient 
and powerful and is not affected by desires causing it look to others for 
fulfilment {of these desires], then we need to analyse its self-sufficiency 
and strength. It could be that the Universe came [into existence] after it 
had been affected by certain things such that it transformed so that it 
possessed needs and desires. Therefore, it is possible that its [actual| 
substance can be affected by having needs and desires due to this 
transformation and [resulting] change. This means that all of the 
conditions for self-sufficiency and strength are not present, meaning that 
its [substance] became the main basis and source of desires [and being 
in need] and therefore the supervision of a Wise and Knowledgeable 


[Creator] becomes necessary. 


217 See Footnote 116, as in this section Shaykh Aba Manéur is revisiting the position 
of the Philosophers who believe in pre-eternal matter, which some of them refer to as 


Hlaysila 


126 


[Theit proposition] is that the entire Universe became so that it was in 
this state, or that the raw material remained in [its original] state but the 
entire Universe was contained within it and then [the Universe] appeared 
[from within it] naturally - which is the opinion of the people who 
believe in Haywla. Then everything which was in the Universe was 
destroyed, in terms of unnaturally [existing] in other things and then 
emerged naturally, For example, they posit that each human was within 
sperm, trees and plants were in seeds, and that this is the way of all 
substances. [Also, for them it is the] exact same thing in regard to the 
continuous [processes] being hidden within food etc. Therefore, it 
becomes necessary that it is the same for the Prime Matter, which is their 
claim pertaining to the Hay//a, because the both of them are the basis of 


the Universe. 


ae a 


127 


Against the Karamites 


Furthermore, this explanation is also applicable to the Karamites.’ This 
is because they hold the position that the entirety of the Universe is 
literally within the ‘First Initiator’. God nurtures the entity, and this 
entity supports the Hayzla, and the Universe is constructed from this 
Hayala. It necessitates the existence of the first source. This is applicable 
to evetything which is not naturally in another thing but appears 
naturally. They consider our present existence [i.c. the Universe] as proof 
of the initial [cause]. The first is the substance of the entity and the 
second is substance of the particles. It then became the substance of 
everything but is recognised by the substance of particles and that is 
because no one is able to comprehend [the entirety] by using their 
senses. If these [points] are established, then what we have explained 
[previously] is also applicable [in this case], in terms of being in need, 
having desires and the occurrence of incidents, which signifies the 
origination of the initial basis [of the Universe|, because it can be 
affected by evanescence and annihilation. ‘This also refutes the claim of 
the Karamites, even if they posit that it came into existence after not 


being.? There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


The fact is that the Universe is benighted and unaware of what 1s 
unnaturally [contained within] it, and of the condition of what ts 
[contained within] it, who is in it and what will happen from it. It is the 
same [case] as I previously mentioned in terms of the lack of awareness 


by semen and seeds. ‘This is also applicable to the Hayw/a and the other 


218 The Karamites are followets of Isamaili Shi’sm. They rose to fame for their rebellion 
against the Abbasid Caliphate. 
219 The Karamites believed in God but also held that matter is pre-eternal and that the 


Universe was contained within this pre-eternal matter. 


a 


128 


[related cases] they have claimed. ‘Therefore, it becomes necessary that 
the one that they claim exists does not possess the competence to 
supervise [the Universe], and nothing in the Universe came into 
existence because of it. But if it existed, so that [existence] occurred dye 
to someone who knows what is going to happen, and from it He 
[meaning God] made its foundation appeat, He will unnaturally create 
with it [something that] appears natural, by creating substances and 
places for it so that it can grow, which is the actual belief of Monotheism, 
He is the one who created everything in its initial [state] and everything 
existed through Him in the condition that they have claimed, or He ig 
Infinite Creator of everything by His own Will, [and is able to create] in 


any way that pleases Him, as is claimed by the Monotheists. 


If God is initially able to create something, which at the outset is going 
to be the foundation of something else, then He is initially able to create 
evetything in whatever manner pleases Him, without explicitly and 
unnaturally engaging in it fand] without making it emerge naturally, but 
instead by creating it [directly or Ex Nehilo|. On the other hand, if they 
were to argue that everything was camouflaged in the substance of the 
main foundation [of the Universe], and then it appeared naturally, then 
even that [position] will be according to what we have stated. They 
posited the evidence of the seed and semen. Consider the weakness of 
such arguments, because reason rejects the possibility of the substance 
of large objects being hidden within the substance of smaller objects. 
This is based on observation fof reality] and [demonstrates] the 


contentious [nature of their statement]. 


“0 There ate some who believe that everything in the Universe was physically 
contained within the ‘Prime Matter’. They give the example of how a human is 
contained within ‘semen’ or a plant is contained within a seed. al-Matutid? js arguing 


that something that is larger in dimension cannot physically be contained within 


129 


The foundation [of the Universe} which they identify as the raw material, 
or Hayila, or initiator, or entity, that can create the Universe without the 
Universe being [contained within this entity] or naturally, can create what 
and how it wants, without anyone being able to oppose its will and no 
one can teplace it in the supervision [of the Universe]. This is {in fact] 
the statement of Monotheism. They may name [God] by other names, 
but [God] is the name of the creator and initiator of the Universe 
according to the Monotheists. [here 2 no strength to find the truth except by 
God. 


something that is smaller in dimension to it. He argues that this is based on out 
observation of the laws of nature. Although, the proponents of this position argue that 
‘Prime Matter’ from which the Universe originated is without size, shape or dimension. 


Therefore, they do not argue that a large object came from a smaller object. 


130 


The Correct Understanding of God’s Names (Asma? 


Shaykh] Abu Mansur stated that our stance in regard to the linguistic 
classification of the names of God |is that they] are of several 
[categories]. The first type refers to the names by which we call Him, 
These [names] ate different to one another, because we call Him 
‘Knowledgeable’ which is different to [calling Him] ‘Powerful’. This is 
the elucidation of when one says that God has such-and-such number 
of names, It is similar to when it is mentioned that God created such- 
and-such Mercy, but it does not mean that God displays this Mercy by 
using a created mercy, because it is not possible that initially God was 
not merciful and then He became Merciful by this created metcy.”! He 
then passed this mercy onto His creation, but it is called [the name 
‘mercy’] because it was due to His Mercy, and it is similar to the name 
of Paradise, the rain, and the vatious other things that are [known as 
and] called ‘the mercy of God’. It is comparable to statements whete one 
states that ‘it was his command’, but in reality, it was not his command 
but it was because ofhis command.” There is no strength to find the truth except 
by God. 


The second [type] refers to the meaning that it is pertaining to His 


Essence, which the creation is unable to know except by Him, despite 


“2! This is a well-known disagreement between the Matutid? and Ashari School. Shaykh 
Abu Mansir holds the position that God is pre-eternally Metciful, He was always 
Merciful and as such He is eternally named as “The Merciful. The Asharis argue that 
one cannot name God ‘Merciful’ until the Attribute of mercy is applied, even though 
He possess the eternal Attribute of Mercy. This disagreement is like the question 
regarding whether someone can be called ‘a writer’ before he writes anything or can an 
artist be named an ‘artist’ before he creates a piece of work. 

222 Shaykh Abi Manégit classifies the Names of God into three categories. The first is 


the names that we call God, but they are other than Him. 


Lent 


the fact that His Divinity cannot be comprehended by letters [and 
words], and this differs due to the variances in the language which refers 
to His actual Essence. [For example, the Names of God] such as A+ 
[’abid (The Unique), Allah, the Merciful, the Existing, the Pre-eternal 
and the Worshipped One.” 


The third” is linked to the linguistic derivation of the Attributes such 
as the Knowledgeable, the Powerful, which in reality, if they were to 
refer to someone else would [give an indication of a form of] change, 
which would make it necessary that naming [God] by them would not 
be referring to their real commonly understood meaning.” There is no 


strength to find the truth except by God. 


This would then mean that it is acceptable to name [God] with anything 
that is used to name other things, as long as we do not denote the 
meaning that is [commonly] understood. We then {make further| 
inquities of those who believe that God does not have pre-eternal 
knowledge and that these names ate originated. We ask them [what was| 
God’s [state] before He created the creation? Did He know Himselfe 
Did He know what He does or [does] not [do]? Also, did He or did He 
not know anything with His Essence? If the answer is no, then [it means 


that] He was ignorant until He created knowledge and He became 


223 The second are those Names that pertain to His Essence and cannot be 
comprehended by His creation and must be accepted in the way in which they were 
revealed by God. 

24 The third are the Attributes that come through derivation, because in the present 
world there is no other way of attempting to grasp what is meant by the Attributes. 

225 Shaykh Abt ManSir is explaining the position of those who posit that when one 
calls God ‘knowledgeable’ it is not the same as when one is referring to a created thing 
using the same word. This is because it is commonly known that one’s level or 
knowledge changes, but this is not the case with God, and this is the reason why there 
is always an addition to the application of the word ‘knowledge’ to God, such as adding 


the word ‘eternal’ and ‘unchanged’ to the statement. 


132 


knowledgeable because |of the creation of this knowledge]. On the othey 
hand, if He knew it, then did He or did He not become knowledgeable 
by His Essence? If He became knowledgeable by the knowledge of Hig 
Essence, then it becomes necessary He was pre-eternally in this state. 
Therefore, attributing this name [of God] to others will contravene 


monotheism,” 


226 According to Imam Maturidi, the Attributes of God are classified into three 
categories; the first are the Essential Attributes (4/Sifaat al-Dhatiyyah), the second ate 
Positive Attributes (4/Sifaat al-Thubutiyyah) and the third are Active Attributes (A/ 
Sifaat al-Piliyyah 


i 


All Names Apply to God Eternally (With a Critique of Jahm bin 


Safwan) 


The focal position of the people who deny the Attributes of God is that 
they say that God did not have this name, and He did not have an 
Attribute such as ‘Knowledge’, which means that {God| knows pre- 
eternally by His Essence. Therefore, they reject the Names and 
Attributes, as they postulate that all of [the Attributes imply] origination, 
as stated by Jahm*” when he said [in reference to God’s Attributes] that 
[it cannot be that] ‘He mas not knowledgeable nor powerful, and then He knew,’ 
[he argued that] God’s Divinity and purity does not allow for [any of] 
these [attributions]. We then ask him [i.e. Jahm] of the situation if [God] 
knew His [state] pre-eternally, as this would necessitate the name pre- 
eternally, whereas if He did not know that He is knowledgeable, then it 
would necessitate the name ‘ignorant’, which even according to them 
cannot be avoided. This is because according to them the meaning of 
‘knowledge’ is not being ignorant. Therefore, if [God] was not pre- 
eternally knowledgeable, it denotes that He was pre-eternally ignorant. 
There is no strength to find the trath except by God. 


Furthermore, we then discuss with them about [issues related tol 
Knowledge, because according to them it was not [present] and then it 
[later appeared]. If this is the case, it would imply that this is also the case 


with all things. Bearing in mind that [according to them} He can be 


22? Jahm Bin Safwan was born in Kufa and died in 746 AD. He was consicleted the 
leader of the Jahmites. His books have not sutvived and as such his positions are only 
viewed from the perspective of his opponents, such as in the above chapter where 
Shaykh Aba Manéur is relaying his alleged position about the Attributes of God. Jahm 
also denied that the physical Quran was eternal, was against anthropomorphism, and 


espoused determinism - that man is devoid of Free Will. 


134 


affected by Knowledge even when He did not have OQndyg 
(Power/Ability) and nor did othets [possess this power/ ability], This 
terminates their claim of [following] monotheism. We then ask them 
about the issue where they say He was Knowledgeable by Himsel¢ 
before creating, but He did not have Knowledge in reality, then [the 
question atises that] how did He know His Essence? If He had 
Knowledge in reality, then this claim that [the Names of God] are 
otiginated is negated. On the other hand, if Jahm states that God Knows 
without being Knowledgeable or being able to [know], then the 
[refutation] that I mentioned will also be applicable to this atgument, in 
terms of the [proofs] that I have mentioned in teference to the 
|[purported| impossibility of pre-eternally attributing Knowledge to Him, 


with the refutation of it implying ofigination. 


On the other hand, if Jahm was to posit that God knew through others, 
by God observing by the various incidents fie. events in the life of the 
Universe or man] that affected [God’s Knowledge] and [that is how the] 
Universe came into existence, Jahm’s position will coincide with those 
atheists who believe in the Hayz/a (Primal Raw Material) and that of the 
Thanawi’s, who believe that the Universe came into existence due to 
various incidents that affected its foundation. Fissentially, this point is 
telated to the issue of the Attributes which we have [previously| 


mentioned. There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


13S 


Anthropomorphic Descriptions of God in the Quran: God Sitting 
on the Throne (Al-'Istawa ‘Ala al-'Arsh) 


[Shaykh] Aba Manéur said that Muslims disagreed on the issue of 
[ascribing] location [to God]. Some of them said [that] God is on the 
‘Arsh, and that He is settled on the “Arsh. According to [their belief], the 
Arsh is a throne which is carried by the Angels surrounding it. God said 
[in following verse of the Holy Quran] “the ‘Arsh of your Lord ts carried by 
eight” and He said “you will see the Angels surrounding the ‘Arsh’? and He 
said “and the ones who are carrying the ‘Arsh and the ones who are around it?™™ 


and they have supported their opinion with the verse “The Most Merciful 
[who] established al- Arsh ‘istawa’ lias 


The people who raise their hands towards the sky during prayer and 
hope for the benefits that they desire [from God] posit that God came 
[to that location] after [previously] not occupying [that location] ae 


because of [their understanding] of the verse “after that He settled on the 


228 Quran, Surah A/-Haggah (69:17) 

229 Quran, Surah Az-Zamar (39:75) 

230 Quran, Surah A+Ghafir (40:7) 

31 Quran, Surah AtTaha (20:5) 

232 Shaykh Aba Mangiur is relaying the position of the Anthropomorphists, who apply 
a literal meaning to these verses and as such come to the conclusion that God is a 
corporeal being. They hold the position that God is literally sitting on the throne. There 
are different levels of Anthropomorphists; some of them hold the belief that God is 
literally sitting on the throne but do not accept that God is literally the fourth person 
listening to a whispered conversation (see quote below) and instead will give a 
metaphorical interpretation to this specific verse. There are other Anthropomorphists 


who accept the literal interpretation of all these verses. 


136 


throne”. Some of them say that [God] is everywhere because of the 
verse “whenever three people are whispering, God is the fourth’®” and the vers al 
“We are closer to hin than his jugular vein’” and God said, ‘We are closey 5 
him than you, but you do not see it.” And God said “He is on the sky and the 
Earth”* They make the assumption that if you say that God is in one 
location rather than [in] another, it will necessitate a limit [to God]. [We 
know] that anything that has limits is smaller than [the thing by which jt 
is limited] and [in turn that thing] is larger than it, and [this type of 
ascription| is a defect. Therefore, it necessitates a location and it results 
in [God] being finite, which is impossible unless the space is larger [than 
God], which [based on our observation of the present Universe] is 
puerile. I! someone were to choose a location [for God] which is not 
sufficient for Him, then the limit of this space will be the limit of God, 
and God’s Divinity does not allow [that which they ascribe to Him]; 
whilst others denied ascribing location, or [argued] that no location can 
be [attributed to God] except metaphorically, which would mean that 
[when a location is used it means that] He is the Maintainer of |the 


Universe] and has Knowledge of everything. 


Shaykh Abu Mansur said that the general principle in the notion of the 
ascription of the Kz/Z (universal things) to God and vice versa is in fact 
God describing Himself in terms of His Sublimity, Elevation, Majesty 


and Glory; such as when God said ‘To Him belongs the possesston of the 


°° Quran, Surah ALFargan (25:59) 

“4 Imam Maturidi is presenting the purported position of those who argue that God 
is everywhere, and that the basis of their position is that one cannot ascribe a particular 
place to God and therefore He is everywhere, as God is Powerful and Omnipresent. 
°° Quran, Surah ALMujadila (58:7) 

6 Quran, Surah ALQaf (50:16) 

? Quran, Surah A/Wagi'ah (50:16) 

“8 Quran, Surah A/Wagi'ah (43:84) 


137 


Heavens and the Earth 29 and ‘the Lord of the Heavens and the Earth*”as well 


as 
(so all of these are issues related to the general things]. In terms of 


[verses that are related] to the creation [such as] “Lard of the Worlds” 


asctibing particular things to God, it comes from the notion that God is 
showing |the thing] respect and favouring it, in terms of nobility, dignity 
and superiority” such as we find {in the following verse of the Holy 


Qurans| ‘God is with those who are conscious of Elim mee 


and [the ascription to 
God such as when God] said ‘that is the mosque of God ®*® ot ‘the camel of 
God” or the house of God etc. Similarly, people’s relation to each other 
is also conceived in this way. We do not discount the possibility that 
accrediting creation to God can have the same implication as accrediting 


a specific creation to another specific creation; it can imply that one 1S 


239 Quran, Surah A/Furgan (25:2). God is attributing the ownership of the skies and 
Earth to himself 

40 Quran, Surah A%-Zakbraf (43:82) 

“4 Quran, Surah AZ Yunus (10:10) 

42 Shaykh Aba Manéur is explaining that whenever God makes a Kulk (general) 
attribution to Himself such as in the Quran “And He és the subjugator over His servants, and 
He is the Wise, the Acquainted [with all?’ (6:18), it means that He is attributing Glory to 
Hunself. 

243 When God mentions a /vzi (a particular thing), it means that God is making it 
respected or showing that the thing is of high standing and that God is showing it some 
favour. 

4 Ouran, Surah An-Nah/ (16:128) 

45 Quran, Surah Ash-Shams (91:13) 

446 Quran, Sutah a+A’raf (7:73) 


138 


showing his favour towards another.’ The general ascription of One 


creation to another implies the meaning of ‘powete 


[Shaykh] Abu Mansur stated that the initial principle of this is that God 
was there and there was no location. It is possible for a location to 
become evanescent and [itrespective of this occurrence] God will remain 
as He was, without any change. He is now as He was befote and God is 
free from change, annihilation and transformation. Every one of these 
are indications of origination; they signify [the created] Universe and ate 
proofs of the possibility of annihilation. ‘This is because in terms of 
[annihilation] or transforming from one state to another state, it is the 
same as transforming from one entity to another entity. The reason for 
this is because the both of them did not transpire on theit own, which 
signifies that they ate also [subject] to change. [For] anything that does 
not exist in and of itself, it is possible that it can change and be 


annihilated.” There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


Furthermore, when one ascribes a location to God, irrespective of 
whether [it includes| all locations, then they are attributing need to God 
for the thing [upon] which He settles [(exists)], which [would make God] 


*" An example of this would when a King states that a specific person is ‘one of his 
people.’ Tt means that the King is honouring that person by ascribing the person to 
himself. So when God is ascribing something such as a house to Himself, He is 
honouring that house and giving it a special preference, such as in the case of the 
Kaabah (the House of God). 

8 Hor example, if one were to say that ‘France belongs to the King’, it is not an 
example of favouring but instead it is demonstrating his power. Therefore, the same 
metaphor that is used for God can be used for the creation, but what is used for 
creation cannot be used for God. 

* Shaykh Aba Man§ir simultaneously deals with the argument of those who believe 
that God is one place, or is concutrently in all places, as God being in a places makes 
change and motion necessary, which is a sign of being otiginated. As such, He cannot 


be in a place or in all places. 


139 


the same as each one of the bodies and accidents that exist in a location, 
[as] they move within [the location] and settle in it. [And this] despite the 
fact that all of this would mean that the Universe does not exist in a 
location. Therefore, the One who brought the entire Universe into 
existence, sustained and maintained it, is not in a location as His Divinity 
does not allow for Him to be in need of a location. His Divinity does 
not allow for such description when [even] the entirety of creation does 
not exist [just] within space, even though the [specific] details and parts 
that ate inside of the Universe [do] exist within space.” In addition, if 
we believe that God is in a location, that can only be the case if God was 
a part of the Universe, which is the sign of a defect. It would also become 
necessaty that the Universe can exist in no location, and if all of the 
Universe can exist in no location then God [too] can exist (and is in a 
better position to) exist in no location.” There is no strength to find the trath 


except by God. 


250 4|-Matutidi is referring to the notion that there is a possibility that the entirety of 
created things do not exist only in space. Mor example, things such as the Soul; where 
does it exist - inside or outside of the Universe and Space-time? 

251 Imam Matutidi’s second argument is that if God is in one place or all places, He is 
limited by the location that He is in, which means that God will be smaller than the 


space that contains Him and that would mean that He is finite. 


140 


The Differing Views of the Throne as well as the Possibility of , 
Localisation of God 


[Shaykh] Abu Mansur continues that [in terms of those who hold the 
position that God] exists on the ‘Arsh and [that the] “Arsh is such g 
location’ that [God] Himself is there, or that He is everywhere, [such a 
person] has three [possible] options: It is either that the space is bigger 
than Him, or they are equal [in size or dimension], or He is bigger than 
the space. If it is the first option, then [we observe] that anything that is 
surrounded by another thing is smaller [than the thing that surrounds it], 
which would mean that [God is] lesser than the creation, as He would 
be [physically] smaller [than the space that surrounds Him}, 
Furthermore, if one were to describe God by stating that He is 
surrounded by space, then it will necessitate that Time is also applicable 
to Him, that He has a beginning and end and that He is finite, which 
would [again] mean that He is lesser than His creation. On the other 
hand, if it is according to the second possibility, it would be necessary 
that when the [size of the] creation increases, God will once again 
become less than the creation, [so] then whatever we stated {in terms of 
the] first possibility will also be applicable in this instance. In terms of 
the third possibility, it will necessitate the repugnant condition [because 
the space that He is located in is smaller than Him] as well [His being in] 
need. More than that, it will become necessary that He was unable to 
create something that would be sufficient for Him. If one were to 
consider that something similar were to happen to a King - that the King 
would sit or exist in something which ts not sufficient [for him], it would 


be considered quite a repugnant [situation]. Furthermore, it will 


2 Kor the word ‘Makaan’, I have used the translation ‘space’ and ‘location’ 


interchangeably depending on the context, as ‘location’ means a point in space/time. 
geably g > P E 


141 


necessitate that God has parts [meaning that He can be broken up into 


parts], because some of Him will be hanging*” [ 


from the space, as He 
will be larger than the space which He is attempting to occupy}. All of 
these signify created things and God’s Divinity [does not allow for such 
ascription]. 

Furthermore, there is no glory in being in a higher location, or sitting on 
a higher location, or standing [at a higher location]. [For example], there 
is no glory when a person is standing on top of the house, or standing 
on top of a mountain. [The person is] not of higher standing than those 
people who are beneath the house or mountain. [The reason for this is] 
because they are all humans. That is why it is not permissible to give 
these types of interpretations to the above-mentioned verses. [This 1s] 
because the above-mentioned verses are mentioned in the context of 
Glorifying God. As [God] states in the [the Quran in the following] verse 
He is your Lord, the one who created the skies and the Eart, >" (Therefore 
when God is ascribing the ‘Arsh to Himself], it means that He is glorying 
the ‘Arsh. It implies that the ‘Arsh could be made from such a thing as 
light or it could be some [other] substance that humans cannot 
comprehend. ‘here is a hadith that has been mentioned*” where the 
Prophet is describing the Sun and he said “Gabriel brings forth a palm 


full of light to the Sun and puts it on as some of you put on your clothes, 


253 Shaykh Abia Manéar means that if God was in space, for instance on the Arsh, and 
He was bigger than the space that contains Him, it means His excess size would be 
hanging outside of that space. 
54 Quran, Surah abA ’raf (7:54) 
255 He states the word Ruwhyaa before mentioning the hadith which is a form of criticism, 
Although, in the context of the statement, it does not appear to be that Shaykh Abu 


Man&ur is criticising the badith and instead he is using it as proof. 


and he does this before sunrise”. And it is also mentioned about the 


Moon, that he brings a palm full of light from the “Arsh [to it}.25 


In terms of “¢stamda being attributed to Him, then it has two [Possible] 
meanings. It is either that He is being glorified by the things that are 
mentioned after [the word] ‘ istawaa’, because in [the instance after the 
word * ‘zstawaa| God mentions His Kingdom, His Raboobiyah (Divinity) 
and His creation. The second [possible] reason is that He mentioned it 
[to signify that] it is the most glorious creation and in customaty usage jt 
is known that this mode of asctiption is to attribute things to the most 
glorious things.”” For example, stating that a petson conquered such- 
and-such country or took such-and-such place under his Possession, 
This does not mean that it is specifically referring to [only] this [specific 
asctiption], [meaning] that it does not specifically mean that he only 
conquered that country, but [rather] because it is known that the person 
who can conquer that country can conquer everything. It is the same as 
when God said [in the Holy Quran in the following verse] Yoday I have 
completed your religion’.* This verse was revealed in Makkah and the 
Prophet was at the centre of the Umm w-Ouraa (the centre of the 


towns). Also [God] stated that today the disbelievers lost their hope in 


re 


*°° He means that the both of them are from this creation which is known as the Ayyh, 
°? By stating that ‘Joe Bloggs has conquered the United States’, you are in fact implying 
that if he can conquer the United States, he can conquer any country, because the 
United States is the foremost Superpower and hence the most difficult to conquer. 

28 Quran, Surah a-Ma "dah (5:3) 

9 Shaykh Aba Manégar is explaining that when God ascribes specific things to 
something that is more glorious, it is a way of signifying its glory and importance. So 
the verse of the Quran ‘today I have completed your religio# was revealed in Mecca and there 
were many More verses which are of equal importance that were revealed later in 
Madinah, Thus, it was a way of signifying the importance of that particular situation. 
Furthermore, as Imam Maturidi explains, when God mentions that He sent the 


143 


fattempting to] stop your message. As well as [God] mentioning that He 
| gent the Prophets to the Pharaohs, and that He sent the message to the 
Umm w-Quraa (the centre of the towns), but it does not mean that God 
has [only] sent the message to those people or only to this city which ts 
the centre of the towns, but [instead] God mentions these significant 
things to express their importance, and it is in the same vein that this is 
also applicable to the ‘ArsA. It is also [the same situation where] God 


326 


mentions that He sent punishment to the ‘greatest oppressors, "or the 


punishment being sent to the ‘wealthiest people. ea Pe 


Furthermore, it is possible that God has mentioned all of these verses 
[such as the verse about ‘Zstawdal, to mean that no location can be 
attributed to God, because from the point of view of the creation, the 
‘Arsh is the highest place. This is because the creation cannot 
comprehend any space beyond the ‘Arsh, so [when| God refers to the 
[Arsh] it means that God’s [Divinity] does not allow Him to be in a 
location not to be in need of a location.” It is in the same manner that 
we understand the verse, “if there are three people whispering then He ts the 


Jourt. “754 as whispering has no relevance to location. Therefore, what 


message to the Um» n/-Quraa (the centre of the towns), it does not mean that God has 
only sent the message to those particular people. 

60 Quran, Surah al-An'am (6:123) 

201 Quran, Surah al-[sra (17:16) 

2621t does not mean that God is only referring to them, rather it means is that if the 
punishment [of God} can reach those people that are from the highest echelons of 
society, then it can quite easily reach the common folk that cause oppression as well. 
So even though God has mentioned these two specific categories, it also includes 
everyone else. 

263 al Maturidi is attempting to explain that one of the possibilities of the meaning Arsh 
is that it is the highest point in creation and one cannot comprehend its location, then 
this is even more the case for God, who is the creator of the Arsh and everything else. 
64 Quran, Surah ALMujadila (58:7) 


144 


God is actually implying is that He is beyond location and nothing cap 
be hidden from Him. It is in the same way that He has expressed Hig 
Power, by saying, “We are closer to you than your jugular vein”? which 
signifies that He is close to you by His Power and strength. It is in the 
same mannet that God has expressed that He is God and is worshipped 
everywhere, this is because [all] places are places of worship, [such as 
when God mentioned in the following verse of the Quran] “He ts God jy 
the sky and on Earth.’**° In the same way He expressed that “Le Him belongs 
the dominion of the skies and the Earth’’ He also expressed that He is mote 
Glorious than everything else by stating that “He is the subjugator over Hj; 


3268 


creation””™°and He also said that “He has Knowledge of everything’’® as well 


*" Therefore, in these verses God has 


as that “Te has power over all things. 
included a general concept, for which He has provided detailed 
explanations in other verses. [The reason for this is] so that everyone is 
able to understand that everything that has been explained belongs to 
Him due to Himself, and not because of the creation. It is in the same 
vein [that we attribute to God] Glory, that He is not in need and that He 
is Great. God’s Divinity is such that no one is similar to Him and there 


is no other God besides Him. 


On the other hand, some of them explained that the linguistic meaning 


of Arsh is ‘kingdom’.*” [This is] because linguistically this word is used 


for anything which is in a high place, such as the toof of a house or the 


765 Quran, Swrah Oaf (50:16) 

766 Quran, Surah Az-Zukhruf (43:84) 

267 Quran, Surah A/Bagarah (2:107) 

°68 Quran, Surah ALAn’am (6:18) 

26° Ouran, Surah ALAn’am (6:101) 

70 Quran, Surah Hyd (11:4) 

*7l'Tn this section Shaykh Abu Manégir is refuting those who apply the metaphorical 
and linguistic meanings towards these verses. The focus of his refutation are the 
Mutazalites, but it is a position that was later followed by the Ashari School. 


145 


gop of a tree. In terms of the [linguistic meaning of| “istawaa they say that 
there are three [possible] meanings; [the first possible meaning is that it 
is referring to] “conquest”, such as when people state that such-and-such 
person ‘conquered’ the city. The second [possible] meaning is that [it 1s 
referring to being ‘raised’, such as in the [following] verse [where] it is 
mentioned “And when you have raised the ship. 27 The third [possible 
meaning] is that it means being ‘perfect’ and ‘complete’, [such as in the 
verse] “And when he attained his full strength and was [mentally] mature ea, 
whilst some others said that it means to ‘intend’ or to ‘desire’ [based on 
the interpretation] that the linguistic scholars provided for the meaning 
of the [following] verse “Dhen He turned Himself to the Heaven’, 22° that by 
stating that ‘He turned’ [this meant that] God intended to create, [and 


2"6 “when they 


He conveyed this] by relating it to how created things act 
want to do something, in that they intend one thing after another, 
despite the fact that [in reality this is not really] considered as ‘intending’. 


There is no strength to find the truth esccept by God. 


[This can be seen by the following lines of poetry, where the] poets 
stated that ‘I thought that your “Arsh does not disappear ot change’ and 
another poet said ‘When the “Arsh of the Banu Marwaan will be taken 
from them, they will collapse as Yaad and Himyad collapsed’. Nabighah 
[another poet] said ‘it is the -Arsh that become evanescent after being 


glorious, and they collapsed after reaching safety and wealth’, whilst 


272 Quran, Surah ALMa minun (23:28) 

73 Quran, Surah ALQasas (28:14) 

274 This is because when you have teached maturity, you have perfected or completed 
the biological and mental process of reaching adulthood, 

275 Quran, Surah Pussilat (41:11) 

276 Shaykh Abii Manégiir said that the example of creation was provided in terms of how 
the creation itself acts, so that we may attempt to understand the point that has been 


made in terms of the context of the verse. 


146 


others stated that ‘the son of Jafzaa and the son of the one whose ‘Arsh 


has collapsed, after his warriors were hoping for success.’?”’ 


[Shaykh] Aba Mansir explained that the elucidation of this is that if it 
were to refer to a conquest and the meaning of ‘Arsh is ‘kingdom’, rh, 
1s not an acceptable [interpretation]. [The reason for this is] because God. 
controls the creation and this interpretation signifies two things. [The 
Quran says that] He és the sustainer of the great ‘Arsh, ®” {if it} means the 
“Great Kingdom’ it necessitates that there are also other kingdoms, and 
this [kingdom] being surrounded and carried by the Angels can also be 
applied to these [other kingdoms].”” God is the grantor of success. 


On the other hand, if one were to accept the meaning of ‘being 
completed’, or ‘perfecting something’ or ‘raising in tank’, then it will 
mean that when God said “Are you dishelieving in the One that created the 
Earth in two days?’ and “Fle completed them as seven Heavens in two days? 
He has independently mentioned whatever He had created in the six 
days, and He then summarised and mentioned [what He has created in 
the six days] generally, such as in the following verse, “Indeed, your Lord is 
Allah, who created the Heavens and Earth in six days, and then He _Al-istama 


Ala al-'Arsh”,”” as this explanation was in the context of creating those 


2" Tmam Maturidi is providing examples of how based on different contexts, the word 
Arsh’ denotes different meanings. Therefore, insisting that it can only mean ‘throne’, 
and that God is located on a throne is an interpretation that has been falsely imposed 
on the Quran. 

“8 Quran, Surah AtTawbabh (9:129) 
* al-Maturidi is postulating that if one atgues that God is ruler of the ‘Great 
Kingdom’, then it means that there are other ‘kingdoms’ which could be ‘lesser’ ot 
‘equivalent’ to the ‘Great Kingdom’ and in the same vein these kingdoms would have 
also have gods that were ‘lesser’ or equivalent to God. 

789 Quran, Sutah Fussélat (41:9) 

“81 Quran, Sutah Fussilat (41:12) 

*82 Quran, Surah a/Ar‘af (7:54) 


147 


that will be tested fic. sentient beings such as Mankind]. Therefore, the 
leavens and the Earth were created in order to create beings that will 
pe tested, meaning that [the words] ‘completing’ and ‘finishing’ creation 
are expressed by the [words] ‘Highness’ and ‘Glory’, because as we have 
explained, this is the focal goal of creation. It is in this manner that the 
meaning of ‘kingdom’ and the meaning of ‘highness’ are achieved by 
[attempting] to reach the ones for whom [the Heavens and the Earth 
were created, namely humans]. Furthermore, some of them said [these 
yerses| only refer to humans, because God said; “God created everything on 
Earth for you’®® and “God made the day and night in your service’™ and ‘He 
has subjected to you whatever is in the Heavens and whatever is on the Earth. nee 
Ibn Abbas stated that humans were created on the seventh day and this 
is what is meant by ‘being completed’ and ‘being glorious’, because God 
created everything for humans and created them so that they may 
worship [God]. Jinn ate included within this [statement] because of the 
verse “I did not create the Jinn and Mankind except to worship Me’**° but the 
focus are the humans, because everything that is mentioned is in their 
service, and evetything that is created is to benefit them.*’ God is the 


grantor of success. 


83 Quran, Sutah a/-Bagarah (2:29) 

284 Quran, Sutah Ibrahim (14:33) 

85 Quran, Surah A+Jathiya (45:13) 

86 Quran, Surah Adb-Dhariyat (51:56) 

287 al-Matutidi is explaining the concept that A/Istiwa ala LArsh refers to being 
‘completed and ‘finished’. Therefore, he gives the transmission from Ibn Abbas that 
humans were created on the seventh day. Hence, this is what is meant by ‘completing’, 
because the focal reason for creation are humans and their creation was completed on 


the seventh day. 


148 


Summary of Al-Maturidi’s Teachings 


[Shaykh] Aba Manégur said that according to [out position] the central 
principle about this [issue] is that “there és nothing is similar to Higy 1288 
Therefore [God] has negated any assertion of similarity to Him and we 
have [already] explained that God’s Divinity in His acts and attributes 
does not have any similitude. Subsequently, we have to accept [the verse] 
“Lhe Most Merciful [who] established al-'Arsh ‘Tstawd’? according to what 
was [divinely] revealed, but we must deny any likeness or similatity to 


™ The reason for] this is because God has attributed it to 


the creation. 
Himself, as it [has been stated] in the Revelation, which is supported by 
treason, but beyond this we do not give a specific interpretation, because 
[based on what we have previously] mentioned, the possibility of other 
interpretations is still present. In addition, there is another possibility; 
that it could mean something we not know or cannot comprehend, 
which ts [something that bares] no similarity to creation. We believe in 
what God wanted to state, and this is also applicable to anything [else] 
that is revealed, such as the visibility of God and other [related] issues. 
Therefore, we deny any similarity to God, and we believe in what God 


wanted to state, without specifying one meaning and rejecting other 


meanings, God is the grantor of success. 


‘The central principle concerning this issue is that the understanding of 


people will be inadequate [to comprehend God], [as people] compare 


“88 Quran, Sutah Ash-Shuraa (42:11) 

2 Quran, Surah Taha (20:5) 

#9 Shaykh Aba Mansur disagrees with the position of the various other theological 
Schools and argues that we accept the verse as it was stated by God, with the added 
caveat of bila kayf (without how), meaning that the verse is accepted but all likeness to 


the creation is denied. His position became known as the doctrine of “Tanzih’. 


149 


what they hear [and see], to what they [have] learnt [and observed] from 
the creation [that ts] around them. We say God’s Divinity does not allow 
for Him to be similar to anything by His acts and by Himself. Because 
of that, we cannot attribute something to God that we cannot 
anderstand™' [based on| what we know from the creation. In view of 
[the fact that] we usually compare what we hear from people to the 
meanings ws a vis the created things that we know of; God, on the other 
hand, is known before hearing the statement which is understood [by 
the creation], according to the [issues that are known by the] creation. 
Therefore, this is why it is incorrect to interpret the statement according 
to what is understood by people. This is because the reason for that 
statement is the Knowledge [of God] - which is prior to any creation. In 
terms of all of the meanings that are understood from the words “ A/7’ 
(upon’), and “ “Arsh? (‘throne’), and *‘Is/awa’, they have many different 
interpretations that ate understood from them. Therefore, it is incorrect 
to interpret these words with repulsive meanings when we have the most 
beautiful [meanings], whilst still taking into consideration the possibility 
of other [possible meanings], as with the descriptions of the rewards and 
punishments [in the Hereafter]. [It is a similar case with] the Hurif 
Mugatta‘at and other things in which people should believe, because the 
test fin terms of] those issues is not to provide certainty.” God knows 


best, 


291 Meaning that we are unable to translate this verse, 

292 We know that there ate words and sentences which are contained within scripture 
for which we do not know the meaning and are unable to comprehend. For example, 
the Hanif Mugatta ‘at (these are isolated letters such as aif, laam, meem found at certain 
places in the Quran). We do not know the meaning for these verses and Maturidi ts 
stating that it is a test from God, so that we may realise that there are sentences for 
which we may not achieve a certain meaning. The lesson is for those who want an 


answer for everything, but for this instance they are unable to get it. 


150 


Disputation with Ka‘bi and Against the Notion that God is in th 
Sky Above Us 


Ka ‘bi said that it is not permissible to attribute location to God [as He] 
would be surrounded [by that space]. [This is] because God existed when 
there was no location, and it is not possible that God would be in need 
of a location after creating [locations], as God is not subject to change, 
But then afterwards, [Ka‘bi] said that God is everywhere based on the 
meaning that He has knowledge of everything and is the maintainer of 

everything, because they posit that [from a] linguistic [perspective], when 

one states that they are ‘at a house [ot] building’, it means (that one ig | 


performing] the act of building a house.*” 


[Shaykh] Aba Man8ar stated that [Ka‘bi] is making a factual statement 
in terms of [God] not being surrounded by space because He existed 
when there was no location and _ this Jasctiption to God] would 
necessitate a change [in God]. On the other hand, [IKa“bi’s] claim that it 
necessitates [God being in] need, [solely] based [on the fact that] one of 
his opponents does not believe in [this position], is an unacceptable 
teason to disagree with one’s opponent. Also, after [making this point] 
he claims that God was not a Creator, He was not Merciful, He did not 
speak, and after that, the [creation] came [into existence] after not 
existing. His claim necessitates change, and further, the change that is 
attributed to location is less [problematic than Ka ‘bi’s position]. This is 
because it is possible that a person can be in one location and then he 


comes to be in another location, which is considered a change without 


*” Ka'bi’s position is that from a linguistic perspective, stating that God is everywhere 
is not meant to be taken literally, but instead such an application is metaphorical. 
Therefore, in this case it means that God has knowledge of everything, 


151 


y [material] change [to his essence].”* An example [of this would be] 
God finding Himself in another location and [this occurring] in the 
resent Universe without any change happening to Him. ‘Therefore, if 
Ka'‘bi rejects the issue related to location, then what he is rejecting is also 
applicable to the actions of God, because change affecting actions is far 
greater than [the change that is caused] by location. This is because based 
on the present Universe, an act does not affect a person without him 
being affected by some form of change, but it is possible that [a person] 
will change his location and there will not be any [innate| change to him 
_ as such [we observe that] this happens in the creation without any 


change. Therefore the change that occurs in the act is a far greater [form 


of change]. God is the grantor of success. 


The peculiar thing about Ka‘br’s claim is that he states that [God] is 
everywhere with the meaning of God’s being knowledgeable of all 
flocations]. [The] Knowledgeable is His name, and according to Ka'bi, 
He by Himself is not everywhere. More than that, Ka‘bi [being a 
Mutazalite|, does not attribute knowledge to God, by which He can reach 
[all] locations, even though he is stating [that it is by this attribute that 
God is present in all locations]. When one considers and contemplates 
this point, one concludes that this statement contains a clear 
contradiction. Furthermore, [in one statement] he said that [God] 


maintains [all] locations but in another [statement] he said that God 


294 Shaykh Aba Manégiir is not ascribing location to God but instead he is attempting 
to explain the flaws in the position of Ka*bi. According to Imam Maturidi, fa'br’s 
belief on the Attributes of God results in a material change in the Essence of God. 
Imam Maturidi argues that God changing location is problematic, but when one 
changes location there is allegedly no change to one’s essence but instead only a 
displacement in one’s position - and ascribing a change in essence is much worse than 


ascribing a change in location according to Maturidi. 


2 


[innately by His essence] does it Himself.> Therefore the maintenance 


and the act which is attributed to location is nothing other than th 
location, which would mean that according to this, stating that Gog ia 
evetywhere means that God is [physically] everywhere, which is 
problematic. Rather, God is knowledgeable about everything before ang 


after it exists. God is the grantor of success. 


[Shaykh] AbG Manguar said that in terms of people that raise their hands 
towards the sky [to pray], [this action] is a religious ritual that can be se 
up by God in whichever manner pleases Him. God can make (His 
creation] face any direction He wants, and if someone thinks that raising 
one’s hands towards the heavens means that God ts in the sky, it is the 
same as to believe that God is beneath the earth when one plants their 
forehead on the ground during prayer. It is also the same as to say that 
God is in the East or West by facing those directions during prayer, or 
thinking God is in Mecca due to [people] going there for pilgtimage, or 
God is in S afa and Marwah because when we go [for pilgrimage we] walk 
towards those two directions as though we are seeking a lost item, or [it 
is the same as] thinking that God is in the direction of the enemy [when 
one prays to God during a conflict] - and God’s Divinity does not allow 


for [these types of ascriptions]. 


Furthermore, there is no one location that is closer to God than Jany] 
other location, and there is no way of knowing how to get to Him. 


Humans are unable to comprehend teaching [God], and it is not [an 


ag erica ccna 
2% What Shaykh Abii Manéiir is arguing is that in one statement Ka ‘bt is stating that 


God maintains the Universe by His attribute (even if Ka‘bi does not call it an attribute), 
but in another statement he suggests that God maintains the Universe by Himself 
without any attributes. For example, Ka‘bi argues that the meaning of ‘God is 
everywhere’ is that God has knowledge of everything. But ‘knowledge’ is an attribute 
of God, and Ka‘bi denies the existence of such attributes, which al-Maturidi argues is 
a clear contradiction. 


aa 


jgsuie| that can be established based on reason. [This is] because God 
does not need the worship of His creation; it is from this perspective 
that God has set up religious rituals so that people may offer their 
thankfulness to Him. Therefore, [God] may establish religious rituals in 
whichever way pleases Him and it does not imply that God is in one 
[specific] direction as opposed to another direction, and this [incorrect 
assumption can only be made by] someone who does not have the 


cotrect understanding about God. 


154 


The Meaning of the Terms ‘Near’, ‘Coming’, ‘Going’ and 
‘Sitting’ Regarding God 


[In the previous chapters] we have explained the statement of [Gog] 
being close and that it means God’s acceptance [such as in the follow; 

verse of the Holy Quran], “When My servants ask you, [O Muhammad}, 
concerning Me - indeed I am near.’*” [Also] sometimes the closeness of God 
means His support, such as [in the following verse of the Holy 
Quran] “God is mith those who fear Him and those who are doers of good” and 
sometimes it can be closeness in terms of state [such as] “Prostrate and 
draw near [to God]”™””, as well as what has been narrated in terms of anyone 
who comes close to God one hands span He comes close to him one 
arm’s length, up to end of this natration,?” as well as “Seek the means lof 
nearness] to Flim.’ Also, this [closeness can] mean protection and cating 
such as “Your Lord, over all things, is Guardian’®”' and “He is the Guardian of 


29302 


all things’ as well as “hen is He who is a maintainer of every soul, [Rnowing] 


what it bas earned.’” [Also] sometimes it can mean ‘knowledge’ [such as 


in the following verse of the Holy Quran] “He Avows your secret and what 
2804 


Jou make public” etc, It is in the same way that we understand ‘coming’, 


°° Quran, Surah A/Bagarah (2:186) 

7 Quran, Surah An-Nab/ (16:128) 

“8 Quran, Surah Ad ‘Alag (96:19) 

29 "This is an ‘Ahad Hadith (single chain or greater natration but not reaching the level 
of Mashhir (famous) Matavatir (mass transmitted)) that was later found in a number of 
collections such as “Sahih Muslin’ (2687). This is an example of one of the few instances 
where al-Maturidi used hadith to present his point. 

* Quran, Surah A/Ma tdah (5:35) 

*°! Quran, Surah Saba (34:21) 

%? Quran, Surah ALA ‘am (6:102) 

°° Quran, Surah ArRa‘d (13:33) 

°F Quran, Surah ALAn'am (6:3) 


Soing” and ‘sitting’ [v7s-a-ws God}. Due to [the fact that stating| that a 


body is coming will entail motion, but [stating that] the truth is coming 


means the victoty of that truth, [such as in the following verse] “Say, the 


path bas come” [It is the same as] falsehood departing means its 
annibilation, loss or disappearance, [such as in the same verse, | “yalsehood 


has 
normal conversation this is what is meant by a body and an accident 


departed 599 But a body ‘going’ is [normally] its motion, and in a 


‘coming’ and ‘going’. God’s Divinity does not allow for either of these 
[ascriptions], and therefore neither of these meanings should be 
understood in their [literal] ascription to God. There és no strength to find the 


pruth except by God. 


There is another aspect to this issue, which is that there is no direction 
or state that is devoid of God’s Bounty and grant towards His creation. 
It is due to this fact that God established specific rituals in each of the 
directions, and He did the same for [people’s] limbs, such as in terms of 
possession of wealth, because each one of these things has its own way 
of offering thankfulness to God. There is no strength to find the truth except 
by God. 


Beat in mind that it is from the sky that we receive revelation, and it 1s 
also from the sky that we receive the blessings of the world*”’, so that is 
why we raise our eyes towards that direction. There is no strength to find the 


truth except by Gad. 


30 Quran, Surah ALIsra (17:81) 
406 Thhid 


307 Such as rain. 


156 


The Vision of God (Ru yat Allah) in Paradise 


[Shaykh] Aba Mansur said that it is necessary to accept the Beatific 
Vision [in the Hereafter] without ‘drdk (comprehension) and Tafsir 
(interpretation). As for the proof of seeing God fin the Hereafter], then 
God stated [in the following verse of the Quran] “Wision perceives Flim nog 
but He perceives fall] vision.’”* If God could not be seen, then there would 
be no wisdom in denying ‘zdrak.” [This is] because in othets [besides 
God] it is not possible to comprehend [them] without vision. Therefore, 
the actual thing that God denies [is the ability to] comprehend [God], 
because something cannot be comprehended (‘idrak) without vision, 
except in the case of God [where ‘idrék is not possible]. Therefore the 
[point regarding the denial of vision] does not make sense.”"” Ged is the 


grantor of success, 


The second proof is that Moses said “Oh my Lord, show me so I can see 
You’”" If God could not be seen then Moses asking to see [God would 
result in Moses having a] lack of knowledge [and understanding] of God, 
The one who is unable to recognise God cannot be His Messenger and 
cannot be the trustee of the message. Furthermore, God did not forbid 
him [from making this statement], nor did He make him lose hope [in 
the possibility of such vision]. [For instance] in the case of Noah, he was 


forbidden over something less [important], and [God] corrected Adam 


*°8 Quran, Surah ALAn’am (6:103) 

909 ‘Idrak means the comprehension of the definite. 

910 The Mutazalites argue that humans will not see God as it ascribes limits to God, 
since God is then defined within the parameters of what the eyes can see, Imam 
Matutidi argues that the believers will see God in Paradise without modality, because 


God cannot be seen by created qualities. 
Mt Quran, Surah ALA ’raf (7:143) 


157 


and the other Prophets [if the need arose]. [In this case] if [the vision of 
God in the Hereafter] was [something that is} impossible then [this issue] 
would reach the level of Kur (disbelief). [This is] because after that God 
said: “Lf the mountain remains in its place, then you will see Me.”””” Lf someone 
ete to posit that it is possible that Moses asked [God] to show him a 
sign to know that it is from God, we [respond by] stating that this is 
impossible because of the following feasons; God said ‘you will not see 
we? and then God showed him the sien.”'* In addition, [Moses] asking 
for proof would be a form of stubbornness, because God has already 
shown him [many] proofs and signs, and this level of stubbornness ts 
the behaviour of the disbelievers. This is because the {disbelievers] will 
continue to ask for evidence even when they have been provided with 
sufficient proof, and therefore this [type of stubbornness] would be 


considered of the same ilk. 


The [third] proof is that God said [in the following verse of the Holy 
Quran] 9f the mountain remains in its place then you will see Me.’ Therefore 
the proof by which the mountain will remain in its place is weaker than 


the proof that the mountain will not remain in its placer” It is because 


AM Thea. 

313 Thid 

34 Tn terms of what is relayed in the Quran, Moses asked God “Ob yy Lord Show mie, $6 
I can see You,” to which God responded “You will not see Me, but look. at the mountain; uf e 
should remain in place, then you null see Me”, but the mountain disintegrated and Moses fell 
unconscious. So according to al-Maturidi, the sign from God was that Moses would 
not see God in this world. 

#19 Thid 

316 What Al-Matutidi most likely means by this is that if the mountain had remained in 
its place, then this means that there had been no tesponse by God to the question of 
Moses. Since the mountain did disintegrate, it means that there was a strong response 
from God, rather than ignoring the question. This is not al-Maturidt’s strongest proof, 
as there is no seeming correlation between God responding to the question of Moses 


and the possibility of seeing God. 


158 


of this reason that we say that Moses did not ask for a sign [from God] 
but instead, he was asking for himself [so that he can see God]. There a 
no strength to find the truth except by God. . 


Furthermore, [is the instance of] Abraham arguing with his tribe about 
the stars being God. Abrahams criticism that the stats ate not God js 
because they set and disappear. He did not expostulate [with his tribe} 
about the vision and non-vision of God, but instead, he said that he does 
not love something that disappears and sets because this proves that it 


is temporal. There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


In addition, God said [in the following Quranic verse] “The faces that day 
will be radiant, looking to their Lord’ and this verse cannot refer to 
waiting’, because of the following reasons: The first is that the Day of 
Judgement is not a time of waiting, but that time [of waiting] is in this 
world. That day and place fie. the Day of Judgement] is the place of 
existence and occutrence except at the time when everyone will become 
scared [about the forthcoming Final Judgement}. Some of them also said 
that this verse is about [them] seeing themselves [affected] by something 
they have been expecting. The second is [that the verse] “The faces that 
day will be radiant’®” is fusing] the word ‘occurring’. The third is “looking 
at their Lord’ - the word “iid is used for looking at something and is 


not used for waiting for something. The fourth is that this verse is giving 


*7 Quran, Surah ALOzyamah (75:22-23) 
8 The Matazalites argue against the possibility of seeing God in the Hereafter. They 
base their doctrine on the verse that refers to the fact that no vision can perceive God, 
but God perceives all vision. On this basis, they interpret the verse which tefers to 
seeing God as denoting the meaning of ‘waiting’. Hence, in this section Imam Matutidi 
is attempting to present flaws in this position. 
* Quran, Surah ALOnamah (75:22) 

20 Quran, Sutah ALOsyamah (75:23) 


159 


them the good news about the bounty they have gained, and waiting for 


something is not called ‘rewarding’. 


Furthermore, not using its obvious and explicit meaning would 
necessitate that they ate imposing their words onto God. This is why it 
stands established that [we] will see God but by denying any definition 
of similarity or likeness of God [to the creation]. It is the same as [in dare 
instance of] Speech, Acting and the rest of the attributes of God,” for 
in the cases of the attributes such as Speech, Acting and Power, it 1s 
necessaty to accept the attributes of God while denying all similarity 
between [God] and others. Anyone who claims that God cannot grant 
[someone the ability to] see Him and denies the vision [of God] because 
[it implies] similarity to seeing created things based [on the principles 
regarding the] usage of the verse “Ihe Most Mercaful [who] established al- 
‘Arsh “Lstawa?*”? as well as other verses, we should not reject their 
[position] based on these types of verses [and the implied literal 
meaning] of [God’s] likeness to the creation, but instead we [should 
posit] that we accept the [verses] whilst rejecting similarity to the 
creation, and it is the same case regarding the verses about the vision of 


God. God is the grantor of success. 


Moteover, [God states in the following verse of the Holy Quran], “For 


those who have done good is the best [reward] and extra.” In some Abad 


321 For example, the attributes of Speech, Acting, Power and Will, It is necessary to 
attribute all of these to God but with the added caveat of denying any type of likeness 
between Him and His creation. 

322 Quran, Surah Taba (20:5) 

323 Quran, Surah Ywrus (10:26) 

324 ‘The linguistic meaning of ’ Ahad is ‘ones’. It is a transmission by narrators where the 
number of these natrators does not reach the level of mautawatir or mashhar (mass 


transmitted’ or ‘famous’ respectively). There is no specification as to the number of 


Hi 


160 


natrations it is reported that [this extra that is referred to in the Verse] 
means seeing God,” but again, it is possible that [the extra] could be 
referring to something else. Nonetheless, because the [issue of] Seeing 
God became very well-known, so this is why it is not accurate to deny 
the explicit meaning [of the narration]. If it would not have been spread 
widely, then we also would have rejected this nartation. There is no strength 


to find the truth except by God. 


Furthermote, it was narrated that the Prophet said: ‘You will see your Lord 
on the Day of Judgement as you see the moon, and you mill not get hurt from the 
vision.’ He was also asked “Did you see God?” to which he replied, ‘By my 
heart.’ Hence, some of them argued that the Prophet did not reject the 
[validity of the] question of this person, and the person asking [the 
question] understood that seeing through the vision of the heart is 
[seeing} through knowledge. He understood that the [Prophet] knew 
God and he did not ask about that. Beating in mind that God has 
forbidden Muslims to ask about something that has been previously 
banned, [such as] in the following verse “Oh you who have believed, do not 
ask about things”, so how is it possible that someone can ask about an 
issue that is considered Kyfr disbelief) according to some of the scholars, 
and [yet] the Prophet does not forbid him from jasking such a question], 
nor does he fault him but [instead] responds softly and gives the 


impression that itis not impossible. Gad is the grantor of success. 


Moreover, God has promised that He will reward {His creation in the 
Hereafter] by giving them something that is much better than [their 


actions] in this world, and there is nothing better than believing in the 


narrators. “Ahad narrations give the hadith an equal possibility of being either authentic 
or inauthentic. 

°° Meaning that this extra is referring to the reward of seeing God. 

%6 Quran, Surah 4A/Ma‘idah (5:101). 


161 


Oneness of God. [This is] because believing in God is considered a good 
[act] based on teason, and the reward in Paradise correlates with the 
actions [of the person in this world]. The beauty that is known by nature 
[such as desires of man] is less than the good [reward that has been 
promised in Paradise]. This is because all of it [namely the good in this 
world and Paradise] is considered good by [Man’s| desire/nature because 
we desite [a good reward], but our practices [in this world] in terms of 
believing in God are not [something] desired by [Man’s] nature/desire 
but instead [that desire is based on] reason. Something that is considered 
good based on reason is superior to the thing that is considered good 
based on one’s nature/desire. [The reason for this is that] when 
something is considered good according to reason, then it is not pos sible 
that a petson who uses reason does not confitm it to be good, but it is 
possible that when someone desires something based on his nature, 
there are others who do not desire it based on their [own] nature, and 
therefore one’s natural inclination is based on varying perspectives. [It is 
the] same [case] for punishments [from God]. Therefore, the possibility 
of the vision of God becomes necessary as a gtant [from God], which 
will correlate with theit good actions. This is being able to see that which 
they worshipped without seeing. It 1s similar to being ptomised a reward 
and then [this reward] presenting itself to them on the Day of 
Judgement. There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


In addition, in the Hereafter, everyone will gain knowledge about God 
[and| the knowledge will be such that it never ceases. This type of 
knowledge can only be gained by vision and not based on [speculative] 
reasoning. A large number of proofs and signs does not provide 


indisputable knowledge about this [issue], and this is signified in [the 


162 


Holy Quran, in the following verse];" “Even if We had sent down to the 
the angels [with the message], and the dead spoke to them [of it] and We Sathere, 
together every [created] thing in front of them, they would not believe.’®?®,329 Also, 
God mentioned that these disbelievers continue to reject the Day of 
Judgement and deny the Prophets, but then on the Day of Judgemen;, 
they will remonstrate [with God] that they have only spent ‘but an houp 
the day,” and [there are] other [similar] verses [that present this point], 
Thus, if the knowledge that is gained by seeing cannot be equivalent to 
the knowledge gained by reason, then the reverse is also applicable, 
[which is] that the certainty that is gained by teason cannot teach the 
level of the certainty that is gained by seeing, and therefore this makes 
|the issue] of vision necessary. For both, the believers and disbelievers 
are on equal [footing] in terms of the knowledge that is gained by teason, 
but the virtuous news about the vision [of God] is only for the believer, 


Lhere 1s no strength to find the truth except by God. 


[Shaykh] Abt Manégur said that we do not believe that ‘idrak is possible 
because God said “eyes do not do “idrak’®” So God praised himself by 
saying that “drdk is not possible but [God did not say that] He is 


7 Shaykh Aba Manéar only included the first part of the verse in his text, but I have 
included a greater portion of the verse as I felt it would provide a better understanding 
of the point that has been made. 

%8 Quran, Surah AsAw'am (6:111) 

°° Al-Maturidt is making the point that even if they had been provided with and had 
seen numerous proofs, they would continue to disbelieve. It is explained in the 
Maturidi School that although proofs that are gained by speculative reasoning can 
provide certainty, when one observes the actual existence of something, this provides 
additional satisfaction. Maturidi calls it ‘Fame’ nial’, An example is when you lock your 
door; you are certain you locked it, but to double check you will twist the handle to 
confirm it. This additional confitmation is called “Fama ’ninab’. 

°° Quran, Surah Yunus (10:45) 

! Quran, Surah ALAn ‘am (6:103) 


163 


invisible. It is the same as [what is mentioned in the following verse of 
che Holy Quran;] “vo one can comprehend/ surround (completely know) Hine”. ‘os 
This verse states that knowledge about [God] is necessary, but it denies 
the [possibility] of having complete knowledge of [God]. It is similar [to 


the issue of| ‘idrak, Gad is the grantor of success. 


Tira means the comprehension of the definite. God’s Divinity does 
not allow for Him to be described with definiteness because that would 
entail limitation and confinement.” He is free from all these ascriptions, 
and He is unique in His Essence, whereas definiteness is a description 
of an object whose parts are amalgamated until they become evanescent. 
In addition, it is not possible to apply any definition to God, because 
God existed [when] there was no definition, and God is as He was before 
and there was no change [in God]. Everything has its definition by way 
of which that thing is known - such as flavour, colour, taste, smell and 
the other aspects of the definite specifics of things, as God made each 
thing known and comprehended through that specific aspect, and {this 
is also the case for] the faculties of reason and accidents.’ Therefore, 
God has informed us that He is not any kind of these definite aspects of 
things through which we may know Him, which is to be applied to [the] 
vision [of God] as well as Knowledge of Him. There is no strength to find 
the truth except by God. 


Furthermore, there ate several aspects to the issue of the Beatific 
Vision/Vision of God, the reality of all of which cannot be known 
except through the knowledge of a particular aspect of it. Teterore. Ar 


vision is expressed in terms of sight, it is to be accepted in this way. lf 


332 Quran, Surah Taba (20:110) 
333 God cannot be described using limits and parameters because that would necessitate 
that He is less than these, or that they are more than Him. 


334 Meaning substances and accidents. 


164 


there is something whose aspect cannot be known except through the 
mentioning of sight, then further investigation into its essence and reality 
should be avoided, but 7dra& means ‘the comprehension of the definite. 
[For example in the case of a] shadow, in reality it is visible but in relation 
to the sun it has no definite aspect or otherwise [the shadow] would also 
be visible up until the time of the sunset, but instead the definite aspect 
(of the shadow] can only be known by vision through the specific aspect 
that limits it.’ Also [in the case of] daylight it can be seen, but its definite 
aspects are not just ,known by itself; or in the case of darkness, where jt 
cannot be seen and nor can one comprehend its definiteness, and 
therefore ‘idrak is not possible for it and nor can one comprehend its 
definiteness. As such, each thing [has been made] to be known and 
comprehended through a specific aspect,” even if in itself it can be seen 
without definition. The example of the Moon was presented because its 
definiteness and size are not known, but it can be seen based on 


certainty. [here is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


[Shaykh] Aba Mansur said that the foundational principle related to [the 
Beatific Vision] is that we only accept that which has been confirmed in 
scriptute, while denying all meanings and descriptions that imply 
similarity [with the creation] and nor we do attempt to interpret it, 


because interpretation is not Revelation. Ged és the grantor of success, 


In addition, Ka'bi has made an attempt to prove that Rw’yah (vision) and 


idrak ate synonymous, but we have already explained [the fallacy of this 


53> Maturidi is arguing that vision differs depending on the circumstance, object or 
person. The example he provides is that the conditions of seeing shadows, darkness 
and daylight are not the same as solid objects, in terms of the fact that a person cannot 
deduce their definiteness with the eye. Therefore, imposing your essence on all other 
creations, never mind God, is flawed. 


3° Meaning that ‘idrak will be applicable to it. 


165 


proposition]. He then continued that knowledge about something 
which is absent cannot be different from the ways of knowing [other 
things, such as those which are present|.°* Therefore it is the same case 
for out vision; we will see fin the Hereafter] in the manner that we see 
[in this world]. Also Janother example of vision differing depending on 
circumstance is viewing something] from different distances, when [an 
object] is close [it is large, and when the same object is] far it is small, [, 
put the relationship in terms of vision between the two is still the same]. 
If [one argues that] it is possible to see without the conditions [of vision| 
then it is [the same as proposing that it is] possible to know without the 


conditions of knowing. 


Shaykh Aba Man§Sur said that his position contains several errors. 
[Ka‘bi] has compared the vision of God to the vision of [Ia bi’s] own 
essence. It is known that there are many [creatures] that differ from one 
another [in their essence]. Their modes of vision differ from Ka‘br’s 
mode of vision, which allows them to see things that he ts unable to see 
(and this is not referring to comprehending something’s definitencss 
using vision), such as [in the case of] Angels, Jizz and other types of 
creation, who are able to see by [the use of] modes of vision that differ 
from a human’s mode of vision, which allows them to see things we 
cannot [see]. It is the same case for small creatures such as mosquitos, 
flies and lice which can be seen and they use a different mode of vision. 


If we were to propose that the only acceptable mode of vision is that 


37 The Mutazalites argue that Ra ‘yah (vision) and “idrak are synonymous, which means 
when you see God this applies definite aspects to God. Maturidi argues that they are 
not synonymous but instead “#dra& means to comprehend, and God has denied the 
ascription of ‘#drak to Himself. 

338 He is saying that regardless of whether absent or in front of us, we know both things 


in the same way, therefore our knowledge about absent or present things is similar. 


166 


which is [used by peoplej, then it would mean that no creature [othe, 


so. ¢ 
than humans] has vision?” 


Furthermore, [there are other examples] such as those Angels who are 
responsible for recording our deeds and listening to our speech. If we 
were to compare their condition to our own, then we have to tefuse and 


reject all of that -"" which is a significant proposition. 


Further examples can be seen by [what is mentioned in the Quran] such 
as the skin [of people as well as their] limbs and other types of creation 
speaking [in the Hereafter].*"' If we wete to analyse [this verse] and 
compate it to our observation of the present Universe, then it would be 
very challenging to accept. Furthermore, vision differs in terms of seeing 
and definiteness. As such, if one were to compate one mode of vision 
to another, one would reject [the mode of vision that differs]. If [the 
points] we have presented are correct, then Ka‘bi’s proposition is 


flawed. God zs the Lrantor of success. 


*° Al-Maturidi is attempting to explain how modes of vision differ amongst the various 
types of creation, so for example in the seen world, we know that the mode of vision 
of humans differs from animals, such as in the case of a bat, who in order to navigate, 
use echoes of self-produced sounds which bounce of objects. In the case of the unseen 
world, we know that Angels and Ji## use modes of vision that cannot be comprehended 
by humans. For example, in Sunni theology, angels are able to observe and tecord 
deeds of humans, in a way that a person is unable to understand. If the modes of vision 
differ so significantly in relation to the creation, then applying your own mode of vision 
to God is completely flawed, especially when you ate not able to apply your own mode 
of vision to something that has been created, such as in the case angels and finn. 

340 "This is another example of where M-dash is used; it is to explain to the reader that 
this statement was made in the middle of the paragraph. I have refrained from pointing 
out all instances of this occurrence, but by referring to it a second time it will be 
demonstrate that this occurs on many occasions throughout the text. 

| Thete ate many examples of this in the Quran, such as the following verse, “That 
Day, We nill seal over their mouths, and their hands will speak to Us, and their feet will testify about 
what they used to earn.” (Quran, Surah Ya’sin (36:6 >) 


167 


Moreover, based on our observation of the conditions [of the present 
Universe], this allows us to understand what we know based on things 
peing bodies and accidents. But then Scripture was revealed that 
informed us about the unseen, whose conditions differ from |the 
conditions of this Universe that are based on them being] bodies and 


accidents. The issue of vision beats similarity to this point. God Knows 


Best. 


The next issue is what we have mentioned in terms of the [vision and 
definiteness of] a shadow, darkness and light. It does not meet any of 
the conditions [of vision that is applied to people}. [The next point] is 
that it is possible that all the conditions [that allow one to see] are 
present, but one is still not able to see due to certain obstructions, or it 
is a specific [attribute] of the body [that it does not see]. If that isthe 
case, then the conditions that allow one to see are present, even if there 
is no vision. However, if there is an obstruction [to the vision], then 
precision [of sight] can be attained by the [unobstructed] vision of 
others. This is because [the person| was unable to see due to an 
impediment, and if this obstruction is removed [by relying on the sight 
of others], then it becomes possible [to have an awareness of that which 
should have been seen without the obstruction]. There is no strength to find 


the truth except by God 


In addition, [the position of] Ka‘bi [only focuses] on the vision that 1s 
related to bodies, and he did not test to compare his vision with [those 
things] that are other than bodies and accidents [to decipher] how vision 


can reach them.” 


342'The Mutagalites using the analogy of the present for the absent is flawed, because 
our knowledge in this world in limited to bodies and accidents, and we do not have 


knowledge of the absent. Furthermore, God is neither a body nor an accident. 


168 


Furthermote, everyone can see, even if there is an obstruction to the 
accuracy [of their vision] or [due to] distance [of the seen thing], as it Fs 
possible to dispel [the obstruction] by telying on the vision of others 
[For instance], the Angel of Death can see that which is at the end of the 
Rarth, as well as the middle of it, which [is something] that cannot be 
comprehended based on human sight. This signifies that what [Ka ‘bi 
considered is not the reason for the definiteness of what is seen, but 
instead, it is the cause for the definiteness of what obstructs vision, and 
if this [obstruction] is dispelled, one can sce. The denial of vision is based 
on something which in its essence is anomalous, or otherwise, everyone 
could see. Therefore, if one denies the Beatific Vision because [God] is 
not a body or cannot be seen [with definition], then it is necessaty to 
confirm [this statement when accepting the scripture], because [in this 
world] anything that is not seen is due to an anomaly or otherwise al] 
corporeal bodies can be seen. There is no strength to Jind the truth except by 
God. 


[Al-Ka'bi] objected to not applying the situation of this world [to the 
absent] but this is not possible, because by [equating this world which 
includes bodies and accidents], it removes the reason for the obligation 


of this world, such as [that] it is a test. 


In terms of the issue related to Moses, [Ka ‘bi] mentioned [where Moses 
asked God] to show him a sign to know that it is from God, but we have 
already explained the flaws [in this position]; that the one who is unable 
to recognise God cannot be the trustee of His message whose purpose 
it is to help with the salvation of creation, as his mission entails 
transmitting the message and advocating wotship [of God], which [in 
itself] is a test. In fact, the reason why [Moses] asked to see God was so 


that his rank would be increased and he would know his great standing 


169 


with God, or God commanded that people could be taught about the 
possibility of [Beatific Vision]. 


*® God is the grantor of success. 


Then [Ka ‘bil inferred that [Moses] did not see [God] but instead saw the 
mountain, and [seeing] the mountain is not a reasonable way for [Moses] 
to know and see [God]. It is said to Ka‘bi that if [this event] was [for 
God to present] a sign, then the mountain did not see or understand [the 
sign] 3 Tf itis [a sign], then the sign is the firmness of the mountain not 
that [God] will show [Moses] the sign and then for [the mountain] to 
crumble [This point includes the proposition of Ka‘bi] which entails 
Moses seeing the sign, which is the mountain crumbling, and then God 
stating in [the verse of the Holy Quran]; ‘you well not see Me**and Ka ‘bi 
attributed [this verse] as the sign which [Moses] saw. There zs no strength to 
find the truth except by God. 


346 


Then Ka‘bi asked about the meaning of Moses’ repentance”, [despite] 
not being asked about it. Ka‘bi claimed that [repentance is] of two types. 
The first is that Moses is aware of the evidence that it is a minor sin and 


he therefore repented. The second is the customary usage without the 


43 There is a disagreement amongst theologians on whether it is possible to see God 
in this world. The majority of theologians hold the view that it is possible to see God 
in this world, because there is no essential difference between this world and the 
Hereafter. A minority of theologians, which include the Mutazaties, argue that it is not 
possible to see God in this world and nor is it possible in the Hereafter. For example 
Zamakhshati argued that when God stated ‘You will not see me’, it applies eternally, which 
means that you will never see God and this includes the Hereafter. 

344 Matutidi is making the point that if seeing God automatically means that it is a sign, 
then in the same verse, God appeared to the mountain and yet the mountain is unable 
to see or understand. 

345 Quran, Surah ALA ‘raf (7:143) 

346 In the same verse in Surah ALAraf, the literal text states that Moses repented. 


occurrence of sin, such as when people renew their repentance at 


time of being in plight. 


Shaykh Aba Manéir responded that if it were a minor sin, then it beging 
by [the minor sin] being known by evidence, and it is imperative Moseg 
was warned [of this minor sin] except for when he is in an 
unconsciousness state and not [being warned] when one is in a State of 
unconsciousness. The second [explanation] is acceptable for when one 
is in a state of shock and not when one is in a state of rest, or [when One] 
returns to safety and consciousness, and the cortect [usage is fo, 
example] the time when [Moses] saw his staff, turned and fled. God 25 the 


Lrantor of success, 


However, it is conceivable that since [God] said ou will not see Me®" then 
it means that it was possible for Moses to see God in this world*® and 
that as promised by God, one is capable of lof seeing] Him in the 
Hereafter. He went back on what [he thought] and [literally accepted the 
vetse] where God stated you will not see Me,* even if {this position} 
became a part of the foundation of his belief, such as the case with 
believers, whose belief is enacted through each sign that is revealed and 
every duty that is renewed, despite the fact that on the whole, they were 


believers. God is the Lrantor of success. 


We have already explained [the issue related to] what God said |in the 


following verse of the Holy Quran;] “The Jaces that day will be radiant, 
looking at their Lord’? 


re 
7 Quran, Surah AL4 raf (7:143) 


48 What al-Matutidi is arguing is that God said: ‘you will not see Me’ and not ‘you 


cannot see me’, which he claims means that the possibility of seeing God in this world 
remains. 


3 Tid 
350 Quran, Surah Al Qiyamah (75:22-23) 


171 


ishaykh Abt Man&sur] said that the central principle of the argument 
fpertaining to the Beatific Vision] is that it is either a well-known issue 
reference to the essence] or it is linked to an intention which would 
pe an explanation] that does not refer to the [explicit meaning] such as 
in the following verses [in the Holy Quran]; ‘Have you not turned your vision 
jo your Lord - how He extends the shadow”! and ‘Have you not seen how your 
Lord dealt with. °°’ The main basis of [the argument] is that when one says 
eYou have seen such-and-such’ or “You have looked at such-and-such’, 
it is specifically referring to his essence, but instead when one says “You 
have seen him say such-and-such and do such-and-such’, one is not 
referring to his essence, and it is the same case for Moses in telation to 


this verse. 


Therefore, in principle, the one who contemplates [the position of 
Ka‘bi] knows that he is anthtopomorphist [as he is comparing God to 
the creation], [which can be seen by the fact that] he has not mentioned 
that quality the vision must possess under these conditions, but instead 
he argues that he came into existence this [way], which is the position of 
an anthropomorphist - that every person who acts and is knowledgeable 
came into existence in the present Universe as a body, and therefore it 
must be the same in the unseen. Then he mentioned the meaning of the 
vision of a body, but he failed to mention the quality of the vision of 
other than a body, so that he could [provide an adequate] proof [for his 


position].”° 


351 Quran, Surah a/-Furgan (25:45) 

382 Quran, Surah a/-Fi/ (105:1) 

353 What al-Maturidi is attempting to argue is that the position of Ka‘bi entails a degree 
of anthropomorphism, in that Ka‘bi is comparing seeing created things to seeing God. 
He argues that Ka‘bi is unable to fathom the possibility that the Beatific Vision bears 
no similarity to creation. Al-Maturidi posits that Ka‘bi’s view means that the principles 
of the seen world should be applied to the unseen world and therefore also to God, 


172 


Furthermore, Ka'bi denied the Beatific Vision in its accuracy or [due te 


distance as both cannot ‘leave’ God. Then he argued that God Ptaise 

Himself [in the following verse of the Quran]; Vision perceives Him not, bys 
He perceives [all] vision,’®™ and it is not possible for something to ‘leave? 
God, and the same is applied to the [following verse]; He has power Over 
all things, and therefore it is not possible [for this power] to ‘leave? 
[God]. [But the problem with this position is that] God was described 
by vision in a manner that invalidates [Ka‘bi’s contention], which 


signifies that his approach does not express the true nature of vision. 


Furthermore, if one posits the question that ‘How is [God] seen?’, we 
answer ‘without “how”, because ‘how’ is used for something which is g 
body, but instead [God] is seen without the description of standing and 
sitting, leaning or hanging, amalgamating and sepatating, advancing or 
retreating, short or tall, lightness or darkness, at test or in motion, 
touching or not touching, outside or inside. And it is not possible to 
ascribe a shape to Him or for reason to comprehend Him, because He 


is beyond [such ascriptions]. 


The likely reason for this paragraph is the Mutazahtes arguing in turn that al-Matutidi’s 
belief entails anthropomorphism, in that only bodies and accidents are apprehended 
by vision. His response was an attempt to show that rather Ka ‘bi’s position was the 
one that resulted in anthropomorphism. 

4 Quran, Surah ALAn ‘am (6:103) 

93 Quran, Surah Hud (11:4) 


173 


Dispute with Muslim Opponents 


Against the Mutazalites: Proof That Their Main Teachings are 
Close to the Ideas of Foreign Religions 


[Shaykh] Aba Manéur said that we will explore what causes a rational 
person to [adopt] [the position of] the Muazalite School, which in its 
principles and analogies [is similar] to the various other [non-Islamic| 
religions, and if one were to contemplate, one would realise that the 


doctrines [of the Mutazalites| are as a result of the doctrines [of other 


religions]. 


174 


Against the Thesis: That Which is Non-Existent (Ma’dum) has 
Always Existed. 


The Mutazalites said that a non-existent [thing] is [nonetheless] a thi 
and the somethingness of things is [not applied to] God, and it is God 


who brings [the thing] from non-existence into existence. 


[Shaykh] Aba Manéir said that in reality what they say is that things are 
pre-eternal but non-existent, and later come into existence. As such, 
atguing for their [form of] pre-eternity is the denial of monotheism, 
[According to the Mutazalites| things are non-existent and become 
different [in existence] only in their emergence, and appearance [in the 
present Universe], and [such] things are pre-eternally non-existent 
things. In this way, they associated the pre-eternity of God with other 


than Him which is tantamount to a denial of monotheism,” 


*°¢ In this chapter al-Maturidi returns to the topic of whether a non-existent thing is a 
thing. As he relayed previously, as well as in the forthcoming chapters, he argues that 
a non-existing thing is not a thing, due to the fact that it does not exist, whereas the 
Mutazalites argues that non-existent things are still a type of a thing ie, they have a type 
of existence — for example in the ‘knowledge’ of God. 
*?’ When Muslims such as the Mutazalites argue for the pre-eternity of the Universe 
they do not equate the pre-eternity of the Universe with God’s necessary pre-eternity. 
This important distinction is the reason why they are not partnering the creation with 
God. This distinction is not accepted by Al-Maturidi and more famously in later times 
by al-Ghazali who believed that the Mutazalites and Avicenna are equivocating the pre- 
eternity of God with the pre-eternity of creation. 


175 


Against the Thesis: God has not Eternally been the Creator 


Therefore, the Mutazalites claimed that the Universe is pre-eternal, as 
«bings’ are other than God, and that all things [before creation] other 
than God had the property of ‘non-existence’ but [nonetheless] did not 
cease [in their somethingness]. This controverts [the position] of all 
monotheists who hold that God created Hx Nihilo. Mutazalites assett that 
[God] is the Creator in the sense of bringing something into existence, 
while [stating that] there are things before creation. God és the grantor of 


SUECESS. 


The argument of the Dahriya (Materialists), who maintain that there is a 
Creator [and] argue that God is continuously making things so that they 
exist pre-eternally**, is closer [to the truth] than the teaching of the 
[Mutazalites|. Another belief the [Dahriya| hold that conforms with the 
view of the Mutazalites is their view that the Prime Matter of the Universe 
is eternal, which is also the belief of those that propagate the notion of 
Hayiila |raw, Primal Matter], which is that accidents emerged [from the 
Hayila|, and the Universe is the result of these [accidents]. In addition, 
([Mutazalites| also attribute to things a ‘somethingness’ that is originated 
and then they come into existence. This position entails the notion that 
God was not the Creator or originator [of the Universe] and nor were 
things non-existent and then they came into existence. According to 


them, the Dhat (the Essence of God) existed and was inactive, and God 


358 Their position is that God is the Creator and thus He is continuously creating as per 
His pre-eternal Attribute. Their view is occasionalism whilst still holding onto the view 


that the Universe is pre-eternal. 


176 


then produced the creation, or He was not the Creator and then came 


. . c * 
into existence as a Creator.*”’ Gad is the grantor of success. 


According to them, the Daf (the Essence of God) existed, and there 
was no Universe, and then nothing occurred except that the Universe 
came into existence, without {God directly] causing the [Universe] to 
come into existence and without any quality going from [God] to the 
[Universe] through which it existed. This is because for the Mutaxalites 
God's Will [of creating] and the Knowledge [of creating} are the same 
thing, because the creation and the Universe has no meaning for [God] 
for it to be as it is. They then used |the temporal nature of the Universe] 
as evidence for the basis of their argument for the proof [of the existence 
of God]. Therefore, they fabricated their position by using this as a ptoof 
because according to their view, nothing came from God [to cause the 
creation of the Universe], other than Him knowing of its existence after 
it came from non-existence [into existence]. They believe that the 
knowledge that a thing exists is not [the same as| creating it, and [positing 
that it is] pre-eternal does not require that it exists because of God 
Therefore, they made it necessary that the Universe is not through [it 
being brought into existence] by one [entity], and this was on the basis 


[of imitating} those who claimed the pre-eternity of the Universe since 


°°? One of the reasons for Mutazilites arguing against those who believe in Creatio ex 
Nibilo is the notion of the latter that God existed but was inactive and then after some 
time brought the Universe into existence by becoming active. Hence, they argue for a 
pre-eternal Universe. Maturidi must know this but he repeatedly avoids mentioning it 
or addressing it vs a vis his own beliefs. 

° The Matazalites do not hold the position that the Universe does not exist due to 
God ontologically. Instead this is a positon held by some Greek philosophers. 
Although, in this paragraph, Al-Maturid? is atguing that if you hold the view that the 
Universe is pre-eternal, it is not necessary that such a model tequires the existence of 
a creator — although even the Greek Neo-Platonists showed long before Maturidt how 


an eternal Universe still requires a Creator. 


177 


it was not through another [way of being brought into exustericel., 
therefore, their position is a mere imitation of the claim of these other 
groups], except that these other [groups formed their opinion] by using 
analogy, since the [existence of the] Universe was not due to another 
jnon-interlinked cause and therefore] their belief was that [the Universe 
was] pre-eternal without beginning, while arguing that the Universe 
caine into existence without another being [causing it] - as we have 
explained [previously]. What is even more perplexing is that [the 
Mutazalites| made the Universe the creator and |God] a created being, so 
(that] the Universe becoming so was not because it was designed by 
another [being such as God]. In that case, [God] applied to himself a 
name [that does not| befit [Him] and applied to the Universe an exalted 
name, and it would be excusable if the name ‘knower’*' were transposed 


to the Universe, but this is an example of an erroneous conclusion [made 


by the Mutagalites|.° 


In addition, another example] of [the Mtagalites| imitating [these other 
eroups| is the Dualists’ position that things were non-existent and then 
came into existence without there being a bringing-into-existence other 
than their emergence from non-existence. The Dualists argued that 
Light and Darkness were separate and then they mixed, therefore this 
Universe [previously] existed without [the aforementioned} separation 


or mixing with something else, and as such, this Universe came into 


361 Which is what the Mufazalites apply to God instead of ‘the Creator’. 

362 Al-Maturidi is relaying the supposed position of the Mutazalites and arguing that 
certain ptemises they hold result in erroneous conclusions. Here al-Maturidi is using 
the doctrine of the Mufazalites that God did not directly cause the Universe to come 
into existence from non-existence, and that God does not enact Fis Will to create the 
Universe, but instead He has knowledge of creation. Therefore, for the Mutazalites ‘will 
and ‘knowledge’ are synonyms. This means that if God did not directly cause the 
creation of the Universe and it was also not because of another, then the Universe must 


be pre-eternal. 


178 


existence by itself after there previously not being a Universe and this 
as we have mentioned, the doctrine of the Mutazalites>® There is no stren 2H 
to find the truth except by God. | 


The Mutazalhites, as well as others, drew ‘Istad/a/ (inference) from the 
created nature of the Universe [that it necessarily is a created object], ang 
their ptoof of this was nothing but the fact that the Universe exists, Theid 
[belief] required the created natute [of the Universe], and on this basil 
they argued for a Creator. But then the Musazalites also posited in terms 
of God that He was not a creator, merciful or compassionate and God 
temains so [unchanging and in the same state].*' Therefore, they made 
God in His initial state, through which knowledge of God’s [existence] 
that occurred to the creation was not free from [being affected by 
accidents], such as in the case of the Universe, which they found based 
on theit senses is [also not free from] accidents. Therefore [according to 
this logic], the [same] reason they know of the created nature of the 
Universe is [the same reason] by which they should assert a created 


nature for the creator (and Merciful God, is eternal and perpetual). 


°° Al-Maturidi is equivocating the position of the Dualists with that of the Mutazalites 
from the perspective that the Mutazalites argue that God did not bring the Universe 
into existence within time, due to their idea of a pre-eternal Universe, and the Dualists 
also argue that the Universe came into existence as a result of the conflict between 
Light and Darkness, and not because an external being brought it into existence. 

*6 The basis of this argument is the Matazaktes denial of the Attributes of God. This is 
because they argue that this would mean that God then would have parts, with one 
part being Knowledge, the other Speech, another Essence etc. Here al-Maturidt is 
giving a counter as to why this is a flawed position. 

°° Al-Maturidi is attempting to argue that the Mutagalites hold the view that we know 
the existence of the Creator based on the created nature of the Universe. But then, al- 
Maturidi claims that the Musazalites don’t believe that God was a creator. They also 
hold that God doesn’t have the attribute of knowledge, because they argue that the 
attributes give the implication that they are separate from God and as a tesult they ate 
accidents. But then the Murazalites argue that God has knowledge of the Universe, and 


179 


furthermore, in regards to the above, there ate two issues. The first is 
that it is necessaty to state that the entire Universe is originated, even 
though we did not observe fits origination], [this understanding] is based 
on the fact that we have observed [from the Universe and the objects 
therein] that it is not free from [being created and] created things, which 
signifies that it requires a Creator and Designer, and our existence is [an 
example of that] which is called a created thing. The second is that God’s 
Fissence must be eternal, since if His existence is only known by 
accidents [as the Musazalites claim], why is it not necessaty to claim the 


eternity of the entire Universe, if it is not free of accidents?” 


In addition, there is knowledge about the comportment of accidents in 
the non-sensory Universe through their amalgamation and separation, 
motion and rest etc. According to [the Masazzltes’| position, mercy, 
designing and restoting creation ate properties that are added to God, 
and they posit that they are all accidents. Therefore, it must be argued 
that what is required for the Universe, and whoever has this description, 
is a Creator and Designer outside of it. There 2s no strength to find the truth 
except by God. 


knowledge is an accident, so therefore theit position means that not only do we know 
God because of the created nature of the Universe, but we also know through God 
His own created nature. 

366 Al-Matutidi also holds the position that God is known by accidents, therefore in 
this paragraph he is most likely making a similar point as he made in the previous 
paragraph, which is that if God’s ‘accidental’ (according to the Mutazatites) attribute of 
creating created the Universe, then it means God is attached to accidents, as is the 
Universe. Therefore, both of their accidental natures result in the eternity of both of 


them, or that the both of them are originated. 


180 


Against the Thesis: God’s Act of Creation is not Different from, 
that Which is Created, God’s Will is not other than that Which ie 
Willed | 


The Mutazalites argue that there was God, and then a ‘will’ emerged from 
Him through which the Universe came into existence, without God 
creating this will and without this will having any free choice, since there 


was nothing except for God’s Essence, which existed [pte-eternally]. 


Furthermore, the Magians*” argued that God existed, and an ignoble 
thought emerged from Him and from this [thought] sprung Satan, ang 
[Satan] is that through which all evil came into existence, which the 
Magians call a ‘thought’, while the Mutazilites call it ‘will’ and ‘ftce choice’. 
But the origination [of this evil according to the telayed position] was 
not because of ‘free choice’ or ‘will’ because it is closer [to the notion of 
it being] a thought. Then [according to the Magians this ‘thought’] was 
not [anything] other than evil, and [in the same vein] ‘will’ according to 
the Muzazahies was not from other than the Universe, [meaning that it is 


not from God]™", so this (and God knows best) is what is meant by the 


°°? The Magians ate supposedly the followers of Zoroastrianism. They have been 
mentioned by various traditions through history and they are mentioned in the Quran 
in the following verse: “Indeed, those who have believed and those who were Jews and the Sabeans 
and the Christians and the Magians and those who associated with Allah - Allah will judge between 
them on the Day of Resurrection. Indeed Allah is, over all things, Witness.” (Quran, Surah a+ Hajj 
(22:17)) 
°8 Al-Maturidi is referring to his dispute with the Mutazalites regarding good and evil. 
Al-Maturidi argues that both good and evil are from God but out of respect one does 
not ascribe evil to God. The Mutazalites argue that God is good, and therefore only 
good comes from Him. According to them evil is the by-product of human will or free 
choice. Those who dispute with them argue this entails that people are the creators of 
evil which is a result of choice. The Mutazafites on the other hand atgue that this choice 
was created by God, but evil is a result of a person’s free will. 


181 


following Prophetic statement ‘The Oadariya® are the Magians of this 


369 Some people believe that there was a theological group that were known as the 
‘Qadariya’. Most likely this is not the case and instead it was used as derogatory term 
for those who believed that people had complete autonomy over theit actions. The 
issue of the vatious opinions on Free Will is explained in footnote 379 

370 "The Mutazalites hold the position that humans have complete autonomy over their 


actions, and it is the reason why they are being referred to as the Qadariya. 


182 


Against the Thesis: Accidents Function in the Material Universe 


According to Their Own Sets of Laws 


Moreover, according to [The Musazalites position, the Universe is no, 
free from amalgamation and separation, perpetuity and annihilation, ang 
these ate states that can exist without God,” just as ships, structures 
and writings etc. exist by the amalgamation of parts, and it is the same 
case for separation, and on the same basis is the orbit of the sun, the 
moon and motion and rest of creation, and there is no Universe without 
the existence of both substances and accidents. The existence of all this 
was possible through God and His creation, since the entirety of the 
Universe was able to exist through God and His creation. The entite 
Universe was multiple, and this is what the heretics said about two 
essences, and the naturalists and astrologers said about more than two 


essences.” 


Furthermore, according to their teaching, God did not establish any 
ptoof of His Creation other than the Universe, nor [did God provide] 
evidence of His eternity. Therefore, God did not distinguish between 
those accidents that were created by others and those that were created 
by Him, because unification or evanescence can be observed but the 
Mover and Unifier [cannot be seen]. [According to their belief] it is 


possible that they are from another and not God, even if this is not 


371 Al-Maturidi is alluding to the Mu/azalites position that the Universe is eternal and 
that God does not ‘interact’ with creation, But it is impottant to note that the 
Mutazattes stall hold the view that God is the cause of the existence of the Universe. 

372 Al-Maturidi is alluding to the well-known arguinents made by the opponents of the 
Mutazalites where they claim that the view of the Matazahites results in making humans 
equivalent to the Creator, which can be seen in issues such as Free Will (where they 
argue that humans ‘create’ their own actions) and evil (where they argue that humans 


‘create’ evil). 


183 


observed - since they ate equating God to that which is observed.*” 
Hence, this is similar to the belief of the Dualists and Naturalists, who 
argued that things come into existence through [separate gods of good 
and evil, or natures], without each of them establishing a proof that what 
it creates can be distinguished from what was created by another; and 


this is a sign of non-omnipotence. 


The proof that God provided as evidence that He created the Universe 
in its entirety is [found in the following verse of the Holy Quran]; “ef zere 
would be a God besides Him, then each of them would have declared independence 
with his creation.’*"* Hence, according to them, God did not declare 
independence with His [own] creation fand] He did not signify [that it 


was created by Hin]. 


In addition, [according to the position of the Musagalites] if you imagine 
the separation of bodies into parts that are not divisible, cach part of 
which is withheld from perception by the senses in such a way that could 
be comprehended by teason, and their combination is effected by other 
than God in proportion to their subtlety and density, the proofs of God 
based on the perception of bodies become impossible. If God did not 
make cleat to His creation that [everything] that they know is from Him, 
based on evidence that repudiates that [the Universe was created] by 
another, in order to confirm that what they sense exists through Him, 
then what about in the case of what He conceals from them? So those 
of whom I mentioned from the Dualists as well as others drew the 
analogy that none of {the gods] provided evidence of their actions, since 
there is no evil [for someone] which cannot be good for someone [else], 


and it is the same for states such as heat and cold to the utmost things 


373 Al-Maturidi is arguing against the Matagalites position that God is not directly 
involved in creation. 
374 Quran, Surah a-Mu’minun (23:91) 


7 
: 
: 
| 
: 


184 


that can be reached by nature, and it is the same case for the Stats ang 


Planets.*” There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


375 


Al-Matutidi is claiming that according to the Mutazalites, the Universe functions 
according to its own sets of laws, without direct involvement from God. According to 
him, this then means that God did not provide signs of His existence in the Universe 
for Flis creation to comprehend, Therefore, he says they hold the same opinion as the 
Dualists, who also allegedly teach that God did not leave signs of His existence in the 
Universe, because there is nothing that is in its totality good, which would indicate 
towards the ‘god of Good? and likewise for the ‘god of Evil’, 


185 


Against the Thesis: Humans, Based on their Freedom, can Act in 
a Way that God did not Know Previously 


[Shaykh] Aba Manégir said that the monotheists drew inferences based 
on the Dualists denial of two statements. The fitst is that each of [the 
gods of Light and Dark or Good and Evil] is able to conceal something 
from the other and can do something which the other does not know. 
[This would be the case] even if they replied in the affirmative as it results 
‘n one ot both of them being ignorant, whereas if they replied in the 
negative, then it results in the both of them being ignorant and incapable 
_ and incapability invalidates Divinity. The second statement is that 
whatever one of the essences fie. the Good and Evil or Light and Dark 
of Dualism] wants to prove, the other essence wants to deny, and as 
such, they ate contradictory [and conflicting in their essence]. Theretore, 


existence indicates that there is [only] one Creator. 


Furthermore, according to the School of the Mutazahies, a person can 
perform an act which is outside of the knowledge of God, since whoever 
in the knowledge of God is an unbeliever can be a believer, and the 
reality of his existence is outside of God’s knowledge. This necessitates 
that a person can conceal his acts from God, then [this would mean that] 
he did not deny [God’s oneness], and it would be a similar case if there 
wete another God. This is so that you know that their School, when 
studied, is the school of heretics; since that by which monotheism 1s 
proven, is that which invalidates [the position of] both Schools.’” God is 


the grantor of success. 


376 Al-Maturidi is teferring to the belief held by Avicenna and some Matazahtes 
regarding God’s knowledge of particulars. This was a reason for Al-Ghazali to argue 
that Avicenna’s teaching traversed the bounds of Isiam. To briefly summarise, 
Avicenna differentiates between knowledge of particulars (Jaz) and knowledge of 


186 


The second [refutation of the Mufazilites| is that they affirm that a Person 
has the ability to deny all God’s design in propagation and to dismisg 
God’s threat in His saying [in the Holy Quran]; J wé// surely fill Hell yy 
you.” They hold [the position] that the acts of the disbelievers a 
devils are other than what God wants, and that God rather wants [these 
acts] not to be, and in preventing them God uses everything in His 
bounty, and even if God wants to increase it, He cannot. Then the 
Mutazahies did not preclude the possibility of multiple gods, and [they 
say] creation is based on how it exists in God’s knowledge, as is the 
Situation of the Universe. This demonstrates what I reported - that their 
School imitates the School of the Dahriya and the School of heretics and 
it does not [accord] the School of the Muslims. God és the Lrantor of success, 


The School of the heretics’ holds that the Universe was [the result of] 
the act of two [gods] - neither of whom created, directed or had power 
ovet the act of the other, and that each of the two had sole power over 
a [specific] aspect of the act, whether good or evil, that the other did not 
have power over. This is similar to the beliefs of the Magzans. 


general things (Kw#/#). Avicenna then makes a further differentiation between the 
knowledge of particulars that are known in a general sense and the knowledge of 
particulars that are known in a specific sense. Avicenna explains that knowledge of 
particulars in a general sense is known by God, and this is also known by creation. But 
knowledge of particulars in a specific sense cannot be applied to God as that would 
entail a change in God - if something occurs, God knowing about it in time is applying 
time to God, which means making God corporeal. The example of the two types would 
be saying something specific at a specific point in time, which would be particular, 
whereas if one states that said person made a statement (but not a specific time), that 
is genetal. It seems habitual for Imam Matutidi to refuse to present the nuance of his 
opponents’ arguments before passing harsh judgements. 

°7 Quran, Sutah Sad (38:85) 

%8 The School of the heretics that al-Matutidi is teferring to in this paragraph is that 
of the Dualists. It could be a specific group of Dualists or he could be referring to them 
in-toto., 


187 


The Mutaxalite School hold that a person has power over a type of action, 
which is Kash (acquisition [of the action]), while God has power over 
another aspect [of the action] which is bringing it into existence, [but] 
God does not have power overt, nor can He create, the act that belongs 
to a person, and it is the same case for people with respect to God’s acts. 
In addition, it is based on these two [namely, God and humans| that the 
direction of the Universe revolves. Therefore, they imitated [these other 
Schools] in their conclusion. Then the [Musazaiite| School became even 
more repulsive in that they made person’s power over facts such as] 
motion and being at rest derive from [God], since when they gave God 
power [over these acts], they removed power from the person. We do 
not see the Dualists removing power [from either one of their gods] by 
giving it to the other [god]. As such, let it be known that the meaning of 
power is a Divine attribute according to the Dualists, which is through 
and ftom God, but in the case [of the position of the] Musazahies, this 
results in depriving God of the power of existing in Himself, which is a 
mote tepulsive view. The second is their falschood, since they ascribe to 
a person, in his [part] of the act that which they ascribe to the Creator, 
but they did not [give the person] the title of ‘Divinity’ or the name of 


‘Creator’, by which God is known for creating things.”” 


3 The question of ‘Free Will’ in Islamic theology has a variety of opinions, and al- 
Matutidi does speak in detail about the issue later in his book. All the groups that 
disagtee with each other regarding the issue of humans’ Free Will (or lack thereof), 
present alternative opinions in a dramatized and highly negative light. In terms of the 
Mutazalites, they do not in fact argue that a person has complete power over their 
actions as Imam Maturidi claims, nor that this person’s power is equivalent to the 
power of God. I will briefly explain the positions of the Matutidi, “Ash‘art and 
Mutazalite Schools for the benefit of the reader. The Matutidi’s argue that a person has 
Free Will but the power for the performance of the act is from God. So, as a person 
with Free Will, I can choose to raise my hand, but the physical movement of my hand 


into the air is performed by God, in that He causes my hand to move upwatds. The 


188 


Therefore, the Mufazalites increased the rank of humans Iby superseding) 
God’s power, because they argue that God cannot act on His Promise 
to keep it, even though power is attributed to Him. This is similar to 
what the [Muaziizes] mentioned in terms of a person’s lifespan and 
sustenance that was allotted by God, but then another person comes and 
kills him before he has completed this allotted lifespan, and [despite this, 
accotding to them] God has fulfilled His promise, and His power 
remains. In addition, God cannot prevent a person from doing what he 
wants to fulfil, as God does not deprive a person of the power to act. As 
such, the powet of a petson becomes greater, and his will is more 


efficacious. God’s Divinity does not allow for such ascriptions. °° 


“Ash ari School argues that it is God who decides that I will raise my hand in the air, 
and then I believe (falsely) that I am making the choice of moving my hand in the air. 
The implementation of the movement of my hand into the air is also from God, On 
the other hand, the Mutazalites remove God’s engagement with the Universe, and as 
such they argue that God created both me and my Free Will, but gave me the ability to 
choose to raise my hand in the ait, and I then taised my hand in the air by myself, 
without God being engaged in the act, except that He gave me the ability to do it in 
the first place. An example of these various positions would be a parent who takes their 
child to a toy shop; the child chooses the toy and then pays for it, According to the 
Maturidt School, the child chooses to buy, say, a ‘Star Wars’ action figure, but the act 
of paying for and buying the toy is performed by the parent, In the “Ash ‘ar School, it 
is the parent who chooses the action figure and then pays for it, the child merely being 
present during the process. In the Mafazatite School, the patent gives the money to the 
child and the child then chooses the toy and pays for it. In debates, the Maturidis 
argued that the Mufagalites had given the child Divine powers and that the ‘Ash ‘aris had 
removed all choice from him. The ‘Ash ‘avs argued that the Maturidis and Mutazalites 
had given the person complete autonomy of action, by which they meant that they 
were equating the person to God. 

“80 This is a disagreement between the Mutazalite and Maturidi School in terms of the 
issue that God allocates to a person a specific lifespan - but what if someone were to 
commit suicide or is murdered earlier than this supposed allocation; then is it because 
of the person’s or murderer’s decision or due to God’s decision? Let us use the example 


of a person who has been allocated sixty-five years to live by God but commits suicide 


189 


The Dualists argue that Light mixed into the confines of Darkness in a 
manner [that caused it to be] concerned about its Goodness, and 
therefore it repelled Evil from its essence, and likewise for the Darkness 
(according to those who argued that the penetration begins from [the 
Darkness}). Both contentions are incorrect, because the actions [of Light 
and Darkness] turned out contrary to what they wanted, and each of 
them of attempted to liberate itself from the grasp of the other, As such, 
it makes it necessary to attribute error, ignorance and incapability to 
Light. More specifically, the error is that the result was not the intended 
outcome, its ignorance is that Light does not know that it remains mixed 
with its enemy, while its inability is that it is attempting and planning to 


escape but is unable to do so. 


The position of the Mutagalites bears some similarity [to the Dualists], in 
that God does not support a disbeliever or anyone else except in order 
to obey Him and does not give anyone possession over anything except 
to give thanks [to Him], and God does not create anyone except for 
them to submit to Him. ‘This is what God wants, and He does that which 
pleases Him. If other than this emetged from God, then He would be 
foolish and oppressive, which would mean that everything that God 


gave to His enemies is not [actually] what He wanted, and as such God 


at the age of forty-five. The Musazalites have two viewpoints. The first is that when the 
person committed suicide, he died due to his allotted time, meaning that forty-five was 
his allotted time to live all along. The second position they hold is that God provides 
two allotted lifespans, the first is sixty-five and this is based on the situation that there 
is no external factor such as suicide which causes him die before his allotted time and 
the second is if he commits suicide or is killed, which in our example is the age of forty- 
five. The basis of their position lies in a Hadith Qudsi [these are hadith purportedly 
revealed by God and transmitted by the Prophet (although unlike the Quran, their 
reliability is questionable)] which states that, ‘God will punish one who commuts suicide with 
Hell, as My slave bas expedited My Decree’. The Maturidi proof is the narration; ‘when their 
allotted time [of death] comes to them, it will not be delayed nor occur earker’. 


190 


made mistakes. This error is clear, as the [person] does not turn Out as 
God wanted. The [person’s] power [when performing an act] would § a 
outside of [God’s] knowledge. Then what is proven after the 
[occurrence] of the act, which fis demonstrative] of the act of Goq [in 
telation] to the present Universe, is God’s refusal to prevent [the 
negative act]. Therefore, this results in the [Mutazalite’s] claim [about this 
issue] being a mere imitation [of these other schools] through al] 


manners of blame [being directed towards God]. 


[Shaykh] Abt Manégur said that the heretics denied that a thing comes 
into existence from nothing, because this is not conceivable in their 
fancy, and the anthropomorphists state the same concetning bodies. The 
Mutazalites denied that the acts of [people] are created since this does not 
conform to reason and the imagination [of people]. The Qadriya argue 
that God does not allow [that which is outside of the} limit of good that 
He is capable of, but [the person] does so [by acting outside of the limit 
of good]. The heretics’ make a similar claim - that God creates good, 
and that the creator of evil is other than Him. The Qadniya similarly argue 
that God does not have power over any evil thing in existence, and that 
all of this [evil is as a result of the] actions of people. The Mutazalites 
atgue that God does not want evil for or from anyone and [that rather] 
Satan is the one that wants it. Then if this [evil that exists] is not what 
God wants, this bears similarity to the notion proposed by the heretics 


who stated that evil was from Satan and [that he is] the creator of evil, 


381 Here, most likely al-Maturidi is referring to the Mutazakies, as they hold that evil is 
as a by-product of human actions. But the fact that he named them earlier in the 


patagtaph means that he could be referring to another group that also held the same 
belief. 


191 


even though God did not want it to occur. There is no strength to find the 


382 Al-Maturidi argues later in his book that both Good and Evil are from God, but it 
is out of respect fot His Divinity that we did not ascribe evil to God. The Matazalites 
on the other hand argue that because God is Good, He cannot be the reason for Evil, 
as He cannot have negative ascriptions such as ‘injustice’, and as such Evil is from 


people, so that God is able to and justified in punishing people for their evil acts. 


192 


Description of God and Attributing Names to Him does not 


Entail Anthropomorphism. 


[Shaykh] Aba Mansur said that a sect’ denied that an attribute of God 
is an essence that He can be described by, or that there are essential] 
names by which He can be known, as they posited that this entaile 
anthtopomorphism, since He would have a name [and attributes] like 
other beings. They atgued that it is not possible for one to make an 
analogy of God with anything from the entirety of creation [or anything 
that] refers to [the creation], because it is evident that analogy is affected 
by the name that is more appropriate for each thing. It was for this 
reason that [this sect] refused to ascribe the words ‘thing,’ ‘knowing’ and 
‘capable,’ [to God], citing by way of an example [their congruence with 
the words that cannot be ascribed to God such as] ‘for Him’ and ‘to 
Him,’ since they result in similarity and limit. [It is the same case for 
those who state that] God is in all locations, because locations have finite 
[limits], so describing [God by] using fall places] and by one [place] ate 
equivalent and as such the same applies to the first case jin terms of 
applying names to God that anthropomorphise Him]. God is the grantor of 


SHECESS, 


The basis of our position is that God has Essential Names by which He 
is called, such as God saying that He is ‘Merciful’, and Essential 
Attributes that describe God, such as Him having Knowledge of things 
and Power over them. However, this description of God is from us, and 
the name is in fact what our [intellect] can comprehend and our 


expressions can attain out of necessity, since our approach is [to know 


*® Al-Maturidi is referring to the Mutazalites, who as we have read, argue against the 
existence of the attributes of God. 


193 


God] through what is known and what we observe [in the present 
Universe], which requires verbal resemblance, since it is from the known 
and visible that God is considered. Nonetheless, it is necessary to define 
the concept from the present Universe to deny any similarity. As I have 
mentioned, we name Him out of necessity, and if it were in our capacity 
to call God by names that were not held by anything else, we would do 
it, But in fact, the present Universe is evidence of God, and through it, 
He must be known, so ftom it, God determined His names to 
approximate the sense He wished [to convey], even though God is above 
having likeness or similarity. Do you not see that the expression that we 
use in calling Him ‘Knowing’ and ‘Capable’ in language is different, 
without there being an actual difference? This shows you that the names 
that we call God ate expressions which bring the meanings closer to 
understanding, not that they are in reality His names - since at theit core 
they have qualities that God’s Divinity is beyond, a negative expression 
is linked to them, so He made monotheism proof of an essence within 
a negation, and a negation within proof of what was explained.” God is 


the grantor of success. 


The proof of our position ate the Prophets and the books that were sent 
from Heaven, and if in the naming of what the Prophets brought was a 
likening [of God to creation], the [Prophets] would be a cause for 
negating monotheism. But they all preached worshipping the One and 
knowing the Oneness of the Creator. Therefore, this cannot mean that 
there are multiple gods, and nor can it mean that God is similar to the 


creation. There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


384 To explain the fact that over several chapters al-Maturidi is rehashing points made 
earlier, sometimes using different arguments but in many cases using the same points 
that have been made previously, it is my personal belief that these writings or lectures 


never meant to be the collected book that we find in contemporary times. 


194 


However, since such names can contradict the designation of the 
known by their name, it is permissible to use them along with 
[following verse of the Holy Quran]; “nothing is in his similarity”, : 
the somethingness of things from simple elements is denied, such j 


accidents and attributes, as well as composite substances such as bodies 


Assistance is through God. 


Furthermore, we find based on our observation, that the entire Universe 
is compelled and incapable of directing itself, ignorant of its start, and 
how much of each state of time and space it annihilates and in which jt 
exists cohesively, and which contains opposites [with contradictory 
natures] that by their nature should repel. As such, it signifies that they 
do not exist through themselves and that the One who designs them and 
creates them had knowledge of them and power over them, since it is _ 
contrary for anything that is other than God to be able to coincide with 
His Essence, and this does not contradict the evidence of power over 
them in Himself and knowledge of their state. It is necessary to verify 
this meaning, of which the evidence lies in the visible wotld, since there 
is no way to know God other than through it. Similarly, if this was by 
the direction of [a creator] before God to whom the first situation 
reverts, then this involves all that we have explained. 


# are those who derive the mentioned names from the 


The Batiniyya 
First and Second Originators, such as the Intellect and the Soul, and 
[argue] that the entire Universe emanates from the Intellect, from which 


the Soul draws aid, which supplies the Haydla (Primary or Raw Matter). 


°85 Quran, Surah as-Shuraa (42:11) 

“86 The Batiniyyab are an Isamaili Shia sect, and this term has been used by many Sunni 
theologians, such as al-Ghazali, in order to attempt to refute the dogmas of Ismaili 
Shias. ‘Ba#iniyyah’ refers to esotericists, as they claimed that they followed hidden 
infallible ‘Imams’, who interpreted the Quran esoterically, 


195 


They posit that the Intellect was [present] at Creation and was its cause, 
from which everything that cxists emanated. It is impossible that 
creation emetges from a being that does not know what it is to cause 
emanation at [the time of] creation, or it does not [possess the ability] to 
be emanated or that it does not want to be emanated. [Therefore,] it is 
similar to the act of an entity such as ‘Nature’, in that it does not feel or 
know and is not described as having power over [things]. So according 
to this position [in terms of] God, the denial of [God's] Attributes and 
Names out of fear of likening [Him] to creation, enters into a state of 
the negation of His Attributes. God becomes such that nothing points 
to Him as evidence, and speech about God is only in the form of 
imitation of authority, which is an unlikely [proposition].”"’ God is the 


grantor of success. 


Furthermote, it is asked, is ‘God’ His name or the name of something 
other than Him? This, in reality, goes back to the name of the ‘Intellect’, 
and ‘Merciful’ is the name of the Soul in their School. They rejected the 
name out of feat for likening God to creation. Then they made the Deity 
worshipped as God, merciful, compassionate and to be innumerable 
other things and parts that it is difficult to count, as though the Prophets 
pteached the worship of multiple [Gods] as opposed to one God. It is 
to God we turn for acd. 


387 This idea is not only restricted to the Bafiniyyab, but in fact the view that everything 
comes ftom the ‘First Intellect’ is held by many philosophers, with some arguing that 
this First Intellect is God, whilst others do not name this entity ‘God’, but give it the 
same characteristics as God, which would entail Divinity. This also beats similarity to 
Avicenna’s view of the Universe. 

388 Al-Maturidi is explaining that this is one of the reasons as to why the Muatazahtes 
teject the ‘Attributes of God’, because they argue that these attributes result in God 
being in parts, where each attribute is a separate part, and when they come together, 
they make the whole, which is God, But God cannot be in parts and therefore what it 


196 


Then when they said, ‘He has no name,’ it is said to them, ‘what do you 


mean by the statement that ‘He has no essential name and no essentia] 

attribute’?’ Thus, they find no way to explain their statement that ‘He 

has no name,’ and this statement invalidates all those who state that 
q 


‘God has no essential name.’ 


Then they claimed that God has a name other than [God], such as ‘the 
Creator of creating, He is the Cause of creation, the Causer that is neither 
caused nor a cause’ because every caused thing can become a cause of g 


State. 


It is said to them that since they argue that God’s name is other than 
Him, ‘Was that name given to God by someone else, or did God give 
this name to Himself?’ If they respond ‘No, God can name Himself 
whatever God wants of other things, and cause and effect’, in that case, 
this is a saying that is figurative and not necessarily a statement of reality, 
and something other [than God, such as us] needed this name for Him 


without it being needed by God. 


If they posit that creation is from God, it is said to them that it was God 
who brought the creation into existence from non-existence and God 
who verified for [the creation] those names [of God] that, in any case, 
were from Him, to the extent that [the creation then] required a name 
for God. [If this were not the case, it would be] necessary [for this 
creation] to be made by another creation [who did not provide his 
creation with a name for him] and so on Ad Infinitum, which is 
impossible, and they do not claim that. It is not acceptable to state that 


the creation created itself, so that it is infinitely creating, and therefore 


means 1s that each part, ot in this case, each attribute, is a God, and therefore it would 


entail that there are multiple Gods. 


Loy 


all of this necessarily requires the Essential Names of God. ‘There is no 


spengte to find the truth except by God. 


[Shaykh] Aba Mansur said that according to our position the absolute 
name [of God] cannot be likened to creation, because every opposite 
exists in the present Universe under a name, such as life and death, light 
and darkness, good and evil, and belief and disbelief, and for each thing 
there is a separate word. Thus, if there were a similarity in the absolute 
name, the opposite would not be known, and there would be no 
difference in the name. It signifies that [these names} were made due to 
what is meant by the difference and similarity whose reality would not 
be known if they did not have a name. If it was due to the name 
coinciding and the denial of the meaning [of the name] for which there 
is similarity between that which can be comprehended and _ the 
application [of the name] in this Universe, [in the] the higher and lower 
Universe, then the first and second creator [meaning the Intellect and 
the Soul] would not be named, and there would be a correlation between 
those who claimed that He does not have a name and the others that 
deny the name for all things. However, the Ba#niyyab, find the claim of 
‘one’ of creation, a denial of likening, even if there is congruence in 


respect to the name of ‘ones’. 


Furthermore, for them, the Creator is a cause and is not described as a 
thing, because things come into existence through it. All accidents are 
not described by knowing, capable etc. So, if there were a similarity in 


proving the name, there would be |a similarity] in denying this as well, in 


389 Al-Maturidi is positing that the Bakiyyab argue against the names /attributes of God 
because they indicate similarity with creation, but then they use the name ‘one: fOr 
God, but say that it is a denial of likening, even if there is similarity with the creation 


in terms of what is meant by ‘one’ in its customary usage. 


the way that we have mentioned.” There is no strength to find the truth cep 
by God. 


* Shaykh Aba Man§uar is attempting to argue that if one denies the attributes based 
on their similarity with creation, then denying them also results in a type of similarity, 
because according to al-Matutidi, if you say God is not a creator because a person also 
creates, you ate making the assumption that God, in his Essence, is similar to the 


creation, so that His form of creating bears similarity to a person’s form of creating. 


135 


Why did God Create the Universe?™ 


[Shaykh] Aba Manéiar said that people disagreed in their response to the 
question, ‘Why did God create the Universe?” 


One sect responded by stating that the question is flawed, and [this 
question] cannot be posited because God is [eternally] wise, knowing, 
self-sufficient, and as such His acts cannot contravene wisdom, This is 
because actions that contravene wisdom are due to foolishness or it is 
feated that a benefit [based on one’s caprice] will be lost if the path of 
wisdom is kept. If God is omniscient, self-sufficient and not affected by 
needs that would be fulfilled by contravening [wisdom], then it is a 
flawed [ptemise] to argue that God’s acts can contravene wisdom — 
postulating ‘why’ does not contain wisdom. Therefore, it 1s due to this 
reason that God forbade envisioning that His act was in vain, as he 
mentioned [in the following verse of the Holy Quran]; “We did not create 
the Heavens and the Earth, and everything between them just for amusement” to 
[the verse] “He is never to be asked about anything He does, while all others are 


391 Shaykh Aba Manéiar begins this chapter with a supplication, but because it disrupts 
with the flow of the book for the uninitiated, I have chosen to remove it. The only 
place a supplication that begins a chapter was included in the translation was at the 
beginning of the book. 

392 Quran, Surah ALAnbya (21:16). In reference to his point he is using the verses 
located in Surah AL Anbya from 21:16 to 21:23, which are translated as follows: “Had 
We intended to take a diversion, We could have taken it from [what is] with Us - if [indeed] We 
were to do so,” “Rather, We dash the truth upon falsehood, and it destroys it, and thereupon it departs. 
And for you is destruction from that which you describe,” ‘To Him belongs whoever as tn the heavens 
and the earth, And those near Elim are not prevented by arrogance from His worship, nor do they 
tire,” “They exalt [Him] night and day [and] do not slacken,” “Or have men taken for themselves 
gods from the earth who resurrect [the dead]?” “Tad there been within the Heavens and Earth gods 
besides Allah, they both would have been ruined. So exalted is Allah, Lord of the Throne, above what 
they describe.” 


200 


questioned,” and God brings calamities to those [people] who assume 
that He has needs or does foolish things. There is no strength to find the in 
except by God. 


A gtoup of the Mutagahies answered [the question of a/-’Aslah (the mogt 


optimum)|*”* 


by stating that God saw what was most optimum and 80 
He did it. Therefore, He cannot be questioned for His most optimum 
act.” [Shaykh] Aba Man$ir said that this statement of a/-’Atah (the 
most optimum) means nothing more than ‘wisdom’. In fact, the latter is 
mote preferable. On the other hand, if something other than wisdom is 
meant by it, then the statement of the notion of a’ Adah is similar to 


that of ‘why did he do’? 


Furthermore, the concept of a/-’Asiah implies the question of the 
condition of the most optimum act, i.c., on what basis should it be the 
way it is? However, the people who ate most rightfully ashamed of this 
question is them. This is because there is nothing which is a condition 
for the “Aflah that cannot be at the same time a condition of cofruption, 


and in that is the biggest corruption of all. 


On the other hand, there is nothing which is wise that can be foolish. 
This is because the interpretation of ‘’Aig/’ is that it is meant to be more 
suitable than anything else, and according to their position, corruption 


to [the creation] may occur through [God creating by way of ‘A/vai]. 


93 Quran, Surah ALA nbya (21:23) 

394 gf.’ Ailah is ‘the Most Optimum’ and means that God always creates the Most 
Optimum. 

*° According to the Mutazalites, the basis of this position is that God’s act is based on 
absolute justice and as such His act does not contravene this justice, and therefore 
injustice and evil cannot come from God (as explained in a previous note). Instead, 
alternatively, al-Maturidi argues for the notion of divine wisdom, meaning that because 
God’s act entails absolute wisdom, His act can never contravene wisdom. God cannot 


become devoid of wisdom and therefote all acts of God are based on divine wisdom. 


201 


However, the interpretation of ‘wisdom’ means ‘correctness’, in the 
sense of putting everything in its rightful place, which in fact means 
justice from which God’s act does not exceed. In addition, God is the 
creator in His Essence, which is the Attribute of Praise and Majesty. 
Hence, it is absurd that God has earned that [ability]from among other 
than Him [such as the creation], because that would assume that in it 
there is a benefit for God [by creating by way of ‘Aslah] and the one who 
is described as deriving benefit is in need. But since God is the Creator 
in His Essence, it is impossible that God is no Creator at all. Therefore, 
the question ‘why?’ is absurd in the same way as are the questions of 
“why is He powerful?’ or ‘why does He know?! There is no strength to find 
the truth except by God. 


Another sect states that since God is beneficent, generous and capable, 
it is necessary to describe Him by profusion of beneficence, so there 
must be a creation through whose creation God can be a profuse giver 
to whom He bestows beneficence, and God is capable, and power that 
does not realize the act is fruitless; and therefore, God created. Ged ts the 


grantor of success. 


Another sect states that the question is impossible because it requires a 
cause to precede what God creates. Thus, the cause is either a creation, 
so asking about it is asking about all [of creation], or the cause is not a 
cteation, which results in something other than God being pre-cternal, 
but rather God created because the act of creation is 1n His Essence, as 


was stated. God ts the grantor of success. 


Another sect states that the question is nothing more than [an issue of] 
notions. It is either stating that ‘why did He create this Universe rathet 
than creating another?’ - the question in this aspect is like the other 
[question mentioned above] - also it is the same case in statements such 


as ‘why did He not create a creation to [exist] before the time that it 


| 
| 
| 
| 


202 


actually [existed]?’ Or ‘why did He not create creation to be before the 
time that it was?” On the other hand, [the question] is asking about the 
reality of the Universe, and so [the person’s] question is about himsel¢ 
as if he were stating ‘why am I asking?’ and ‘what was the teason for 
asking?’ and ‘why am I not other than rational?’ which is a defective [line 
of questions], because it involves preventing himself from asking [the 


question}. God és the grantor of success. 


Another sect states that God created the Universe for [the] causes it jg 
from, in and after. It is reasonable to expect all wise people to know that 
intention precedes creating, and in the same vein, any doer who does 
not know the consequences of the act that he performs is not wise. They 
then disagreed about the meaning behind creation. Some said that [God] 
created the Universe to test [His creation], since wisdom appeats in [the 
creation] as do loftiness, dominion, glory, and elevation, and through 
them appear wisdom and foolishness. [Humans] are what is meant by 
[the reason for] creation, and the [rest of] creation is made for theit 
benefit, to test them, for evidence, and to serve them. Those who are 
tested wete created for worship, or [were created so that they] 
themselves can seek tesults for which they are either praised or 
admonished, and that is what transpires for them.” It is out of necessity 
[that] their Creator is exalted above them in two ways; since those who 


were created are in need, He composed in them that by which they know 


°° At this point mid-paragraph Shaykh Abi Manéur has written a supplication. As he 
ends the same patagraph with another supplication, I have chosen to remove it, as it 
disrupts the point being made. The supplication is the same that he has made 
throughout the book which is ‘there is no strength to find the truth except by God’ 

**” Al-Maturidi is explaining that some sects argued that the reason for creation was for 
God to test humankind, and it is for the same reason that the rest of creation was 


created, natnely in order help in the process of testing. 


203 


theit needs, and what to do to satisfy their needs. There is no strength to find 
she truth except by God. 


Another sect states that God did not create everything for a trial because 
there is not a trial behind everything, [Instead] God created [only] some 
things for a cause, and this is similar to the fact that God did not create 
everything in [the same] place, because everything has its own place, and 
God created some [of His creation] for other [reasons]. Therefore, it was 
on this basis that God commanded the generation [of creation] and then 
[after this] a trial and penalty [as a result of the acts of people].”” God is 


the grantor of success. 


398 Al-Maturidi explains that a sect argues that not all things were created for the reason 
of testing their conduct. Instead only some were created for this purpose, whilst others 
were created for other purposes; for example Angels are created for a specific purpose 


that is unrelated to humankind. 


204 


Dispute with Al-Najjar on God’s Wisdom and Providence 


Al-Hussain [ibn Muhammad ibn Abdullah al-Najjar]*” in his response 


to this question stated that [the Universe] was created for many reasons 
7 2 


* Abu Abdullah Al-Najjar was a theologian who was considered the leader of his own 
school, namely the Najaya. Al-Buruguth, who al-Maturidi mentions later, propagated 
the positions of the Najariya School. Al-Najjar to an extent followed the teachings of 
Bishr al-Marisi, a student of Aba Hanifah, who was considered an advocate of the 
Muryz’a School. This means that the views of al-Najjar bear similarity to the Minyj, 
School with some distinctions. Imam Abu Hanifa was an enigmatic teacher who taught 
students from a wide vatiety of backgrounds. Those who learnt from him placed reason 
centrally. It was based on this that three branches of differing theological groups 
emerged from his teachings, the Maturidis, the Mu tazalites and the Murji’a, who despite 
differing in theology, followed Hanafi Figh (jurisprudence), Abu Hanifa’s Maturidi 
students (even though they preceded al-Maturidi, their views aligned) were scholars 
such as Imam Muhammad (d. 189/805) and Imam Abu Yusuf (d. 181/798). The 
My tazalite stadents included Abu Hanifa’s son and his senior student Imam Zufat (d. 
158/775), Murji’a students included scholars such as his senior student Bishr al-Matisi 
(d. 218/834). It was in the famous exchange of letters between Abu Hanifa and 
Uthmaan Al-Bathi that Abu Hanifa was attacked for holding to Murji‘a doctrine (an 
allegation he accepted without hesitation). Therefore, it is quite plausible that Abu 
Hanifa held certain opinions that aligned with the Marja. The Muryji’a were the 
diametric opposite of the famously violent Khawatij; they held that only God can judge 
if a person is a Muslim and therefore any conclusion made on this matter should be 
delayed for God to decide the outcome as to someone’s theisin in the Hereafter. Many 
of these teachings were later adopted by Al-Maturidi and formed a part of Sunni 
theology. The major point of contention between them and theit opponents was their 
view that sin, which included major sin, had no effect on one’s belief in God. Even 
though their position may seem inconsequential nowadays, they should be appreciated 
for being one of the main reasons for people not holding the notion that sin is 
equivalent to disbelief. For example, the Kbawaarjj held that major sin was equivalent 
to disbelief, the Hanbalites held that certain sins were equivalent to disbelief (such as 
simply missing prayers) and the My ’tazalites held that whilst committing a major sin a 
person resides in a state of limbo between belief and disbelief. Hence, this position of 


the Mayi'a was incorporated into Sunni Islam - to its great benefit. 


205 


including as evidence and proof, then lesson and warning, then blessing 
and mercy, then nourishment and livelihood, and administering needs, 
and what was created jof the Universe] is a blessing for one [person| and 
sribulation for another. He said that if the beginning of creation were for 
no other reason other than for advantages and benefits, it would not be 
possible for anything to be moved up in time or postponed, nor would 
it be possible for anything to be created before the creation of those who 
were [to be} tested, or [to] transform something from one state to 
anothet, ot to increase or decrease [created things]. Since God has 
created things that cannot be grasped by the imagination and ts 
concealed ftom view of humankind™”, this signifies that the situation is 
not like this, but tather that things are in their [proper] place, and divert 
things from benefit to harm, and from harm to benefit. “Uhere is no strength 


to find the truth except by God. 


400 An example of this ate creations such as Angels and Jia. 


206 


The Question of Why God Created the World (Against Al-Najjar 
the Mutazalites and the Ismailis) 


[Shaykh] Abu Mansur said that according to them, in the entirety of the 
topic there was nothing for God [to do} other than what He did, and 
nothing of what God did was preferable, since in His every act God was 
compelled [to do as He did], and God did not have a choice in it, since 
if something other proceeded from Him, God would be a corrupter, and 
He would be incapable of bettering others, and that would be the end 


of blame [as a result of a person’s actions].""' God és the grantor of success, 


If it were not possible for God to do other than what He did, then God 
would be benefitting from His [own] act and would need it to be praised 
and glorified - since one who does not merit praise except through 
another is in need of that other to be entitled to that praise, and as such 
He benefits from [that praise] - because they posit that God’s acts are 
other than Him, and there is nothing that is abandoned by God not is 
there anything other than what God does, due to what is other than God 
being of lower station and less competent. Thus, the benefit in God’s 
act is proven, which in theit view, is other than Him. This is the quality 
of being in need according to the custom of reason. There és no strength to 


Jind the truth except by God. 


401 Al-Maturidi is referring to the argument made by the Matazaties that the creation of 
the Universe was based on the optimal act of God ie. that this is the best possible 
Universe and God could only have created the ‘best of all possible worlds’. 


207 


The Definition of Wisdom” 


Then with regards to the arguments about commandments and 
prohibitions, invitation and intimidation, the position of al-Hussein [al- 
Najjar] accurately explains [the issue]; that God created things such that 
they are subject to admonishment, knowledge of benefit and hatm, 
being able to extrapolate from what they obsetve [in the Universe] to 
the unseen, that they cannot be turned away from knowledge and face 
ignorance, such that falsehood and all ignobleness is allowed. 
Furthermore, those that God created received blessings in the creation, 
and it is necessaty based on reason to be thankful for blessings, and so 
God makes this thankfulness necessaty. Then the promise and the threat 
[of God] is to invite [the person] to glorify God, and the intimidation is 
to dissuade [the person} from degrading God. Then, since God 
beneficently bestowed all kinds of generosity, the reward [for gratitude] 
is limitless, and since disbelief is the utmost disobedience, the 


punishment for tt correlates. 


Moreover, faith is a belief in the infinite and cannot become evanescent, 
and disbelief is a denial of the infinite and cannot become evanescent, 


and thus on this basis is theit requital. For this reason, it is possible to 


402 Al-Maturidi and al-Najjar agree that the creation of the Universe was based on the 
Divine Wisdom of God. They argue that wisdom cannot be detached from the Essence 
of God and as such all acts of God entail wisdom. This is not a position that is held by 
the ‘Ash ‘ari School, who argue that by making the argument that God’s acts entail 
wisdom it means that God is subjugated by wisdom, which ts in contradiction to his 


Divinity. 


208 


pardon what is less than disbelief, because it is not a denial of the 


infinite.’ There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


103 Al-Matutidi is conforming to the standatd orthodox opinion that a person will be 
punished for the act of disbelief, and a person in such a position cannot be requited, 
but for anything less than disbelief such as sin, a person can ask for forgiveness from 


God and based on sincere Tawba (repentance) a person can be pardoned. But rejecting 


God after understanding that God exists is something that is not forgiven. 


209 


God’s Command and Prohibition (In Agreement with al-Najjar) 


[Shaykh] Abu Mansur said that according to our position, the wisdom 
pehind commands and prohibitions is the knowledge of [God], who 
gives the commands and prohibitions, since God - out of the entirety of 
creation - gifted humans knowledge of these [and] as such they cannot 
neglect it, just as a thing that contains benefit cannot be neglected. 
Furthermore, given that according to reason there is the beauty of every 
beautiful thing and the ugliness of every ugly thing, then the act of the 
ugly thing is ugly, and the act of the beautiful thing ts beautiful, hence 
the commands and prohibitions are necessary due to the status of what 
is commanded and prohibited. Moreover, because God created all things 
(and| this proves His Oneness and Wisdom, then creation cannot be 
emptied of knowledge of that, since creation would [then] be in vain. 
This is because removing the obligation eliminates the wisdom of 
creation, since its end is annihilation; and anyone who constructs 
something only for negation and no other purpose is egocentric and is 


not wise. 


210 


God’s Promise and Threat (In Agreement with al-Najjar) 


The promise and the threat [of God] are for invitation and intimidation; 
since without them, the benefit of following commands and the harm of 
disobedience would be lost, and for those that have been created there 
would be no benefit in their acts. If there were no benefit for the One 
who follows the commands [of God] or harm for the one who disobeys. 
the meaning of commands and prohibitions would be in vain, since there 
would be no benefit for the one giving the commands and prohibitions, 
Therefore, the promises and the threats [of the Hereafter, namely 
Paradise and Hell] are necessary for wisdom. Furthermotre, in command 
and prohibition there is a struggle of the soul which forces it to 
overcome what [its] natute hates, and the soul withdraws from what it 
hates, and so the [person] being tested does not find a path to overcome 
it and turn it to what he desires except [by] using the motivation [of 
God’s] promises and threats, even if sees [the pleasures of this life], it is 


easy for him to give them up and tolerate ereat pains.*"* 


Furthermore, humans were created as beings for whom it is repulsive to 
do that which does not have beneficial outcomes or that from which 
harmful outcomes are feated. As such, it is necessaty that their actions 
[take this under consideration], and this is the reality of the promise and 
threat [of Paradise and Hellfire]. If it were not for this, the consequences 


would be the same for [both] friends and the enemies, and since they 


t Al-Maturidi is explaining the wisdom of God’s promises and threats. He explains 
that detaching wisdom from these acts would result in foolishness. God’s commands 
are based on wisdom and it is wise to follow them and contravening them is a foolish 
act, whereas if God’s commands were not based on wisdom and instead were foolish, 
then in fact it would be wise not to follow those commands, because foolishness is the 


diametric opposite of wisdom. 


Zacks 


differ concerning choice and preference, their consequences too must 
differ. God ts the grantor of success. 


15 since there were 


God could have made the reward entirely His favour, 
previously blessings from God that deserve thanks to the limit of [ones] 
capacity, and so [an aspect of| the reward is God’s favour. Then, in 
addition [this favour] is multiplied, as God states [in the following verse 
of the Holy Quran]; “Whoever comes [on the Day of Judgement] nith a good deed 
will have ten times the like thereof [to his credit], and whoever comes nith an evil deed 
will not be recompensed [according to bis evil)”, so God mentioned 
concerning evil [that] the punishment that is required because of 
wisdom, and the reward is multiplied on the basis of God’s favour, since 


that is its principle. There is no strength to find the trath except by God. 


This is according to what can be comprehended by reason about what 
requites command and prohibition. There is sufficient proof brought by 
God’s messengers that forces us to admit the magnitude of the wisdom 
in both {command and prohibition], even if treason is unable to 
comprehend it. In the case of reason, there is a refusal to give up its use; 
like the other kinds fof created things] that can be prevented from 
[rendering| those benefits that they are purposed for, so it is with reason. 
In terms of what I have mentioned regarding the other [created things], 
this is [also] the reality and indication of action as well. There is no strength 


to find the truth except by God. 


405 Fad/ could refer to ‘grace’ or ‘favour’, | have chosen to use favour in this section. 
406 Quran, Sutah ALAN am (6:160) 


212 


On the Correct Understanding of the Maxim ‘Whoever Knows 
Himself, Knows His Lord’ 


If [a person] were to posit that ‘rational beings are in agreement that he 
who knows himself, knows his Lord’, however people disagreed on the 
mannet of knowledge. For example, the Dualists stated [that it Meant 
that] when [a petson] knows that he himself encompasses [both] good 
and evil, he knows that there is a Lord for each aspect of him. Then the 
Jews turned God into one of a part [that makes up God}.*” 


The Mushabbihah (anthtopomorphists) said that God is a body since, in 
the present Universe, knowledge of the self is [is based on a] body. 


Jahm [bin Safwan] said that since [a person] knows that he exists after 
he did not exist, and [a person] knows that he is a thing; a knowing, 
hearing, seeing body, [the person] knows that everything that has that 
name [i.e. a body] is a created thing, and His Lord who created him 


cannot be a created thing. 


According to out position, whoever knows himself, knows his Lord, due 
to what [a person] knows of accidents in terms of hearing, seeing, etc., 
through their ignorance of what they can endure, and in the same vein 
rectifying what is defective in them, and that they are in proportion to 
the time and space that they occupy, and the types of needs that affect 
them, whose origin [a person] does not know, and the truth of whose 
evanescence is similarly unknown to [to the petson]. This is his concern, 
along with their evanescence, that [the person] observes through what 
he observes of himself. Therefore [a petson’s] knowledge of previous 
states, from inception to the present that he is in, with the knowledge of 


the different states until they emerge from him, is unlikely, and it is even 


407 Please see footnote 442 for a detailed explanation on this issue. 


213 


difficult for him to comprehend it - and this is, even more, the case in 
terms of inability to grasp it based on reason. [The person] knows by 
necessity that he does not control his own situation as it is, but rather if 
he did have this control over his own situation, he would control all of 
these [states| in such a way that he must know all of this. This is because 
if [the person] did have power over [his own situation], he would not be 
driven to the ignorance that he displays, nor to the incapability that we 
mentioned in terms of removing needs from himself and rectifying that 


which is defective.“” 


In this case, because [the person out of all created beings] is the being 
that is most able to control what he senses, and the highest in 
comprehending the realities that he encounters, and the quickest in 
understanding what is known and said about issues, then [the person] 
knows his [own] emergence - which is from [the person’s] own design 
in creation, its annihilation, its persistence. Then [as a result], the 
exptession of all sensory beings, since they are undet [the sensory 
being’s}] control, is that of being perplexed about their [own] needs. 
Furthermore, [the person] [then] knows [based on this knowledge and 
applying it to the Universe and its Creator] that such a being that has the 
ability to understand affairs and comprehend reason, can only be one 
who is outside of all the qualities that the person himself possesses and 


[qualities] that change. Therefore, [this person| knows that this being is 


408 Al-Maturidi is arguing that all groups agree with the notion that “Whoever Knows 
Himself, Knows His Lord’ but they disagree on what this entails: The 
anthropomorphists argue that because you know yout body, you use this knowledge 
and then apply it to God and make the assumption that God similarly also has a body; 
ot the Dualists who argue that you know the good and evil contained within you and 
as such you know the ‘god of Good’ and the ‘god of Evil. Al-Maturidi argues his 
position from a different perspective in that, as we know from ourselves the flaws that 
are contained within us, our being subjected to accidents and knowing the limits of our 


reason, we know that our Lord cannot have these originated qualities. 


214 


powerful and not incapable, knowing and not ignorant, powerful, and 


He has no equal in His design. 


Hence, [this person] knows that this being is Divine and no thing of 
quality is similar to Him, since bearing a resemblance to Him requires 
not being originated and being pre-eternal, or fit would mean that the 
creation is] designed [by one who is] not Him. This is the case for all 
things because between them thete is a coincidence of needs, types of 
incapacity and weakness - there are all types [of these things] in the 
otiginated [Universe]. It is because of this reason that [a person] must 
know that [his Lord] is the opposite of him in all aspects, and the aspects 
he possesses are not [the same as] his designer. ‘This is the definition of 
the Lord and His capabilities. There is no strength to find the truth except by 
God. 


It is on this basis that the position of Jahm [bin Safwan] is flawed: that 
[God] was not knowing or able and then He became [knowing and able]. 
In addition, their position is also flawed in that God was not acting or 
speaking and then He began to do so, since these premises result in a 
change of aspects and states, which are the reason for a person to know 


that he is originated. There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


Furthermore, I mentioned that it is possible to accept the states as 
[God’s| free will, and that He has Essential Attributes such Knowledge, 
Power, Life, Heating and Seeing that signify God’s existence as the 
Knowing Creator, and not as natures that are incapable of choice and 
are ignorant of states, and it is the same case for all types of nourishment. 


There ts no strength to find the truth except by God. 


Similarly, the fact that there is the possibility of good and evil and the 
various other states is evidence that God turns His direction to those 


who are not described as bearing [those things] or are not in various 


215 


states, so that everything is as God pre-ordains. There is no strength to find 


the truth except by Ged. 


One sect said that whoever knows his [own] hidden self, knows God, 
and his hidden self is an entity made for the suitability of affairs, being 
noble, possessing the design of created beings, grasping the hidden 


realities by thought and inquity into reasons.” 


They made a good point. It may apply to what I said that in knowing 
God thete is sufficiency in grasping the hidden things [in man] out of 
his hidden states, and he grasps the knowledge of what was hidden and 
is manifest through reason. He knows what was concealed from him and 
is called a soul first and he later manifests [the true knowledge of this 


hidden reality]. There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


409 This is the belief that is held by followers of Tasawwuf (Islamic Mysticism). Sufis 
(mystics) held that it only by knowing one’s own hidden realities, which ate connected 


to the hidden realities of the Universe, that one can truly know God. 


216 


Again: On the Use of the Terms ‘Thing’ (Shay), Body (Jism) 
And Being (Huwiyyah) with God“ 


[In terms of using the word] Shay’ (thing), it is nothing more than 
affirmation and [and a term used for] proof of existence, since [the word] 
La Shay’ (nothing) is denial. So, man knows that God is a thing, and God 
did not deny that He is a thing. Since [a person] denies all his own states 
and knows them without denying their thingness, so [the person] knows 
his Lord not in the way that [the person] knows God’s somethingness, 
Therefore, {a person’s| knowledge that he is a thing does not prevent 
[the person] knowing God’s somethingness, since no thingness directed 


him towards God."" There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


In terms of a Jism (body), it is the name for something that is finite, 
whereas a thing is nothing more than an affirmation. The existence of 
the present Universe is evidence of this proof, therefore it is said [that 
God is a] thing, as this is not bound by somethingness, but in tetms of 
being finite it includes the signification that is the denial of |the 
ascription of] finitude to God (may His praise be magnified). Unless 
what is meant by ‘limits’ is Oneness and Divinity, which in that case the 


expression of [the meaning of] ‘limit’ becomes void.” This is because 


“° As we can see, there ate several chapters and topics that were contained within 
previous chapters that are repeated. As such, the number of footnotes in these sections 
is limited as they have been previously explained in detail. 

‘" As I have explained previously, the Mutazalites argue that God is not a ‘thing’ but 
Al-Maturidi argues God is a thing, because it is mentioned in scripture. Al-Maturidi 
argues that by applying ‘somethingness’ to God merely means that God exists, and it 
does not mean that God bares similarity to His creation. So a petson knowing he 
himself is a ‘thing’ does not mean that he has to deny God’s ‘somethingness’, which 
refers to God’s existence. 

*? Al-Matutidi is arguing that if you say that God having limits means that God is 
Divine then you are nullifying the meaning of ‘limit’. Therefore, it would mean that no 


217 


its meaning prevails [and in the case of a body it signifies] the finitude of 
the thing by its width, and things such as God being ‘above’, which has 
the meaning of ‘body’ in the present Universe. This would [still be the 
case even if] all sides can be longer, wider and shorter, and this is the 
reason why their position is flawed. There is no strength to find the truth except 
by God. 


Then ‘Humiyyal’ (being) in the present Universe equates to existence and 
interpreting it denies non-existence from it. God has always been and 
always will be without change, [without] evanescence and [without] 
transforming from one state to another state, and God is without motion 
ot being at rest. This is because these ate descriptions of the various 
states, since anyone with different states is not separate from them; and 
whoever is not sepatate from states is originated. This results in the 
negation of oneness as well as pre-eternity. The design of others is 
controlled by [God], since a state, if it existed in itself, could not change 
so long as it is itself. This signifies the existence of the other [meaning 
God], due to the change in essential characteristics that it undergoes and 


its transformation from one state to another. 


word has a real meaning, as you can then interchange words and the resulting meaning 


based on your own volition. 


218 


Again: Is God in a Place (Due to His Sitting on The Throne)>4 


This is evidence that [God’s Divinity does not allow] being described by 
‘place’ since it has been proven that God existed when no place existed. 
In addition to this [the following verse of the Holy Quran]; ‘““The Mosy_ 
Meriful |who] established on the throne’** is not proof [that God is in] a 
place, and nor [are the following verses]; “We are closer to him than his 
jugular vein”? and “whenever three people are whispering, God is the fourth?" 
and “We are closer to him than you, but you do not see it.” Applying place [to 
God] is not a form of glorification or reverence. Whereas, in fact, places 
are honoured by God, and their fortunes vary by God preferring One 
place over another place, by designating it for the best of God’s creation 
ot by making it for His worship and glorification. It is not the case that 
someone from among the kings of the Earth or the best of people has 
his rank elevated because of a certain place, so how can that be possible 
in the case of the Powerful King without Whom no place is elevated in 
importance and glory? If this is the case, then there can be no 
glorification in attributing [things to God]. Then [thete is the issue of] 
being in need, which [God’s Divinity does not allow]. Therefore, God’s 
saying [in the following verse of the Holy Quran]; ““The Most Merciful 
[who] established al- Arsh ‘Istawd”** does not mean [that God] is in a place, 
since the verse is expressing sublimity and glory, and it not possible for 
God to have a likeness in His creation. Hence, it stands established that 


this is [meant] in the way of the sublimity and majesty that God deserves 


13 Al-Maturidi is once again revisiting the topic of God being in a place. 
“4 Quran, Surah At Taba (20:5) 

“9 Quran, Surah ALQGaf (50:16) 

16 Quran, Surah A-Mijadila (58:7) 

"7 Quran, Surah A/Wagi'ah (56:85) 

“8 Quran, Surah At Taba (20:5) 


219 


in Himself, and God is as He is, since God was such when there was no 
creation, and so God cannot describe Himself by [ascribing similarity to 


the] creation. There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


[In terms of the] belief about knowledge preceding a state of one to 
whom it is attributed in the present Universe before it is attributed 
(based on] possibility. Then God [existed] when there was no place, and 
people believed this. It is not possible to change the understanding about 
attributing what was before, and to [this end] turns the understanding of 
attributing creation to God. However, applying the attribution of things 
to God in the present Universe is in order to glorify [those things], in 
that He made them praiseworthy and favoured them, therefore what 
becomes of the [understanding] of the throne in this case? There 7s no 


strength to find the truth except by God. 


Furthermore, on this basis, the claim that God is in all places is also 
flawed, since there is no difference in allocating one place to God as 
opposed to all places. In fact, the individual [who ascribes] a primary 
place to God is glorifying [that place], since this entails designating such 
a thing by mentioning it, and by the mention it results in honouring and 
distinguishing [that placc], as this goes back [to the issue of ascribing 
something to God] means favouring it. In sending and gathering all [the 
favour of God], it goes back to the designation of the reality of God’s 
Attributes. Furthermore, it is also said ‘Lord of everything’ and “God of 
everything’ to glorify in reverence of Him. Also, if it is said “Lord of 
Muhammad’ or ‘God of Abraham’, it is to honour and glorify them. The 
analogy of this is that the attribution to the throne entails glorifying and 
honouring the throne, whereas attribution [of God] to all places entails 


describing God by them, which is repugnant since He was not described 


220 


by them pre-eternally.™ Further, nothing is described as close to Goa 
by way of distance and area, nor is God described as close to a thing a 
the same way; since this involves limits and localisation [of God], but 
God existed when there was no place, since God is as He was, and is 
beyond time and place, since the limits and finitude of things detive ftom 


these, There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


1 What al-Maturid? is explaining here is that when one ascribes a created thing to God, 
such as in the case of Abraham, Muhammad or the _47sA, it is in order to glorify those 
specific creations. But ifa person ascribes God to a place, such as holding the incorrect 


belief that the Arsd is the location of God, or ascribing all locations to God, then this 


is repugnant and not permissible. 


— 


221 


On the Application of the Categories: What (Ma), How (Kayfiya), 
Where (Ayna), and Action (Fi//) in the Teaching on God’s 
Attributes*” 


Sometimes, a person may exptess God’s name by metonymy, such as 
when Pharaoh asked ‘What is the Lord of the worlds” to [which Moses answered] 
‘He is the Lord of the Heavens and Earth.””' Or God saying to Moses “What 
is that in your vight hand, oh Moses?’ To which he replied, “This 2s ney 
staff’ The response to this is that [the question]; “What is Her’ may 
imply ‘What is His description?’ - the answer to that would be ‘He is 
Heating and Seeing’, but sometimes ‘What is He? may imply “Which is 
the thing of the creation by which God’s essence could be known?’ But 
God is beyond being likened to anything, whilst sometimes ‘what is Her’ 
could imply ‘what is His action?’ - the answet to which is “the creating 
of the creation and putting everything in its rightful place, which 1s, in 
fact, His Wisdom,’ and sometimes ‘What is He?’ may imply: “Where did 
He come from?’ However, God is beyond coming into existence from 
anything and tather He is the creator of all things. There is no strength to 


find the truth except by God. 


[These questions] about the Kayfiyyab (qualification) of God are two-fold. 
The first is that they may seek to make a similarity of God to a thing 
among things, but God is unique, and so there are none similar to Him, 
The second is that it may imply an inquiry as to God’s description. The 


answer to this would be the same as to the previous question, meaning 


20 Al-Maturidi is tevisiting this topic from his argument against the 
anthropomorphists’ understanding of God. 

‘21 Quran, Surah Maryam (19:65) 

422 Quran, Surah Taba (20:17) 

823 Ouran, Surah Taha (20:18) 


222 


that there is no qualification of God because in it there is an inquiry 
about something which is like Him, but God is beyond being like 
anything in terms of both His Essence and His Attributes. But if the 
question were as to whether God is described, the answer would be 
"Yes’, but in such a way as God described Himself - with possessing 


Mercy, Knowledge and Power. 


As to the question, ‘Where is He?’, it is a question about a place, and we 
have explained that God is beyond [such asctiption]. God is not 
described by amalgamation ot separation from things, or existing in 
them or emerging from them in terms of distance from whete He 
actually is, because God existed when nothing else existed, and it is 
impossible for God’s state to transform through the existence of another 
thing, for the reason stated above. It is permissible to disregard [any 
ascription] to the qualities of creation and its likeness. There is no strength 


to find the truth except by God. 


Furthermore, [God] is described with ‘closeness’ in the sense of help and 
aid, and by way of honour and designation, and by way of mercy and 
benevolence, and by way of granting success and guidance, and these 
types of things, because all of this is an essential description. It is 
permissible to say that [God] is infinitely merciful to His friends, loving 
them for the time that they are His friends, and hating His enemies in 
the same manner. However, the aspects that are the realities of such 
attributes and that another verifies them in God, ate not that God ts in 
Himself described by them, as it is a defect, because God cannot but be 
praised, honoured and glorified, and this would be through another. 
Therefore, by [God] creating His creation He would become praised and 
derive benefit, but God is self-sufficient in Himself and above receiving 
ptaise or benefit through anyone. Therefore, God is not described by 
this; may He be glorified. 


Moreover, in terms of God’s action, God cannot be its effect, because 


that is [something that is] not known in the present Universe, because 
God is described by [what we know of the present Universe] and not by 
(similarity towards] another [being]. Due to what we explained, that 
description by [the state of] another entails a need for it and being 
described [by it] in pre-eternity, due to what we explained about the 
impossibility of change and evanescence. Also, if it were possible for 
God to be described by what is a state in another, it would be possible 
[for Him] to be described by anything in His creation, which is 
forbidden, as we have explained above. There is no strength to find the truth 
except by Goa. 


224 


Theodicy: God’s Wisdom and Providence in the Creation of 


Harmful Beings and Substances 


[Shaykh] Abt Manégur said that the wisdom in creating harmful beings 
and substances has several aspects“, even if reason is unable to 
comptehend the Divine Wisdom based on what was previously 
mentioned, on the necessity of wisdom in everything in the way that it 


was cteated by God.” 


The first is a test for creation in the present world via harm and benefits 
so that the pleasure of reward for obedience is known, as well as the pain 
of punishment for disobedience. This is because creation was designed 
for results through acts. Hence God made likenesses for them [in terms 
of rewatds and punishments] in corporeal substances so that the 
promise [of God] can be comprehended in their imaginations, to make 
the path [to righteousness] easier." There is no strength to find the truth except 
by God. 


The second is that tribulation is a burden that [can be] easier or harder 
for the body through inquiry and reflection. In undertaking inquiry and 
reflection, people differ because there is no immediate benefit for these 
things, and it takes them away from pleasures and appetites [of this 


world]. Dealing with things is difficult for the body, and in neglecting 


** 1 have not highlighted each instance of al-Matutidi diverging from convention in 
his writings, but this is a further example of an instance where I had to rearrange the 
paragraph so that the point being expressed made sense, 

*° In this section Al-Maturidt explains the wisdom of creating evil. 

“26 The first reason is as a test, so that people are rewarded for their good deeds and 
punished for evil acts. This is closely linked to the issue of Free Will; with Free Will 
comes the ability to choose to do good or bad and you are tested by God as to whether 


you will choose good or give in to your negative desires and indulge in evil. 


225 


these things there is disagreement and separation, which leads to hostility 
and dispute, and in agreement, there is friendship and peace. God made 
for [creation], in what He created for them, alike enemy in the harms it 
contains, and an example of friends, in the benefits it contains, so that 
in evil there is something that drives them to become accustomed to 
how to deal with enemies and friends. Even if they are tested by the like 
in their essence, they know how to deal with them in terms of caution, 
ptepatation, assistance and aid. On this basis, when they undertake the 
worship and praiseworthy ethics of which they are capable, youths are 
commanded to become accustomed to them, so that the path becomes 
easy for them when it is enjoined upon them. It is likewise [the case] in 


the creation of what was mentioned.’ God knows best. 


Furthermore, irrespective of differences in harms and benefits, God 
made creation to indicate that there is a wise, knowing designer [who 
created] these, that He is One in Essence, in respect to indication and 


testimony. There is no strength to find the truth esccept by God. 


In this, there is a wonderful elucidation of God’s wisdom; that He 
combined harms and benefits, good and evil, despite their contradiction, 


in indicating God’s Oneness and testifying that His Divinity ts one." 


Moreover, God created this to humble powerful [people] and kings, so 
through it, they know their weakness so that they are not enticed by the 
multitude of their followers and soldiers into overstepping the bounds 


of God, Hence they see the dominion of God’s power and that God 


427 The second reason given by al-Maturidi is that harmful things obstruct one’s 
putpose, which is thoughtful inquiry to reflect on one’s treason for being created. One’s 
natute and concomitant desires make it difficult to overcome these and to think 
autonomously; as such, giving people the opportunity to defeat these obstacles is one 
of the reasons for creating them. 

#28 Another teason given by al-Maturidi is that opposites ~ in this case that which is 


harmful is opposite to that which is beneficial - will give an indication to a wise Creator. 


226 


establishes the reign of who He wishes over whomsoever He Wishes 


There ts no strength to find the truth except by God. 


Furthermore, so that it may be known via the contemplation of God's 
creation of the essence of harm and benefit, that God is self-sufficient 
and above being affected by needs, because whoever beats that 
description, God can overcome that which benefits and harms. Hence 


God’s power over what He wishes becomes known.*” 


Moreover, no harmful substances ate observed but that they 
[nonetheless] contain some benefits that created beings may be unable 
to grasp. For example, fire, which both burns and prepares food and 
water, which can give life to all things and also destroy them. Likewise, 
there is no bitter or poisonous substance but that it contains medicine 
for [some] disease; so that the inquirer may know that saying that the 
substance is good or evil is a mistake and that rather every substance 
may give rise to harm and benefit, so through it exists the greatest sign 


of monotheism.*” 


Furthermore, there are two aspects; one is complete power over what is 
harmful and beneficial in order to give hope for [reward] and fear [of 
punishment]. Whoever is not like this [in terms of having complete 
power over things then] the situation is not such, because instead it 
would inspire intimidation and not invitation and can only be overcome 
by one who possesses [power over] both [benefit and harm]. The second 


is so that lessons are given so that commandments and prohibitions are 


* When one contemplates the nature of benefit and harm, one comes to the 
realisation that there is a Creator who is not subjugated to harms and benefits. 

“0 In previous chapters al-Maturidi explained how diametric opposites that are 
contained within one substance prove the existence of God. As such, he is now 
explaining that there is nothing that is considered purely harmful but that thete is also 
a benefit to it and vice versa and this signifies the existence of Creator who brought 


these opposites together. 


227 


cottectly instituted, so that inquity and reflection have scope for 
[understanding] both, and because there are both warnings and lessons 


through them. There és no strength to find the truth except by God. 


228 


The Disagreement of Sects on the Nature of the Universe‘! 


[Shaykh] Abu Mansur said that I have contemplated the basis o¢ 
disagreement amongst the people concerning [the nature of] the 
Universe after signs emerged that it is created [and not eternal] ang 
evidence emerged that it was designed by something other than itselg _ 
This is because there is nothing in the essence and basic elements of the 
Universe that does not in these present proof that it is designed and 
brought into existence, and that [the Universe] depends on a being who 
is knowledgeable of its affairs, self-sufficient in the possession its needs, 
and is wise in putting everything in its place so that it does not conflict 
or become evanescent. Furthermore, it is not possible that the Universe, 
in its basic elements, derives from multiple gods, because such a case it 
would give tise to conflict, with each [god] wanting to give tise to its 
own powet, impose its own dominion and subjugate [another god] that 
contends with it. Such a state of affaits would lead to annihilation and 
cofruption unless one of them possesses might and aid and all of them 
yield to him and become lowly and submit to him. This means that all 
substances of the Universe come into existence by the will of something 


other than themselves and are controlled by this ‘something’s’ power. 


This what is meant by the fact that it is evidence for a designer of the 
Universe, who is knowledgeable and wise, to embark on and complete 
it by himself, bringing it from non-existence into existence, since the 
phenomenon that arise from the fact that the origin of its existence 
needs someone who knows how to originate things is no less than the 


phenomenon that it continues and remains in its same state. In fact, it is 


*! Once again, Shaykh Aba Man$ur begins this chapter with a supplication. Because it 


disrupts with the flow of the book, I have chosen to remove it. 


229 


even more evident that the need in this for another being ts greater, since 
jt is unable to design itself and the reasons that it originates from this 
other being are more apparent. This is because the proofs in each thing 
that it came into existence after not existing are clearer, since every 
[person] by using reason is able to remember their own origin or 
transformation from being small or fragile, whereby if such a whole did 
not have a beginning, its entire existence is nullified. Furthermore, the 
possibility of weakness and incapability to the point of annihilation and 
nullification compels it to the knowledge that it came into existence after 
not existing. If that is the case for a being who possesses design and 
knowledge of the conditions [of things}, then it is, even mote, the case 
for inanimate objects, which lie at the disposition of animate beings who 
enjoy them, as they [themselves] are insensible. The fact that there are 
inanimate things that animate beings enjoy indicates that the being who 
designed the inanimate objects is the same being who designed animate 
beings since he created the [inanimate things] to be enjoyed [by the 


animate], as is good for them. 


I have observed doubt present itself to people even after we have proven 
it in such a manner. [So] as to dispel those doubts for those who apply 
reason, [there are] three causes [of these doubts].“” The first is them 
doing Taglid |following someone without knowing the evidence] to 
those whom his mind is accustomed and inclined towards. This is 
because [this person] has abandoned contemplation of evidence and 
instead given way to his innate captices out of his [blind] trust in them, 


in his hope to be their companion and through them satisfy the soul, or 


432 Al Maturidi in this section will revisit the reasons as to why he believes that people 
have doubts, even though he claims that he has proven his position already. The three 
reasons he gives are: 1) Tagéd (following someone without knowing the evidence), 2) 
Those who believe solely in what their senses can perceive, 3) Consideration of 


qualities, that evil cannot come from good and vice versa. 


230 


out of fervour for this opinion to lead him to the right path, or out of 
eagerness for their favour and other grounds for happiness - until he 


becomes accustomed to a greedy soul or bad habits. 


The second ate those who hold the position that existence is only that 
which falls under their senses. They move from one state to another 
through material elements and produce and engender children upon one 
another, and they assume it is impossible that things do not emetge from 
other things or branches from a root, because they did not obsetve this 
occuttence [through the senses], and for them the seen [Universe] is 


proof of the unseen. 


Furthermore, this led to differing [beliefs] and based on these, some of 
them argued for the pre-eternity of the Universe. But even tegarding 
this, their [opinions] diverged. This is because based on this some of 
them held the position that the Universe was not created. It was from 
this that the school of the naturalists emerged, who posited that 
difference and heterogeneity are based on varying ‘natures’ and these 
[natures] striving for supremacy. One of these sects called these 
[divergent] natures “Hayald. The heterogeneity that I mentioned is 
[according to their teachings] like the dye. It emerges in various colours 
based on different humor and balance. It was on this basis that they 
argued that the essence of humans is the balance of the different natures 
and that the [essence] of animals the disorder of natures and likewise for 


everything else. 


There are also those who do not believe its foundation is from the fout 
natures, but instead, each corporeal substance has a foundation, and the 


natures are intrinsic to it.*’ There are also others {who make a similar 


*3 The concept of the Four Humors originated from Ancient Greece, with some 
arguing that Hippocrates was the founder. It was believed that the human body was 
made up of four basic substances: black bile, yellow bile, phlegm, and blood, These 


231 


argument] concerning the Creator. They argue that God is one and that 
He is the cause of the existence of the Universe. The fact that He ts 
eternal means that He existed pre-eternally. Furthermore, in proving the 
existence of a cteator, they cite the harmony and masterful disposition 
of things, which could have only come into [existence] due to a 
knowledgeable designer. Since nature does not derive from luck, it 1s 
through God that things are in a sound state and on this basis, they 
argued for the [existence of] a creator. Then they argued that since [God] 
existed pre-eternally it is a necessary consequence that the Universe also 
existed pre-eternally, in the way that things are intricately linked to their 


cause.** This was on the basis that the Universe is His free oift and 


were linked to various things such as temperament, elements, seasons and various other 
qualities. In the Islamic world, this form of medicine became famous because of 
physicians such as Avicenna. 

434 Tn terms of the idea of the pre-eternity of the Universe being intricately linked to 
God in the same way that a cause and effect ate linked, this was propagated by 
Avicenna and those following his philosophical school, such as Averroes, al - Tusi etc. 
A brief summary of their position is that God is unique, and His Existence ts necessary 
due to Himself and this Necessary Existence is due to His Essence and His pre- 
eternity. The Universe was created by God and relies on God to bring it into existence, 
but it is not possible for God to have a ‘new’ will or desire to create, and there can be 
no reason that can cause a change in His will or desire. Furthermore, such a change 
cannot occur spontaneously or natutally either as God is absolutely changeless. It is 
also not possible for God to create the Universe at a specific point in time, as this 
would entail that there was a period of time ‘before’ God created the Universe and 
then ‘late’ God decided to create it. The relationship between God and the Universe 
then is one of God being superior to His creation: God is the cause of the Universe 
and the reason for a possible thing - the Universe - to come into existence from non- 
existence. This means that the Universe is in need of God. Time then is also something 
created and is defined as the measurement of the movement of matter. Therefore, time 
and matter were created simultaneously and are both pre-eternally linked, with time 
merely being a measure of the movement of matter, meaning that whenever there was 
time there was matter, Hence there can never be a time before the existence of matter, 


as time only exists when and where matter exists. Thus, the Universe existed as long as 


232 


blessing, and He is Powerful in Himself, which proves His essential] 
goodness and generosity. ‘Therefore, His generosity requires the pre- 
eternal existence of the Universe, and His Power brings it into existence 


There ts no strength to find the truth except by God. 


Some of them argued that the Universe was fotmed out of ‘Prime 
Matter’, but even they differed, as some claimed that this is Prime Matter 
was a pre-existing material, out of which the Creator generated the 
Universe. One school of thought posited that the creator is one being, 
whilst another school argued that the creators [of the Universe] are the 
stats, Sun and Moon - in that they continuously pursued their coutse, 
and out of their pursuing their course the Universe emerged. They then 
gave a start point to this course by making the argument that it js 
impossible for things to emerge from other things Ad infinitum with no 
beginning. Then there are some who argued that accidents occurred [in 
the Prime Matter] and from this, the Universe originated. They name 
this [Prime Matter] ‘Haydla’, and they describe it in the same manner that 
monotheists describe the Creator, Then they invalidated [this possibility] 
by stating that [this Prime Matter is subject to] accidents and can change 


from one state into another. 


There are some who argue that the Prime Matter has two aspects 
[namely], Light and Darkness. From the Light comes all that is good and 
beneficial and from the Darkness comes evil and harm. Then there are 
some who say that [the Light and Darkness] were separate and then they 
mixed, as we have explained [previously]. According to the proponents 
of the notion of Hayd/a and Prime Matter, it can be said that they |Light 
and Dark] were one and then diverged, since it is [originally only] the 


Prime Matter, and this then became the basis for good and evil. It was 


time existed and is eternal (but not without a beginning outside of time). Therefore, 


God is linked to the Universe not by time but because of ‘emanation’. 


233 


by this divergence that each of them performed its own function. 
Howevet, the majority [of people] who propagate this notion argue that 
the Universe existed through nature and not because of a voluntary 


435 
act. 


The third way is the consideration of qualities. They argued that the 
Universe contains benefit and harm, good and evil. Therefore, 
accordingly, one who does good is praised, and [one] who benefits 
others is merciful and wise. On the other hand, [one] who does evil is 
repudiated, and the one who harms others is cruel and foolish, It 1s not 
possible to say of God, who is Wise and Merciful, that He has done evil 
ot harm to anyone, and similarly He has no foolishness or cruelty. This 
is among the things by which He benefits [people] or that [He] repels 
hatm, so then how is it for the One who does not benefit from anything 
nor is harmed by anything? According to their [belief], one that 1s wise 


is clearly one who by his action brings about benefit and not harm. 


Moreover, whoever harms another without any benefit to himself is not 
wise. They posited that the origin of the Universe is through the 
difference of the Prime Matter that the Universe consists of, so that each 
existent thing derives from its Prime Matter good or evil. Or the two 
substances [Good and Evil, Light and Dark] were one and then 
diverged, and each thing emerged from {the thing that is the same as itl, 
ot by the fact that accidents occurred in [the Prime Matter so it] came to 
differ. The Dahriya (Materialists), who deny the existence of a creator 
and maintain that everything is multiple, rely on this argument. The 
Dualists called the essence of good ‘Light’ and [the essence] of evil 
‘Darkness’, while the Magians called good ‘God’ and evil ‘Satan’. 


435 Here al-Maturid? is revising the argument of the Dualists and the pre-eternity of the 


Universe. 


234 


Refutation of Dualism** 


[Shaykh] Abu Mansur said that if these sects closely examined the 
previously mentioned evidence, they would realise that their intellects 
are unable to rely on human wisdom nor [are they able to] comprehend 


the wisdom of the Divinity. 


Given the conclusions they reached on Free Will, there is a contradiction 
in their position, in terms of being able to know the true nature of 
wisdom and ignorance, since according to their docttine, in the essence 
of Evil there is only Evil and in the essence of Good, there is only Good, 
This means that in what they call ‘ignorance’ or ‘wisdom’, they do not 
know whether it is doing good or evil. According to their teaching, every 
person is a mixtute of both [Good and Evil], and if [he] considers each 
of them to be the opposite of what he considers the other to be, then it 
means that what he considers wisdom to be foolishness and foolishness 
to be wisdom, Therefore, when one states that something is ‘good,’ this 
cannot be trusted, since the essence of Darkness is total falsehood and 
the essence of Light is total truthfulness [in Dualism], so it is not known 
of which substance he is speaking [since he is a combination of the two]. 


There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


Furthermore, since one of them |i.e. the Light or Dark gods of Dualism| 
does not have the ability to harm and the other does not have the ability 


6 One again al-Maturidi devotes a chapter to refuting Dualists. We know that those 
who followed the Dualists ideology included the Zoroastrians, Manicheans, 
Marcionites etc. These groups were present in Central Asia, but their influence does 
not equate to the number of pages and the strongly worded writing devoted by al- 
Maturidi in his refutation. 


235 


to give benefit, the grounds for hope and fear are entirely cut off, and so 


the use of knowing wisdom and ignorance disappeat. 


In addition, since each of the substances operate based on nature, then 
gaining knowledge [of Light and Dark] through wisdom and ignorance 
based on natute is impossible. [The definition of} wisdom is putting 
everything in its rightful place, and ignorance is putting everything out 
of place. It is not possible to apply this description to something with a 
nature since it has a Free Will. According to their position, Light does 
not know what benightedness is in order to warn from it, and Darkness 
does not know what wisdom is. Ignorance of the somethingness and the 
condition of the thing is evil. Therefore, according to them, knowledge 
and benightedness are contained within the essence of Light, and [as 
such so is] ability and inability, in that it cannot dispel ignorance from 
itself nor can it prevent Darkness from harming it. Then, according to 
them, the essence of Good is that it is mixed with Evil, and the essence 
of Darkness is that there is no Good in it, which means that according 
to them Evil necessarily prevails over Good. If that which is Good does 
not know Evil and foolishness, how is it that what emerged from the 


essence of Good, after Evil overcame it, knows Good and Evil? 


However, anything with a nature is subjugated, since it is unable to go 
against the nature that compels it [to act in a specific way] or [against the 
nature] that compels the contrary. In this lies a subjugating control that 
makes one thing good by nature and another thing evil. If a thing 1s 
reduced to two things that possess what is in these two things, such as 
heating and cooling, there must be a being who made them this way. 


This results in the proposition that this being is One. 


Furthermore, whomsoever argues that each one of the two is a powerful 
creatot, then it becomes necessary that each one of the two knows how 


to prevent the other from functioning and is able to do so, ot it does not 


236 


know [how to prevent the other from functioning] and is unable to do 
so, If it does now know or is not able, then benightedness and inability 
are combined in the Light, which results in the negation of the teason 
that they argue for two [gods], on the other hand, if it knows and fs 
capable but then did not act to prevent [the other, ic. Evil or Dark], then 
the description of evil is applied to it. 


Then it becomes necessary that Light either opposes the Darkness ot it 
does not, and it [either] enjoys being conjoined with it, or it does not. Tf 
it does not oppose Darkness and enjoys being mingled with it, then that 
is evil, because not being hostile to the [evil] enemy and having affection 
for it is evil. On the other hand, if it opposes and hates Darkness, then 
hostility and hatred in the present Universe are evil. If they argue that 
this is only the case with the present Universe due to a mixture of 
conditions, the same is the case in all the wisdom they deny in the 


creation of the two types. There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


Furthermore, it must be recognised in the present Universe that there is 
knowledge after benightedness, beneficence after offense, regret after 
sin, and acknowledgement of offense after understanding, as well as 
belief that a thing is true after belief that it was false, because of the 
existence [of such things] in the present Universe. Therefore, we can 
either make it so that the both of them come from Light, which would 
mean that offence, sin, and ignorance come from it, which in that case 
would negate the belief of two [gods], or it can be that offence, ignorance 
and benightedness come from Darkness and recognition, beneficence 
and regret come from Light, such that this is falsehood, partisanship and 
preoccupation [with a false opinion]. According to this sect, all this is 
from the act of Darkness, as it has expounded it for Light, then avowing 
what is not is falsehood and ignorance, Or it is that both of them are 


from Darkness, meaning that both good and evil come from it. 


re aml DO Op 


23/ 


Furthermote, it is necessary that it [Light] is [either] concerned about the 
evil that befalls its friends and it grieves over it, or it does not. If it is 
preoccupied and grieves, then the argument that [the Light contains] all 
that is delightful and joyful is nullified. On the other hand, if it does 
[grieve or is not preoccupied], then the argument that acts of evil and 
harm are cruelty and severity, not mercy, is nullified. This is the result of 
arguing in support of two [gods]. Then it is asked that does Light want 
or not motion after being at rest, and does it want something [to appeat| 
and then it does not appear, and love something and then hate it? Our 
position on this is what we have mentioned in the eatlier chapters. God 


is the grantor of success. 


In everything we opposed in terms of differing and contradictory 
conditions, the Dualists claimed that this is the way of the present 
Universe due to the mixing of the Darkness into the essence of Light, 
so that things ate seen in other than their [true] form, and through this 


the transmission of the knowledge of things takes place. 


It is said that it is not wisdom or mercy that keeps your claim from being 
the case, instead, it is ignorance and cruelty which are the afflictions of 
Darkness being mixed into you which prevents you from seeing 
everything in its essence and form. There is no strength to fond the truth except 
by God. 


Furthermore, since God is powerful in Himself, and there is nothing He 
cannot do, He is self-sufficient in that He has no need for anything, 
knowing in Himself and is benighted of nothing, and wise in Himself, 
not able to make an error in any deed, it is futile to say that His creation 
contains clear differences and contradictions and that there is a conflict 
in the design [of the Universe]. Instead, it must be said of all things when 
reason cannot comprehend their wisdom after it has been established 


that God is the Originator and Creator of them, |that] we know within 


2338 


them lies great wisdom which reason cannot comprehend. The Dualist 
cannot fathom that our senses were designed to recognise whatever they 
were [specifically] created for, even if they are unable to comprehend it, 
while another sensation comes along and comprehends it. It is the same 
case for teason, since it is created and finite, and does not sutpass the 
finitude that was imposed on it. In everything that exists, there is 
unseemliness in everything that appeats seemly, and corruption in 
evetything that appears upright. So it stands established that perhaps 
[reason] is afflicted by something that prevents it from undetstanding 


the true nature of the wisdom and foolishness that it encounters. 


Furthermore, how is it that considering the purpose of wisdom by one 
who is needy and poor endeats him to his need, makes his poverty 
beautiful in his own sight, and shows the appeal of unseemly things 
through habit and familiarity, and vice versa?*” Therefore, to whomever 
it is applied, this description of his comprehension of Divine Wisdom 
and related afflictions, [he] is unable to originate an act which is not from 


a thing, since he acts by the ability of his own limbs and uses instruments, 


“7 Al-Maturidi is arguing that all things are based on God’s Divine Wisdom. In most 
cases, the wisdom is obvious and easy to comprehend, for example the wisdom of a 
good act resulting in something positive such as a reward. However, there are acts 
where the wisdom requires contemplation, such as in the case of the existence of 
certain evils. Based on inquiry into each individual case, a person can come to the 
realisation that certain situations exist in order to test people, or for some other 
potential benefit. But there are issues where a persons’ limitations preclude 
comprehension. This does not mean that there is no wisdom behind them - instead 
according to al-Maturidi, it is the person who is unable to comprehend it, despite the 
fact that everything entails God’s Wisdom. Therefore, if one appreciates this, then one 
who is poor understands that the beauty of poverty lies in the fact that all things are 
based on God’s Divine Wisdom. For example, it could be that a person is being tested 
by God to see how they deal with their poverty, or God is in fact helping such a person 


because with wealth he may have committed many abhorrent acts. 


239 


438 Sq how is that someone whose basis of action is such, after he has 
come to realise that he acts using a power that was created and with 
knowledge that was transmitted [to him], how can he assume judgement 
of inability and ignorance over One who is all-powerful in Himself, 
knowing that a [created] being is unable and ignorant [to do the same]. 


There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


[In terms of the refutation of [the Dualists] that were mentioned in the 
first chapter, it should be said to them: ‘Is the Light safe from the 
Darkness if [Darkness] harms [Light] by removing itself from it and 
[Light] prevents [Darkness] from this occurrence?’ If he replies ‘no’, he 
admits his ignorance, since the ignorant person did the same in the issue 
related to the present Universe. On the other hand if he replies ‘yes’, 
then he imposes [on Light] something that his essence cannot endure, 
and in that case, he is ignorant. There zs no strength to find the truth except by 
God. 


438 This is a very important point in regard to the issues of belief and disbelief in Islamic 
theology, which can have an impact on real world issues such as cloning and other 
pioneering scientific advancements. Those who believe in God argue that it is only 
God that can create something out of nothing and that created beings are unable to do 
so. But if one was to utilise a created substance to create something, then that is not 
creating something out of nothing (Creatio Ex Nibilo) and does not constitute disbelief. 
Hence, using a created substance or instrument in order to create something else is not 
an issue of disbelief and nor does it cause any problems for Theists - although many 


Muslims and other Theists seem confused as to this point. 


240 


Refutation of Naturalism*” 


Meanwhile, according to the Naturalists, ‘nature’ is a subjugated thing 
that cannot remove itself from what is in its nature, but something that 
is without a nature can prevent it from causation. Therefore, it stands 
established that its action upon another thing is without effect, since it 
may [itself] be prevented from acting by something else. It performing 
an action by itself is not possible as long as it remains itself. In addition, 
since it cannot refrain from an act, this proves that it is subjugated under 


a knowledgeable, subduing being. 


Furthermore, anything with a nature does not act upon anything through 
its nature unless that other thing has been created to receive it. For 
example, something that cannot be harmed will not be harmed by an act 
that is harmful to something else, and similarly with acts that cause 
pleasure and pain. It is the same way in the case of dyes. The action of 
nature is not such as to make [another] thing accept its nature or change 
or be affected by it, which proves the existence of a being without 
natures [i.e. God]. In addition, if a thing with a nature were separated 
from its action, it would neither compose nor form, so the existence [of 


elements of the Universe] prove that something else is their originator. 


Moreover, if dyes were separated from the colouring of things, it would 
turn out flawed and ugly. On the other hand, such a thing is permissible 
for a wise, knowledgeable being who puts everything in its rightful place, 


and it is the same case regarding the effect of nature. In terms of nature, 


* Once again, al-Maturidi has devoted a significant portion of this book to his 
refutation of naturalists. In terms of naturalists, there wasn’t a specific sect of 
naturalists but instead this was a belief held within many religions and localities. For 
example, within Islam there were some Mutazalites who were naturalists and some who 
held a Deistic worldview. 


241 


this is, even more, the case, since [its parts] are incompatible and 
mutually repel one another, ot degrade things without limit, and admit 
corruption. Therefore, the harmony and perpetuity within substances 
signify that there is a knowledgeable, subduing being that amalgamated 
them and forced them together. Furthermore, each amalgamation of 
natures has something causing [them to amalgamate] which is not of 
them - and this necessarily proves the existence [of these natures]. And 
there are many [things] of the same ilk. We may find heat rising by its 
vety nature and coldness falling, and [yet] they [can] both exist in the 
same body, which is ptoof that this phenomenon has a subduing, 


knowledgeable designer. 


To respond to those who argue for the eternity of substances, we find 
that substances are not devoid of accidents. We reject this position [of 
substances being eternal] for several reasons. ‘The first reason is that 
eternity is devoid [of accidents], and this involves rejecting the testimony 
of our own eyes. The second reason is that there ate many substances 
and they originate for a number [of different] periods of time, and they 
ate parts of the whole in that they endure the accidents that the whole 
endures. Therefote, it is necessary to argue that they are created. It is not 
possible to argue that they were dormant and became appatent or 
separated and amalgamated, because this would prove something other 
than the judgment of our observation. If this were possible, even if it 
removed the possibility of knowledge, this would mean it was possible 
for the Universe to be created from nothing, even if its existence was 
removed ftom a person’s imagination of the evidence. In addition, 
dormancy is not possible because it converts the existence of one thing 
into space for ten things like it. There is no strength to find the truth except by 
God. 


242 


Furthermore, substances and their attributes are not devoid of forms, 
and so are not without a designer, just like the other things whose 
essence and atttibutes can be sensed. They do not subside in themselves 
but instead through a Sustainer, and as such it is impossible for them to 
be eternal. Moreover, since it is known that everything is incapable and 
benighted of its own conditions and what is suitable for it, this is proof 
of the entirety [needing a Designer] - among the other proofs that were 
mentioned [previously].“” There és no strength to find the truth except by God 


Therefore it is necessary to ascribe to the Creator omnipotence and 
beneficence in pre-eternity, as well as creating, so that everything is as it 
was from pre-eternity, provided that eternity is not applied to everything 
that existed through God - because [creation] is a type of annihilation, 
and it is impossible to say that God was brought into existence, since 
God exists in Himself. Moreover, everything is as it was in the sense that 
substances are not devoid of accidents, which were brought into being 
by [God’s] omnipotence and generosity. Then they returned to accidents 
as was possible, and it is the same case for all substances. There is no 


strength to find the truth except by God. 


Furthermore, if everything were pre-eternal, the atttibution of power 
and action would no longer apply to God in terms of temporally created 
things. Instead, God’s creation is that He creates everything as He knows 
it to be, and desires a creation that does not cease to possess attributes, 
since He is above being affected by attributes, such that He makes 
everything within the Universe, which includes the things within it that 
signify that they were created, and that is the design of the Creator. God 


as the grantor of success. 


“40'The supplication was moved to the end of the paragraph 


243 


Approaches to Monotheism 


[Shaykh] Aba Mansur stated: In support of the position of monotheism 
from a different perspective is the argument of the Dahriya “' who 
despite their differences argued for one Creator and the [existence of| 
pte-eternal Prime Matter or Hayzla, which is one until it is affected by 


accidents and transforms from its initial state. 


The Dualists argue that the wise, merciful, knowledgeable being is one 
[meaning the Light], and the existence of the other [namely, Darkness] 
does not mean it is Divine, but rather the contrary, since it is all that is 


ignorance and evil. 


The followers of other religions argue for the pre-eternity of the One, 
even if one sect of them argues that He was later incarnated and another 
sect that He has a son. Despite their differences, they agree that God is 
One etc. and that He has nothing like Him. This is impossible, since 
there was nothing other than Him fin pre-eternity] and the basis for 
similarity is the existence of what is other than Him in creation, which is 
impossible. This is the meaning of ‘the One’, since God is one in His 
sublimity and glory, and one in essence, free from there being something 
like Him in His Essence, since as we have explained this negates 
monotheism. He is also One in relation to attributes and is beyond 


anyone being able to shate the reality of His Attributes such as 


M41 The Dahriya ate another group that al-Matutidi has devoted a significant amount of 
his book in order to refute. Once again, there is no one specific group of ‘Dahriya’ but 
instead it is a belief that was held by many groups from a range of sects and religions. 
The term ‘Dahriya’ comes from the word ‘Dahr, which tefers to time without 
beginning. It was used to refer to those people who argued for the pre-cternity of the 
Universe and hence it included Muslim groups such as the Mutagatites as well as non- 


Muslims such as the followers of Aristotle. 


244 


Knowledge, Power and Creation. In fact, whenever something othey 
than Him is described with these attributes, it is after such thing did not 
exist previously, and it is impossible for that which is originated to 


resemble the [pre-] eternal. There 7s no strength to find the truth except by God 


Shaykh Abt Mansur said that God granted all people who possess 
reason to believe in monotheism in its totality, but each of the sects 
rejected parts of what was granted to them based on [their] 
interpretation, except for Muslims, who followed what was granted to 
them [by God]. An example of this is the Dahriya, who argue for [the 
existence] of a Creator as well as the pre-eternity of the Creator, but then 
place all created substances in conjunction with Him in pre-eternity, 
which results in the invalidation of monotheism. Then there ate the 
Batintyyah who argue for the existence of Prime Matter and Hayzila, and 
make them one, {and they say] then [raw, Primal Matter] was annihilated 
through the process of transition and annihilation from which 


numberless things come into existence. 


The Dualists who argue for the knowledgeable One believe that He is 
of one category, since they make all that is good come from Him. This 
is also the position of the Manicheans, heretics and Magians etc. They 
negate their monotheism by arguing for [God being] a body, since it is a 
term that can become many. The Jews made creation similar to God, as 
they multiplied His number, to the point that they claimed He could 


have a child.” 


‘The basis of this issue lies in the following verse of the Holy Quran, “The Jews say, 
Uzayr is the son of God’; and the Christians say, The Messiah is the son of God.’ That is their 
statement from their mouths; they imitate the saying of those who disbelieved [before them.” (Quran, 
Surah At Tawbah (9:30)). It seems that this was Al-Matutidi’s sole reference pertaining 
to Judaism - most likely due to his lack of interaction with Jews, as he was living in 
Transoxiana. This has left many Muslims confused, because there is no current sect of 


Jews who hold that Uzayr is the son of God. Many scholars have opined on the issue. 


245 


The Christians argue that [God is] one entity and three hypostases, and 
each hypostasis excludes partiality and dimension. They also argue that 
He was incorporeal and then became corporeal, while it is known that 


bodies are forms which are divisible and can be pattitioned.” 


For example, Al-Jahiz argued that this was a belief held by a sect of Jews that lived in 
Arabia, but the sect died out. Ibn Hazm (d. 312/1064) argued that there was a group 
of Jews in Yemen who held this position. Al-Maturidf himself in his “Ta/sir’, argues that 
eatlicr groups of Jews from Arabia held this belief, but once the Prophet Muhammad 
began his mission they stopped espousing this in order to hide it, and those who came 
after no longet had this belief (he also claims that both Jews and Christians were 
imitating an earlier, no longer extant group in Arabia). This was also the explanation 
by Fakhr al-Din al-Razi and Tabati. The problem is that there is no historical evidence 
suppotting these explanations. As many historians have argued, the only historical 
evidence that lends to this statement is the Quran itself. Hence, I do not believe that 
this is the best explanation (although those who hold it can argue that there is a 
possibility that there #as such a group of Jews, even if they no longer exist. In support 
of theit opinion they could cite as an example the Dead Sea Scroll’ fragment called 
‘The Son of God’ (4Q246), which is pre-Christian). Rather, when one analyses a 
following verse, an indication is provided as to the intended meaning: “They have taken 
their scholars and monks as lords besides God, and [also] the Messiah, the son of Mary.” (Quran, 
Surah At-Tawbah (9:31)).I hold the view that these verses are linked because the first 
verse states that “The Jews say, Uayr is the son of God” and the next verse says; “They have 
taken their scholars and monks as lords besides God’. Analysing holistically, it means that 
Uzayt was a Jewish scholar (a Rabbi) who his followers revered to the extent that they 
began to ‘worship’ him. This does not necessarily mean that they hold Uzayr as a direct 
partner to God, but rather that they followed him blindly to the point that they took 
his word over the word of God. This verse would then be a lesson to us to not make 
the same mistake vis a vis the veneration of scholars - something that can be observed 
amongst Muslims, where some hold that the Quran can be ‘abrogated’ by transmissions 
ot hadiths that have been authenticated by scholars, or where a person without realising 


ignores the word of God for what is propagated by scholars. 


443 This can be found in the following Quranic verse “So bekieve in Allah and His 


messengers. And do not say, Three’” (Quran, Surah An-Nisa (4:171)) as well as other verses. 


246 


The naturalists did not require the natutes to operate of themselves so 
that there is someone who amaleamates and separates them, who | 


according to their position exists pre-eternally. 


The Mutazahtes, who claim monotheism, argue that there are things in [a 
state of] non-existence, and to the term ‘non-existence’, pre-etetnity [is 
applied] in the same manner as {reall things. So according to their 
argument, monotheism is negated in the same manner that we explained 
in reference to the Dabriya’s argument for the pre-eternity of the 
Universe. This is because according to them, God was not the creator, 
not merciful and not compassionate, and then became so by bringing 
things into existence. This is the same as the Dualists who argued for 
the variance in essence [of Good and Evil] and then [the occutrence] of 
mixing, and this is what the propagators of [the teachings of] Prime 
Matter and Hayzila argue - that God was in a specific state, and then 
entered into a state where attributed [things] came into existence. 
However, their argument is stronger based on reason than that proposed 
by the Mutazalites, since they made change necessaty through accidents 
in the Prime Matter, while [Musazalites| did it through something other 
than God." But in the present Universe, no one changes from what he 
is in a way that is not permissible for him, There is no strength to Jind the 
truth except by God. 


“4 The Mutazalites, who do not believe that the Universe was Creatio ex Nihilo and 
instead propagate its pre-eternity, hold that the Universe emerged from primal matter 
and God is the reason for the creation of everything, Furthermore, the Mutazalites do 
not in fact believe that God did not have attributes and then they came into existence 
when God created as Al Maturidi states, instead they reject the attributes totally. The 
teason they reject them is in fact for this same reason - that if you believe that God is 
enacting an attribute it indicates a change in God, because God was first not creating 


and then He was creating, 


247 


Al-Hussayn [al-Najjar], Al-Buruguth and others were of this second 
opinion, and they linked change to space.” They said that God existed 
and there was no space, but then they described God by all space 
[meaning that God is everywhere]. ‘Thus, they made the existence of 
God contingent on something created, which negates the position of 


monotheism. 


The Anthropomorphists say that there are things in creation which ate 
like God, in having a body, finitude, limit, motion and rest. They ascribe 
to God the properties of the created things of the Universe, and they 
make it, so that [these created things] are like God. But God is beyond 


such ascriptions. 


Those who believe in monotheism argue that God is One in His 
Essence, He does not have a need for the ones and 1s above the meaning 
of the ones, i.e. from what tequites the attribute of number, which allows 
for change, evanescence, limits and finitude. Instead, His Attributes are 
pre-eternity, Creation and Power. His Glory and Divinity are beyond any 


ascription of change and evanescence. All praise is to God in every case. 


There is disagreement amongst the Dahriya who hold three different 
positions. [The first] is separation and then amalgamation, which is the 
position of heretics and Dualists, who are proponents of Light and 
Darkness. [The second] is amalgamation and then separation, which 1s 
the position of those who argue for the Prime Matter and Hayala. [The 
third] is the benightedness of both [amalgamation and separation| in 
their argument for pre-eternity, which is also the teaching of the 
Naturalists, although they have not explicitly argued [for this dogma]. 


Then there is the position that amalgamation and separation do not exist 


“45 As explained previously al-Buruguth was a follower of al-Najjar and propagated his 


ideas until the school ceased to exist. 


248 


and that the state of the Universe applies to both, which is the teaching 
of those who argue for the pre-eternity of created substances with 


accidents that have no beginning. 


The argument of those who differentiate between these two states is 
clearly contradictory, because it requires one of the two - either 
amalgamation ot separation, to apply to God Himself, since they 

describe these states as pre-eternal. Then [this state] must have departed | 
from God without God Himself departing, so the state He was in 
became nullified along with the cause that made it exist, which is the 
existence of the cause that brings the thing into existence in the case of 
its elimination, which is flawed reasoning. If this were possible, then that 
would mean it was possible for the eternal to be originated and the 
originated to be eternal, which would negate their argument v#s-a-vis pre- 


eternity. 


If it were possible for something which endures in itself to cease to exist, 
and what ceases to exist in itself to endure, then it would be possible for 
something which exists in itself to be non-existent and for something 
which does not exist in itself to exist. This then has two aspects. The 
first is the coming into being of the Universe after it was not, and its 
existence after its non-existence.’ Here lies the confusion of their 
school and it requires one to admit that the Universe was originated 
without any foundation to it. There is no strength to find the truth esccept by 
God. 


The second aspect is that if it was [possible for] something which was 
amalgamated in itself to be separated and something which is separated 


in itself to be amalgamated without being created, then it would be 


“6 The first is coming into being after it was not, which does not necessarily mean that 
the Universe came from nothing - for example the Universe could have come from 


Hayula. The second is coming into existence after non-existence (Creatio ex Nibilo). 


249 


possible for something which is amalgamated to be separated while at 
the same time being amalgamated, since its essence is subsisting, and this 
is something reason is unable to comprehend. Hence, knowledge of 
other things ceases to exist - since there is no knowledge which is more 
cogent than what I have mentioned. This would also permit making evil 
good, darkness light, the living dead, the moving still, the cold hot etc. 
with other contradictions. When one allows this, it invalidates the 
argument for the pre-eternity of amalgamation and separation, since they 
wete together, and thus invalidates the argument for time without 


beginning. There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


[Shaykh] Abi ManSur said that the basis for this is that the separation 
can only be because of nature, free will, or through another who created 
them this way, and the same applies to amalgamation. As such, 
separation and amalgamation do not go beyond what we have 
mentioned. If [amalgamation and separation] were because of nature, it 
would be necessary that anything whose foundation is amalgamation and 
sepatation would increase [in amalgamation and separation]. Is it not 
obvious that anything that is in motion in nature increases in its motion, 
and it requires this [to be the case]? It is the same case for any substance 
that rises by nature and whose position is above [in relation to} a 
substance that sinks by nature, it is impossible for them to ever unite 
[except by intervention from God, ie. against their natures].""’ The same 
principle applies to something that moves from the right and something 


that moves from the left; this results in the negation of their claims. 


On the other hand, if [the occurrence] is because of free will, the notion 
that they were in a state other than what they are is not valid, because 


there is no evidence proving the conttary of what we observe in the 


447 Tf the position of object A is located above object B, and object A continues to rise 


whereas object B continues to sink, then these two objects will never meet. 


250 


present Universe, namely that amalgamation can be affected by 
something that chooses separation or separation can be affected by 
something that chooses amalgamation, since otherwise free will jg 
nullified. This results in the falsification of their position that everything 
is in perpetuity and remains in the essence of the other. The 
confirmation of this is that the retention of good in evil is evil, whereas 
if they possessed free will, each one would not be devoid of the ability 
to prevent the other from its act, and they would each have free will and 
knowledge of how to do that. But if they did not [have this ability], this 
would negate the possibility of free will, and both would be characterized 
by inability and benightedness. If that were the case, the difference from 
the state that they were in would be nullified, since as a result each of 
them would attain that which harms and penetrates it. Furthermore, 
apprehending [the difference between Light and Dark] involves making 
each benighted and incapable of affecting the other, which results in the 
nullification of the argument. There is no strength to find the truth except by 
God. 


If this were in another thing that signified that dispersion and separation 
are originated and |the Universe is] not free from such a thing, then it is 
necessary that [dispersion and separation] ate originated. This results in 
the affirmation of monotheism by which I wish to refute [their beliefs]. 
There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


In terms of both [amalgamation and separation], they acknowledged that 
there is no substantial argument to deal with, and it is among the things 
that reason cannot comprehend. Instead, their method is deferring to 
authority, so the matter became doubtful to them due to the differences 
in what it leads to. So instead, they spoke of what they were sure of and 
assumed that what it leads to is a truth that is apparent, that is part of 
that truth, 


ood. 


Since it is impossible to unite the two things with respect to the 
contradiction that we explained, this proves that the truth, if it lies in the 
argument of the Dahriya, lies in one of the two claims, but we have 


shown that both these assertions are flawed. Adah ts the one who supports. 


252 


The Views of Muhammad ibn Shabib on the Existence and 
Attributes of the Creator 


On this [issue], Muhammad ibn Shabib*” made an argument which can 
be summarised as follows: since the existing [Universe], with the 
opposites and contradictions that it contains, cannot avoid being that 
way pre-eternally, therefore its existence is nullified, in that it is not 
conceivable for a thing to exist out of the whole, unless a thing exists 
within the whole. In this manner, each existent [of the whole] prevents 
the existence [of a thing within it] and as such it is nullified. It is like 
when someone says that no one can enter this house until someone else 
enters - and so it is not possible for the entry of anyone into the house 
to satisfy this condition. On the other hand, if it was from sepatation 
that preceded it, then existence would be void due to the opposite, since 
its reality is mutual repulsion because they are opposed by nature, and if 
the result of the contradiction is what I have mentioned. Also, based on 
free will it wete possible to remove their natures which contain 
contradiction, then this would mean that each of them could freely 
choose annihilation of itself in itself, despite the fact that by nature they 
are in perpetuity. If both ways are nullified, then it signifies that it existed 
after it did not exist through a being that originated it in this manner 
with the difference and similarity that it contains. There is no strength to find 
the truth except by God. 


448 Muhammad ibn Shabib was from Basta and was the student of An-Nazzam, a 
famous scholar who follows the school of the Murazalites. He was an independent 
scholar, whose views wete a mix of those held by the Munji’a and those held by the 
Mutazalites. This is probably the reason why Al-Maturidi is willing to openly express his 


agreement with Muhammad ibn Shabib on certain issues within the book. 


253 


Then it is not possible to come into existence without a creator, because 
for God non-existence and existence are one, and because a form is not 
known without a designer, and seasons do not change [on their own] 
such as from Winter to Summer. Hence, this also proves that a being 


created them. 


There was an objection that: if what prevents that which exists in itself 
from this [need for a creator] is that it exists in time which is outside of 
time*” then why could this also not be the case for something that is 
other than it? [Muhammed ibn Shabib] claimed that if something other 
[than God] could direct its own existence, it would have fits own] 
religion and Universe, but this is not the case for things that do not exist 


through themselves. Therefore, the two situations are different. 


Furthermore, his claim entails that it is not possible [for God] to have 
created the first creation, other than something [being created] so that it 
can be tested [by God], so that it exists in the way we have mentioned. 
Since it is possible for something other than [this creation to have been 
created], without there being an advantage to the time that was without 
[the creation], and as such there is no substance to his statement. We 
ourselves have expounded the argument for creation, and the 
impossibility of the question ‘why did He creater’ We cannot assert that 
God only does the most optimum thing, since the reality of the act 
adheres to God, such that the description of blame applies to God if He 


[decides] to postpone [His act] or enacts [His act] earlier but in reality 


449 Muhammad ibn Shabib is explaining that if someone wete to make the weak 
argument that something that exists in a time outside of time does not need a creator, 
then this is a fallacy, because this could then be applied to anything, as there is no such 


thing as a ‘time outside of time’, 


the act of God does not deviate ftom wisdom.*” However, considering 
the [application of] the most optimum [acts] for something other than 
God, [then in relation to this application] what should be consideted fis 


its right over God as opposed to [the consideration of] the act itself. 


Furthermore, it is impossible for something other than God to have a 
tight over God and not [to have a right] over another, or to ask about 
the [the reason for creating the] whole of creation. Therefore, to posit 
that God creates for their benefit and what is suitable for them is 
meaningless, since there is no hatm or corruption for them in that which 
God does not create for them, such that creation would be as 


mentioned. God knows best. 


Then in the whole, thete is not a creation which is placed under the test, 
which does not have benefit and instruction, by way of inference and 
consideration, besides the other benefits that God bestows on them. God 


as the grantor of SUCCESS. 


On the other hand, the righteousness and corruption of a petson in 
teligion are through his [own] action. God has reasons for which the 
tighteous act attains the greatest favours and most profuse blessings. 
Whoever falls into corruption because he turns away from God and 
prefers his desires over obedience to God, [then] God gives him free 
tein with what he chooses for himself, since he preferred his own caprice 
over God’s command, his own desite over obedience to God, and 
preferred the act that he knew was hostile [to God as opposed] to the 
act that he knew would be friendship [with God]. There is 20 strength to 
Jind the truth except by God. 


*°'This is an example of Muhammed ibn Shabib following the Mutazalites opinion of 
God creating the most optimum things, which al-Maturidi rejects and presents his own 


opinion - that the acts of God cannot be detached from wisdom. 


255 


It is an objection to the beginning of creation that God cteates for 
Himself, and there is no advantage. [Muhammad ibn Shabib] claimed 
that thete is no time that existed when it could be said; “Why did He not 
create before?! However, whenever it is [created], God is first, and the 
best in design and first in wisdom, and so on. So this raises the question: 
Why did He not create something superior to Him in wisdom and 


sound direction?’ 


[Shaykh] Abi Mangar stated that what [Muhammad ibn Shabib said] 
concerning time is like [our position]. However the question posed 
about matter being similar is invalid, because there is no reference to a 
time, unless it is creation before then to the point that the tongue cannot 
express due to the number of times that are possible, and this invalidates 
the question. Except in the case of pre-eternity, and that is a 
contradiction, due to the impossibility of creation occurring to a being 


that exists pre-eternally. There és no strength to find the truth except by God 


What [Muhammad ibn Shabib] mentioned in terms of wisdom is 
accurate, but I do not know [the point] he was attempting to make 
concerning the optimum. What [Muhammad ibn Shabib} said regarding 


the point about ‘above Him’ or ‘like Him’ ate meaningless arguments.” 


451 This is the position held by Muhammad ibn Shabib and the Mutazalites, which is 
that God has created the Universe at the most optimum time and there is no other 
time that was better for God creating Universe than this time. Al-Maturidi responds 
that whenever the Universe was created, it still means that God is the first in His 
uniqueness and His acts are never without wisdom. Therefore, the issue of the time 
that the Universe was created being the most optimum is irrelevant. 

452 Al-Maturidi is clearly referring to the ideas that are presented in the works of 
Muhammad ibn Shabib. These books have not survived and therefore we have no way 
of presenting his original premises. J. Meric Pessagno has attempted to recreate his 
thought in his paper titled ‘The Reconstructing of the Thought of M. ahammad ibn Shalil’, where 
he uses the points relayed by al-Matutidi in this book as well as those positions relayed 
by Ibn al-Murtada, al-’ Ash ‘ati, al-Baghdadi and al-Shahrastani. 


256 


God may perform any act that does not deviate from wisdom, since such 


deviation results in ignorance and that contravenes Divinity 


| 


Furthermore, in terms of ‘wisdom’, then it is of two modes. One ig 
justice, and the other is favour. There is no end to the favour that God 
can bestow, such that it could be said of a thing that it is the best act that 
God’s Might can attain. 


Moteover, God is not bound to bestow favour, but rather allocates it to 
whomever He wishes, It is not possible for God’s action to deviate from 
wisdom, for the reason that we have mentioned. The same applies to the 
meaning of Sustice’, which is putting everything in its rightful place, 
However, there are degrees by which an act may be described 4s 
benevolent and gracious, or as just and wise, since they are both 
. common names for any act a [person] may perform, and the first is 
\ pasticular in respect to the fact that God could leave it aside and make it 


gracious and beneficent. There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


The question pertaining to creating a thing before this creation 
circumvents what we have explained in regards to time. Gad is capable of 


all things. 


Then there was an objection, as to why God was not ceaselessly creating 
thingsr** He responded with the argument mentioned above, that it is 
defective to claim that a thing can exist before another thing into pre- 


eternity. 


| [Shaykh] Abu Mansur explained that our response [to this issue] is as 
follows: If by ‘not ceaselessly creating things,’ you mean that [these 


things] do not cease, that is impossible, because that would prove they 


® Here is referring to the argument that God is continuously creating pre-eternally. 
Therefore, what can be seen is that al-Matutidi does not profess to the position of 
occasionalism. ‘This can be seen by him relaying Muhammad ibn Shabib refutation of 


the position. 


257 


ate pre-etetnal, and if they were pre-eternal, that would contradict the 
fact that they were originated. On the other hand, if by this you mean 
‘origination’, such that all things derive from it for the time of their 
existence, then that is true, since God is Creator in Himself, not through 


something else. 


Now we shall mention Muhammad ibn Shabib’s questions, with which 
he atgued against the Atheists. [Muhammad ibn Shabib| objected to the 
[question that was posited in regards to] “What is He that is worshipped?’ 
to which we have clarified the response. He claims that this [creation] 
beats attributes like those [which are ascribed to God — incorrectly in 
ibn Shahib’s opinion}, while we have explained that there is nothing that 
is similar to God, and that God bears the attributes by which He is 
referred to.** We did not come to know [God] through the senses such 
as to tefer to Him [in a manner that bears similarity to creation]. 
Furthermore, [the question] ‘What is He?’ means that God existed 
beforehand [before the senses can point to Him] through evidence and 
the observation of the Universe. {In terms of] ‘What is He?’, this is that 
which is stated by God’s name such as God, the Merciful, the 


Compassionate etc. 


We tespond that He is the One God, and nothing is similar to Him. 
With the Universe, we preclude returning to the question, because it 
concerns something that cannot be comprehended [by reason], and this 
entails that the question is rejected except with regards to the existence 


of evidence. There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


454 Al-Matutidi is referring to the Mutazahites teaching that is also held by Muhammad 
ibn Shabib, namely the denial of the Attributes of God. One of the reasons for the 
denial of attributes is that it is ascribing attributes to God which results in likening God 
to the creation. Al-Maturidi is attempting to argue that such a presumption is flawed 


unless you consider creation to be similar to God. 


258 


Then with regards to the question, ‘What is He? [Muhammad iba | 
Shabib] responded that God is in things, designing them, not in the Sense 
of indwelling in the way that it is said ‘so-and-so is in his work and 
[Muhammad ibn Shabib] also] said not in the sense that things 


encompass God. 


[Shaykh] Abu Mansur said that [Muhammad ibn Shabib] etred in his 
response, because the true [response] is that when you ask about place, 
then [the answer to this is that] God existed without place, and He ig 
above being described by places. God is as He was, without change or 
becoming evanescent. By saying that God is in work, it is using a 
conventional expression about work occupying God or God being 


confined in it by something else, and God is above such a description, 


Furthermore, when it was said to [Muhammad ibn Shabib] that, “if you 
deny that God resembles His creation, and that His creation resembles 
Him, then you ate guilty of likening God to His creation.’ He responded 
that there is no likening in denial. Do you not see that when someone 
says: “He is like black and white, in that the one does not resemble the 
other,’ this does not entail resemblance, but instead it is said by way of 


presenting proof [of the denial of their similarity]? 
[Al-Matutidi explained] that [Muhammad ibn Shabib] made a good 


[point], and if there was [an invocation of] similarity, it was in his saying 
that ‘this tesembles that’ entails the contrary, and this involves 
transposing the realities and nullifying the figurative expression entirely. 
The totality of this is that refutation removes the refuted thing from the 
imagination and the intellect, and if it is removed, (the imagination and 
the intellect] do not appraise it. ‘Similarity’ is the reality under a degree 


of an essence, attribute or extent. ‘Therefore, its meaning is void. 


It is in the same manner that it is a response to those who claim that ‘If 


you do not describe God by place, you have delimited Him in extent. 


200 


Extent is the terminus of the place, and it is impossible to deny 
delimitation in describing God [by place], and it is the same case with 
places.’ Instead, the one who argues for [God being] everywhere or for 
[in] a place without place is the one who delimits God, since he affirms 
God in the way that he affirmed the location that is ascribed [to God], 
which the intellect and imagination appraise. ‘This involves delimitation 


and likening. There is no strength to find the truth except by God 


Furthermore, [Muhammad ibn Shabib] then responded to the question, 
‘How did God create creation” in the following way: If the question 
treats of the act, it is impossible. God originated and created its 
substance, and there is no way to treat it. If the question means ‘Which 
thing did He create?’ It refers to corporeal substances such as the sky 
and so on, since creating the thing, in this claim, is that thing. If the 
question means ‘Why did He create?’ [The answer is that it is for] the 
benefit of creation in their religion and what is best for them as God 


ordained for them. 


[Shaykh] Abi Manéiir explained that the response to this question is to 
reject it on the grounds that there is no ‘how’ in God’s action, since 
everything with a “how” is something with similarities. There is a 
disagreement in terms of the existence of creation being a thing that is 
from God or from other than God. Some of them argue that it is from 
God {and this was the position of Muhammad ibn Shabib] *° and asking 
fot God’s method [in creating] is defective, since God is not [similar to] 
His creation such as to be likened to it. Others say that creating things 


is God’s Attribute that is attributed to Him pre-eternally, therefore 


455 He is referring to the difference between the belief held by Muhammad ibn Shabib 
who held that existence of creation is because of God and those who don’t believe in 
God and held that the Universe came from Prime Matter. 


a 


260 


asking about ‘how’ involves asking about His Essence, His Knowledge 


and His Power, and that is a flawed [question].*”° 


Furthermore, moving on to the question, ‘Did God create things from 
a thing or from nothing?’, Ibn Shabib responded that it is ‘from nothing’, 
meaning that God devised things or originated them without 
foundation. This is as he related concerning the origination of bodies. 
However, the Mufazalites teaching is that the ‘somethingness’ of things 
was not through God, but their existence was through Him, so in theig 
opinion, creating things from nothing is impossible. Instead, God did 
not create things but rather brought into existence their corporeal 
substances out of non-existence. This is among the various reasons for 
the [flaw in the} analogies of the Mutazalites, and we thank God that we 


are preserved from these [errors]. 


His response to the question [‘Why did God create the Universe?’] is 
strange. It is that “God created for the benefit of creation’, because when 
he was asked ‘why did God create the Universe?’ he replied; ‘for the 
benefit of creation.’ And why did he create for the benefit of creation, 
and what need was there for creation, when there was no creation to 
create creation for its own benefitr If it could be said that ‘He created 
creation for their benefit without a need for creation that has been 
proven,’ how did God not create for His own benefit, even if there was 
no need for it? According to the position of the Masazahies, this is prior, 


because God was not creative or merciful or compassionate. In their 


6 The issue of not applying ‘ay’ Chow’) to God is something for which the school 


of Maturidi became well known. It was an idea adopted by the “Ash ‘ari School as well. 
87 Here al-Maturidi is referring to an issue he has relayed several times in the book 
regarding the Musazatites teaching that a non-existent thing is still a ‘thing’, You can 
read about it the issue the last time it was discussed in the chapter titled; “Against she 
Thesis: That which is Non-Existent (Ma’dum) Has Always Existed? which can be found on 
page 185. 


261 


view, these are names of magnification and praise as if God benefited 
from creation, since God was not such in Himself and then became such 
through His creation. But God is above attributes of need and benefit. 
There 1s no strength to find the truth except by God. 


[Shaykh] Aba ManSur contended that the argument of {Muhammad ibn 
Shabib] is that ‘creation of the thing is the thing’. ‘Therefore, the thing is 
in God’s Essence or its own essence. Since nothing proceeds from God 
except Himself and nothing proceeds to creation from God other than 
creation in itself, so how did God become a creator when nothing other 
than creation proceeded from Him, without creation being anything 
else? In addition, why is it not correct [to state] that ‘why was creation 
not in the fact that God is a creator?’, since nothing proceeded from 
God to it other than the fact that God was [in pre-eternity]. The pre- 
eternity of a thing does not require the existence of another thing 
through it. If that through which a thing exists does not proceed from 
it, to it, in the seen [Universe] then how is this required in the unseen 


[Universe]? 


[Muhammad ibn Shabib’s] response to [the question], “How did He 
create?’ is that ‘He did not create through treatment’ and what he 
mentioned is meaningless disputation. If he held that creating the thing 
is the thing, then let him mention that thing in his response rather than 
divide the question and then remove from it the concept of ‘how’. There 


is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


Furthermore, to those who objected and argued that if it is possible to 
say that ‘He is unceasingly Knowledgeable, Hearing and Seeing’, then 
why can you not say that ‘He is unceasingly Creator? [Muhammed ibn 
Shabib] responded that this requires creation in pre-eternity. In addition, 
[the statement] ‘He is unceasingly Hearing’ means the negation of 


deafness, and it is the same case for ‘Knowing’ and ‘Seeing’. 


262 


[Muhammad ibn Shabib] claims that [his position] is that he says that 
‘He is unceasingly the Creator” and not ‘creating’ for the reasons that 


have been stated.*® 


[Shaykh] Abu Mansur said that the meaning of the saying ‘He jg 
unceasingly Hearing, Seeing and Knowing’ is that God is not ignorant, 
ot blind, or deaf [and] stating this [viewpoint] would be better if it would 
keep [one from having] doubt. [This is because] it could be said of g 
thing that; ‘it is not benighted, or incapable or deaf,’ and it is not 
necessary to describe it as “capable, knowing, hearing, seeing.’ If there 
were nothing in [the expression of the Attributes] other than negation 
of what is said, then the expression of negation is more accurate than an 
expression that leads to an understanding of something for which there 
is no use in understanding, and especially [when such an understanding 
results in] all [types of] harms. If its sole purpose was the negation of the 
Opposites, then tt should be said that “God is correct, sound, healthy’ in 
negation of the opposites without doing what was discussed [in terms of 
likening God to creation]. If that is not possible, it is obvious that the 
clatity that is claimed by [Muhammad ibn Shabib] turns out to be 


etroneous.*” 


Furthermote, the emergence of successive acts in good order and theit 


precision, is evidence of knowledge and power over them, not evidence 


*8 Muhammad Ibn Shabib explains that he holds the position that God is unceasingly 
Creator, as opposed to unceasingly creating, because the latter entails that God was 
continuously creating and therefore if God is pre-eternal then His creation would also 
be pre-eternal. 

* Here al-Maturidi is attempting to argue that using negations as attributes, such as 
‘God is not deaf, should only be done when ascribing attributes to God could lead a 
person to think that God is similar to created things, but it should only be in that 
instance. If this is not the objective then it is a useless position to hold, because the 
foundational principle is that in normal instances it is permissible to apply attributes to 
God. 


263 


of one who is not ignorant and incapable, since other than one of the 
descriptions [applied to God], there is no act or similarity among them, 
as is the case with all of the Attributes. There is no strength to find the truth 
except by God. 


On the other hand, the names of the Attributes are rendered null with 
the negation of the Attributes. This is because [Muhammad ibn Shabib| 
did not verify the Attributes, the names became mere titles, and if they 
become that, then saying that [God] is unceasingly so-and-so is 
meaningless, because it is impossible for a sobriquet to exist in pre- 


eternity. There is no strength to find the truth except by Ged. 


Therefore, since saying ‘hearing, knowing, capable’ does not result in 
everything known [being] subject to [God’s] power and hearing which 
exists in pre-eternity, so it is the same case in saying ‘the creator’, 
However, God is the creator of things so that they are in the state that 
they ate in now, just as God knows them, is capable etc. This is because 
saying ‘knowing, hearing, seeing’, has the same meaning as ‘the knower, 
the heater, the seer’, and in the same vein saying ‘creator’ and ‘the 
creator’ has the same meaning. Instead, stating ‘the creator’ is more 
cottect since it requires the eternity of the creation, if one considers the 
utterance fof the word]. Is it not apparent that in the same form as 
“creator,” it is said [in the following verse of the Holy Quran}; ‘Lord of 
the Day of Judgement™@and “He is the Creator of all things,’*” and every 


accident and subsisting thing enters therein, and not in ‘the creator, and 


460 Quran, Surah A/Fatiha (1:4) 
461 Quran, Surah ALAn ‘am (6:102) 


264 


God is not called in this way based on customary usage.” There js no 


strength to find the truth esccept by God. 


[Shaykh] Abu Manégur said that the basis [of this position] is that lin 
terms of] God, since thete is no path to knowledge of God except 
through indication from the knower, by cutting off the ways to attain 
knowledge of God through the senses ot the observation of 
transmission, then the present Universe indicates God by way of 
testifying to Him by attribute and not by testifying to God’s Essence, 
since existence after non-existence is evidence of bringing [something] 
into existence and creation, which the created being has knowledge of. 
The different states of the present Universe and the amalgamation of 
opposites in one thing are evidence of God’s power. The effective design 
whose powers are with the designer, the congruence of the design and 
the lack of disharmony in reality in its multitude, based on treason is 
evidence that reason knows that which the knower makes known, 
Meanwhile, nothing in the sensory Universe points to an essence if the 
attribute is denied. It is not possible to say that it proves an essence other 
than [through] the verification of attributes, since that is not by that 
testimony which is based on observation. Likewise, those whose 
truthfulness 1s proven based on evidence*” spoke of the Knower, the 
Hearer, the Seer in mentioning Knowledge, Power and so on, knowing 


that these names are the names of the Attributes. 


Furthermore, since it is not permissible to describe by location, 


emergence, entry, connection, sepatation, in-betweenness etc. in denial 


462 Al-Maturidi atgues that the acts of God are because of His Attributes. Thus, God 
knows because of His Attribute of ‘Knowledge’, whereas the Mutazalites argue that 
God knows by Himself and does not possess the attribute of ‘knowledge’. 

‘© This is referring to Prophets and the message they conveyed to the people that they 


were sent to. 


265 


of those states, without fixing the utterance in the mind, as is the case 
for dispersal, motion and rest, which is what [the Mutazalites| claimed is 


also impermissible. God és the grantor of success. 


[Shaykh] Abu Manéur said that since the origination of the Universe has 
been proven, and its existence after it did not exist is impossible in the 
state, it is by the initial things assuming the affairs of latter things and 
the harmony within it. It is known that God knew of this. Then the fact 
that it is impossible that a sense is known to God and not a sensory 
thing, or an analogy and not a lesson, proves that God is Snowing for 
Himself. In addition, the knowledge belongs to the knower Himself 
whether the object of knowledge is present or absent. There is no strength 


to find the truth except by God. 


[Shaykh] Aba Manégiar said that the basis of this is as I have mentioned, 
that God is known not by the senses, and in that which is known is 
evidence of [God’s] knowledge of [the Universe], since God made it in 
a manner that indicated this. Therefore, it is not possible that God’s 
knowledge of it be other than Him, because there was no other until 
God brought it into being, then that generated thing was evidence of 
God. It is proven that God knew it before it existed, when there was 
nothing other than Him, It is proven that God knows it in its essence 


and not through something other than Him. God és the grantor of success. 


Then [Muhammad ibn Shabib] asked himself about things that it is 
meaningless to ask about except out of stubbornness. The correct 
response to stubbornness is chastisement in order to prevent it, not to 
draw inferences from the evidence, as we explained with regards to the 
Sophists. [Muhammad ibn Shabib] then posited the question ‘Is God 
not capable of all things?’, to which he responded ‘Yes’, then he further 
posited ‘Is God able to place the Universe inside an egg?’ to which he 


responded that this is a contradiction, because this would make the egg 


266 


more expansive than the Universe when God has made it smaller than 
the Universe, as [the egg] is a part of [the Universe], which is the [very] 


meaning of [something being] ‘bigger’ and ‘smaller’. 


[Shaykh] Abu Manégur said that according to our belief, in terms of 
[Muhammad ibn Shabib’s] response, if he meant keeping the ege as a 
part of the Universe, then that is impossible, because this would invert 
the part and the whole without a change in their state, which is q 
contradiction. On the other hand, if by ‘egg’ he meant something other 
than a normal egg, then there are two possible ways. One is that they 
both remain in their foriginal] state, which is impossible for the reason 
stated by Muhammad ibn Shabib. But if he meant shrinking [the 
Universe]'or expanding the egg until [the Universe] fits within it, then 
God is capable of that. God és the grantor of success. 


The author of the book professes to follow the Muatagalite School, and 
their teaching is that God is not able to create the acts of corporeal 
substances from [the level of] a mosquito and above, and the act of such 
a thing is a reality entirely within its power or in the powet of another. 
They refused to verify their claim that God is capable of all things that 


are within the bounds of the possible according to reason. So the fact 


*64 This is the issue regarding the existence of bodies, which according to Sunni 
theologians is three-fold; necessary, possible and impossible existence. Necessary 
existence is split into two categories; absolute Necessary Existence, which is solely 
telated to the existence of God, and necessary existence for the possible existence of 
something else. An example of this would be when a person moves an object from one 
location to another. For this object to have been moved it requires the existence of the 
person that moves it, so this person is necessary for that object to have moved but is 
not necessary for the continued existence of the Universe. The second is possible 
existence, for example an object being in one location or another location, both are 
possible for its existence. The third is something whose existence is impossible, such 
as there being a four-sided triangle or having a circle with sides. These are impossible 


because if something has four sides then it is not a triangle, it falls outside the bounds 


267 


that they compate an object to what falls outside the bounds of what is 
intellectually possible is meaningless. There is no strength to find the truth 
except by God. 


Then [Muhammad ibn Shabib] asked himself [the question]; ‘Is God able 
to create something like Himself?’, to which he replied; “That it iS 
impossible because that makes something created a Necessary 
Existence, but [we know that] created beings are originated, whilst God 
is pre-eternal. This invalidates that such a thing would be like God. 
[Muhammad ibn Shabib] then also asks if God can create a being with 
power like His, which is similarly impossible like the former case. He 
also said that this also proves that a created thing, which cannot avoid 
being [either] a body that contains traces of its making or an accident 
that does not subsist in itself, indicates that it is originated, and God is 
not like either of the two. He then said that every created thing bears the 
attribute of annihilation, and God is above the occurrence of 
annihilation, because annihilation is not possible for God, and time is 


only possible for other than God, as He is the opposite of that. 


[Shaykh] AbG Mansur said that from contemplating the above, he 
understood that the questioner asking this question deviated from the 
customs of speech that facilitate reason, because he asked ‘Is He able to 
create something like Himself?’ and a being like God would mean not 
being a body, an accident, or a cteated thing, and not a bearer of the 
accident of annihilation, because if it did then it would not be like God. 


On this point, he asked that how can that which has been mentioned 


of the definition of a triangle, which is ‘a plane figure with three straight sides and three 
angles’. The followers of the Maturidi School argue that God's existence is necessary, 
but the power of God is based on possible things ie. God can’t make a four-sided 


triangle or become human etc. 


268 


endure? And what was mentioned are aspects of what refute it. There is 


no strength to find the truth except by God. 


Concerning the Mufazalites, we made clearer arguments than those [that 
they proposed]. Moreover, something compels them in another way, 
which is the fact that they describe God as being capable of falsehood, 
foolishness and injustice. But if such a thing were part of God, it would 
nullify God’s Divinity, nor could God commit such an act for the same 
reason. Instead, they should say [according to their position] that God is 
able to create something like Himself, but He did not.*® This is because 
the miracle [according to Mutagalies| is not in making the originated into 
the pre-eternal, [nor is it] making that which bears the attribute of 
annihilation not subject to annihilation, and [nor is it] making that which 


bears the signs of design without such signs.“° But rather, the miracle 
g g as ; 


465 "This is related to the previous footnote, which is the basis for answering questions 
such as ‘can God create another God?’ or the more well-known question ‘can God 
create a stone that He cannot lift?’ It is possible that God can create anything, but 
God’s power to create is attached to the possible things, and for there to be a ‘created 
God’ is impossible, because the definition of God is ‘not being created and not being 
an accident’. In the same vein, God can create any type of stone whose existence is 
possible, but there cannot be a stone that He cannot lift, because it would mean that 
the stone is more powerful than God and as such citcumvents His Divinity. Therefore, 
creating a stone that God cannot lift is impossible, even for God. 
16 Al-Matutidi is attempting to argue that following through on the Mutazalites opinion 
means that a pre-eternal Universe is nonetheless being created by God, and hence the 
cteation of the Universe would not be a miracle. Rather, making something that is pre- 
eternal become originated (which is logically impossible) would be the teal miracle. 
This is related to the view of the Mutazalites that God does not ‘interact’ with the 
Universe in order to enact His will, as this would mean that God was now within time, 
enacting Fis will depending on the circumstances. Instead, what is possible according 
to the Murazalites’ teaching is that God could have created things in such a way that if 
certain events were to occur then a cteated thing would act differently from its habitual 
nature, which would then appear to us to be a miracle but in reality was ‘programmed’ 
into its behaviour by God all along. 


269 


consists of making the eternal created, the perpetual subject to 
annihilation, and the wise ignorant - since if the power to do this wete 
sound, [in terms of doing] the impossible act, then the former is like 
God, according to their School. There és no strength to find the truth except by 
God. 


Then, according to their school, the impossible is easy, which is that 
God cannot come under power, so saying that something else is brought 
under God’s power in order to become like Him is denial of that thing’s 
similarity, due to the impossibility of God coming under powet, while 
the other thing is affected by God’s power. There is no strength to find the 
truth except by God. 


If you wanted, one could say that the question is contradictory, because 
he said, ‘Is God able to create something like Himselfr’ But ‘something 
like Himself would not be created. So it is like saying, ‘Is He able to 


create a being that is not like anything else?’ 


Furthermote, if something other than God were capable of what He is 
capable, that would negate God’s identity, and that other thing would be 
He through whom is the identity of things. There zs no strength to find the 
truth except by God. 


The basis of this is that the Divinity of God is proven such that God is 
above similitude and ‘thingness’, so it is impossible for something to be 


like Him because this would negate His Divinity. 


However, the atgument is contradictory, from the perspective that 
where it is argued that just because it was reported [by someone] that 
God was created, [does not mean] that this [report] caused God to be 
created. It is not possible for a created thing to bring about the 


elimination of the creator by which its [existence] was brought forth, 


270 


because this would entail its own elimination. There is no strength to find the 


truth except by God. 


Therefore, according to their position [God] was not a creator and then 
became a creator. So, in that sense, they brought God under the 
[purported] power by which God became a creator. How does 
[Muhammad ibn Shabib] deny the possibility of a being that is not [a 
creatot] becoming one by [God] creating him like that, just as God 


became [a creator] by creating something other than Him? We turn to God 
for support. 


Then it was asked about God that ‘was He able to create things before 
they were created?’ [Muhammad ibn Shabib] claimed, ‘Yes.’ The 
evidence for that is that something that is incapable is prevented, so the 
existence of the created Universe indicates God’s power to do so. If God 
is capable in Himself, and not through power as an accident, then God 
is described as having power over the Universe and innumerable similar 


universes. 


[Shaykh] Abu Mansur stated that it is said of God that since He is 
capable in Himself and not through power as an accident, how did you 
claim that God is able to create all the motion and rest of His creation 
to the extent that God enables them to perform them? If God enables 
them to perform them, His power over such acts becomes evanescent 
unless God takes power [back] from them. This is a description of power 
in itself or through accidents. For a being described as such, it is 
impossible to ascribe power to him when the act from him is not 
apparent. According to theit school, ascribing power to a being whose 


power can become evanescent is impossible. 


My intention in citing the statements of the Musazakites, although I had 
no need to mention them, is so that a person of contemplation knows 


that there is no way to prove monotheism and refute the objections of 


2/71 


atheists through their School, and that the true exposition of 
monotheism belongs to other than them. There és no strength to find the truth 
except by God. 


Then [Muhammad ibn Shabib] claimed that for any being that possesses 
power, his power to act precedes the act.’ This is a description of a 
being that has power through something else and whose action is 
through something else, so it changes from state to state, and its essence 
accepts transformation and evanescence, On the other hand, God is 
capable of things in Himself and performs them. So [Muhammad Ibn 
Shabib] statement in this instance is flawed. There is no strength to find the 
trath except by God. 


We have demonsttated at more length above. In this is a sign that God 
made [a person’s] essence knowing, and we have explained his delusion. 


God is the grantor of success.*°° 


Then [Muhammad ibn Shabib] was asked about the creation of things, 
since there was no benefit within this for God, but nor was God acting 
in vain. Ibn Shabib claimed that God created for the accident a reward 
for eternity, which is [based on] wisdom, so that God’s action would 
have benefit for His creation, and not for a reason that preceded creation 
and God, such as creating the structure and types of things that come 


into being from God’s people. 


167 This refers to the theological disagreement regarding when a person is given the 
ability to perform an act. Is the ability to act given to a person before the act, 
simultaneously with the act or after it? It is impossible for this ability to occur after the 
act as the petson would not have performed the act in the first instance. The Musazaktes 
hold that the ability to perform an act comes before the act, as God gave people 
autonomy overt all acts, whereas Maturidi claims that the ability to perform an act is 
given by God simultaneously with the performance of the act. 

468 The supplication was moved to the end of this short paragraph. 


272 


[Shaykh] Abt Mansur said that we have provided a sufficient answer to 
the expression. Namely, that asking about the cause is impossible 
because it is impossible for anyone to have dominion over God, or fox 


His action to deviate from wisdom such that we can question it. 


Furthermore, to ask about identifying the wisdom of the Divine jg 
absurd. The reality of Divinity for us is to know God, know His Truth 
and Command. To perform in obedience and glorification of Him is our 
duty, and to prepare the correct response in all that we do and say. This 
should occupy us from seeking justification for God’s actions and 
advancing a response when the questioner exceeds his limits and turns 
away from his duty as an excuse for the act that he is responsible fot and 


rewarded for. There zs no strength to find the truth except by God. 


In terms of the position of [Muhammad ibn Shabib] that; ‘He created 
creation for the benefit of creation,’ where this benefit is what 
[Muhammad ibn Shabib] mentioned, this is a digression from the 
response because the question posed was about the creation of things, 
and they are a class out of the whole, which is what makes this a 


digression. 


It is the same case for the QOadariya: When they ate asked about the 
creation of acts, in their response, they refer to the act of disbelief and 
sins, This is defective, because this approach is through transmission, 


while the former that is described is based on reason. 


[Shaykh] Abu Mansur said that according to our position, the basis of 
this is that God did not create creation except that the trace of His 
blessing on it is manifest, the evidence of God’s beneficence is clear, the 
fact of His wisdom, signification of God’s Oneness is present, the proof 
of God’s Dominion and efficiency of His will is verified, and the sign of 


God’s power and knowledge of the realities of things is not concealed 


within it. Therefore asking; “Why did You bestow blessings?’ or ‘Why 


273 


did You manifest Your generosity?’, ‘Why was there Wisdom?’ and ‘Why 
did you make a demonstration of Your Oneness’ and so forth is 
impossible and defective, such that reason cannot accept it, and it is 
exceedingly repulsive. Therefore, this type of question is nullified. Gad és 


the grantor of success. 


Then it is possible to say that because God is generous in Himself, 
capable in Himself, and knowing in Himself, so by His creation, God 
bestowed generosity on His creation, since God created it and since God 
is capable of being generous and manifesting His gifts. ‘The basis of this 
question, in our view, is defective, because we thereby make the action 
the essence, when God is desctibed by this in pre-eternity. Asking this 
question is equivalent to asking why He is a knowing God. There is no 


strength to find the truth except by God. 


274 


Defence of the Necessity of Speculative Thought (NaZapz) in 
Theology 


One sect said that it is safer to abandon Nagar (speculative thought), 
since the thoughtful speculator is not guaranteed to attain the truth, 
Then this involves raising the issue of proof, which if the [thoughtful 
speculator] refrains from, then perdition is ensured, in respect of the fact 
that if it was not [for speculative thought], he would not pass through 
the path that he supposes or [overcome] falsehood, to compel him to 
ptove God, since through speculative thought or investigation, thete is 
a certain will that is compelled to know that the truth lies in what was 
revealed to him, without doubting God on the matter and warning from 
the suggestions of Satan. In abandoning speculative thought and Bahr) 
(philosophical investigation), there is security from that, since nothing 
was disclosed to [the person] that compels him to make distinctions, and 
nothing occurs to [the petson’s] mind to send him seeking. There is no 


Strength to find the truth except by God. 


Those who argue that speculative thought is necessary, say that in 
abandoning it there is inevitable perdition, because the necessity of 
speculative thought does not immediately follow upon the speculative 
thought that preceded it, but follows upon that by which Nagar 
(speculative thought) and Bahth (philosophical investigation) initially 
occutred; namely, the reason by which a person knows good and evil 
deeds, through which he knows his superiority over all other animals 


and by which the Lord who directs human affaits is known.” It also 


*© The Mutazalites and Maturidis hold the position that good and evil are based on 
reason. Hence, scripture metely confirms certain acts to be good and evil. On the othet 


hand, the ‘Ash ‘ari School argue that good and evil are thus solely based on Divine 


279 


occuts to his mind and intuition that he will be scattered [on the earth 
upon his death] and annihilated despite his enjoyment of life, that desire 
of perpetuity was fixed in him and that annihilation is a cause of great 
pain if he encounters it. Therefore, philosophical investigation is 
necessaty in order to understand what pains him and so that the most 
delightful and desirable of things are perpetuated for him. His reason 
does not allow him to risk his soul in putting things to the test without 
taking up that which informs him of what is harmful among them in 
order to fear it and the beneficial among them in order to procute it. [He 
does this] either by seeking to become acquainted with someone whose 
report is reliable and who can be sure not to betray him in his guidance 
- so that his orientation in all this may proceed from such petson’s 
opinion. Or he strives to examine for himself the little that shows him 
his outcome, out of that which secures his like from perdition due to its 
littleness. In both cases philosophical investigation is necessary. His 
benightedness, due to his innate desires and the refuge that his self sends 
him, to the hateful things that afflict him and the pain that resides in 
him, drive him to speculative thought about the state of his soul. [Where 
he asks], ‘How did he become this way?’ ‘Was he like this in pre-eternity 
ot did he become this way through some manner?’ He is not ftee from 
certain thoughts that prevent him from abandoning speculative thought 
into the states of his soul in order to know its principles and to know if 
it is this way by itself or through a being that designed it. He must know 
what is sound and what is harmful, and what ate its blessings and 
defences. In all of this, he is driven to speculative thought and the 


necessity of ptoof.'” God is the grantor of success. 


command. If God states that something is evil then it is evil, regardless of whether it 
makes sense or not. 
470 One can see that in this section al-Maturidi is vehemently advocating the importance 


of engaging in speculative thought. 


276 


Thus, he knows with certainty that the one who entices him to abandon 
speculative thought is Satan, since Satan’s work is to turn him away from 
the fruits of his reason and frighten him, since he would surely seize the 
Opportunity and attain the object of his desire.*”’ The evidence of this js 
that the use of reason is in considering things so as to understand 
principles and limits that are concealed, which then indicate that they are 
originated by a creator, which turns him away from the desites of the 
self, such that he realises that they are the work of Satan. However, 
[since] it is not possible for a thing from what is amongst them to neglect 
the benefits fixed within it, or to cease from its works definitively, but 
rather it is necessary for them to cease from their harmful aspects and 
to be used in beneficial ways, then reason and speculative thought 
through which benefits and harms ate known are more deserving of not 


being neglected. 


Thus, for a thoughtful speculator, the possibilities are three-fold, The 
first is that his speculative thought will lead him to the knowledge of him 
being created and to see that he has a Creator who will reward him for 
his good and punish him for his evil, which in consequence will inspire 
him to avoid that which displeases God and adopt that which pleases 
God which results in [the person] attaining nobility in this life and the 
Hereafter. The second is that it will lead him to deny all that has been 
mentioned and indulge himself in all kinds of pleasure, and therefore 
punishment awaits [him] in the Hereafter. The third is that it will lead to 
the realisation of the incomprehensibility of knowledge and its reality, 
which inspired [the person] to search, but then his heart will rest, and 
the pain which afflicts [the person] when he attempts to think will 
disappear. After all, if [a person] is fair-minded in thinking, he will know 


"| Hence according to al-Maturidi, not using reason is Satanic. 


277 


that this speculative thought is a gain for him in all of its aspects. There 
is no strength to find the truth esscept by God. 


If one were to argue that if it is permissible that God can command a 
person to do that which he does not understand using his reason, then 
why is it not permissible that God addresses a person in a way the person 
does not understand?’ Then it should be said to him that there is no 
difference between these two, and therefore it is not right to treat them 
in the way you have mentioned, because there is nothing that God would 
command fof a person] without God causing his reason to understand 
it, and similarly, there is nothing about which God would speak [to a 
petson], unless God caused the way through which [the person] can 
understand it. Therefore, [if a person] falls short of understanding the 
foci of the command, he is excused from it. However, the fundamental 
principle of that [understanding] is different. These ways are known 
through Nagar (speculative thinking) and kr (intellectual exercise). 
There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


If one says; in reality, there is no excuse fot a person that is more 
acceptable than him saying to God ‘T did not know that my act would 
displease you, I would have avoided it’, and ‘If I had known that my 
action would anger you, I would have refrained from what I did’ then 


why is this not acceptable with respect to the wisdom of God? 


That is correct in the relationship among people because of the lack of 
signs by way of which we may know [each othet’s] requirements. 
However, for God, He has given a person signs by way of which [the 
person] can know [His] command|s], and God has stirred [a person’s| 
mind to thought and reminded him of the various kinds of consequences 
[of his actions]. Thetefore [his disobedience] will only be because of 
abandoning speculative thought - and this is his own act. As such, on the 


Day of Judgement, he will be argued against with the very thing he 


278 


avoided. This is because through his [own] choice he tejected 


[speculative thought]. There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


[Shaykh] Abu Mansur argued that the basis for this is that knowledge of 
God and His command can only be attained by ‘Istadlal (inference). Gog 
made evident the basis for inference in the form of states of the soul 
through which [a person] moves. Therefore, we explained that necessity 
causes [a person] to deploy speculative reasoning and it impels him to 
reflect on the different states, members, benefits and harms that {the 
petson] sees - in the ignorance of which lies his perdition and in 
knowledge of which lies his salvation. In addition, a person’s salvation 
lies his knowledge that he [himself] did not arrange the states mentioned, 
which compels [the person] to know himself, and [to know] God, who 
made him. There zs no strength to find the truth except by God. 


279 


Muhammad ibn Shabib’s Argument for the Created Natute of 
Bodies 


Muhammad ibn Shabib argued that bodies are created, since the rest that 
they cannot avoid subsides in something else, and the motion [that they 
cannot avoid] is a journey, and both are originated, in that the place 
differs for one of them from its prior state. This proves that one of the 
two wete created. If this was designated matter [that was] in one of the 
two bodies, the correct claim is that it was created. Concerning the 
created natute of the other of the two, it may be known by the 
termination of the existence of the body in a position other than that in 
which you first see it. Through this evident necessity of locomotion in 
the body, we perceive motion that is not sensed, since we observe the 
difference in the state of the thing that is sensed. Therefore, it is through 
the dependence of the thing in the first place and its locomotion to the 
second place that we know that what is designated dependence in the 
first state becomes motion and transition in the second state, such that 
motion cannot be described as having either a connection to the body 
ot a difference, since that properly pertains to the body. Then this more 
properly pertains to Person A*” than to Person B, because the motion 
of Person B is imagined to be his absence from Person A, if he is found 


somewhete other than his first location. 


The one who objects to this [or] questions how can this be [by saying 
that] since [motion] is your act, and a person does not know how this 
act is performed beforehand, so why do you draw inferences about 


motion based on analogies? 


4721 have changed the names which ate mentioned in the text as an example from 


‘Amr’ and ‘Zayd’ to Person A and Person B. 


280 


It has been said [in response to the question] that to the contrary; he 
knows how to move forward and backwards, which is our action; he 
does not know their otherness from us, and it is from the otherness that 
we have drawn inferences. Do you not see that a sect denied [motion’s} 
otherness from a body based on the assertion of moving forward and 
moving backwards? Then, since the created natute of what wag 
mentioned has been proven, and the body does not precede it, then the 


body’s created nature is [also] proven. 


[Shaykh] Abu Mansur said that this expression is one that the 
proponents of monotheism endlessly boast about. However, they 
expanded the question and the answer, so I mentioned this in allusion 


to what was said without full exposition. 


Then the objection was raised that motion [itself] is a [kind of] body. 
[Muhammad ibn Shabib] said that the one who argues for the pre- 
eternity of bodies does not ask about it, because [motion] occurs by 
sense. He claimed it is tmpossible for a [moving] body to exist in the first 
place without interpenetration, and interpenetration entails another 
motion to change location, and so, therefore, motion is not a body. If it 
makes the second [body to move then] interpenetrating this would 
require the bodies to interpenetrate without end. Furthermore, [if all of] 
this were possible then [it would also be possible for] the Universe to be 
interpenetrate inside an ege. [Muhammad ibn Shabib] made this 
response whilst in a meeting [with his opponents]. This is entirely drawn 
out and superfluous, and if Ibn Shabib were just, he would have found 
[an argument] to preclude his proof, which would have been as follows; 
‘in its first state, a body is neither moving nor at rest.’ So [this point] 
divested it of what he mentioned, and this entails precedence over what 


he described. However, if one argues for the pre-eternity of [bodies], this 


does not prove their initial state, since this result involves arguing for 


281 


their created nature, so what was described constrained [God]. God s the 


grantor of SUCCESS. 


[Muhammad ibn Shabib] inferred the fact that the [being at] rest of a 
body is something other than a body, based on [what is understood 
when it is] said, ‘He is in such and such a house.’ If there were nothing 
other than the body and the house, there would not be a body that is 
inside something [which is not the house], and [we know] that the house 


exists, and [the house] is not described as a being in itself. 


[Shaykh] Aba Man$ir said that this is an evident matter that no one 
questions, since its rest becomes evanescent once it moves without 
corporeality vanishing from it, so it is proven that it 1s something other 
[than this}. 


Then [Muhammad ibn Shabib] responded to the one said that “perhaps 
its rest is with it wherever it is,’ [by saying] that since it could be said that 
the duration of its rest in a place increases or decreases, it is proven that 
there is something other than the initial rest. Like the formet, this is not 
questioned, and the response to it is as we have explained.*” To God, we 


turn for avd. 


Then he expanded on this type [of argument] and left it where there is 
no advantage in it. In addition, {Muhammad ibn Shabib] said that a proof 
of the otherness of ‘rest? and ‘motion’ is that it is possible for each thing 


to exist in place of the other, and that both are other things. This 


473 Al-Maturidi is explaining the view of Muhammad Ibn Shabib concerning ‘accidents’, 
‘bodies’ and ‘Prime Matter’. Muhammad Ibn Shabib is attempting to prove that bodies 
and accidents are not the same and he demonstrates this by providing a number of 
proofs, such as motion being an accident rather than a body. But al-Maturidi argues 
that Muhammad ibn Shabib doesn’t believe this to always be the case, because in its 
‘first state’ (when it was Prime Matter) the thing was neither an accident nor a body and 


they were one and the same. 


282 


invalidates that argument of many Mufazilites when they argue for 
‘making [something] persist’ without ‘persistence.“ There is no strength to 


Jind the truth except by God. 


Furthermore, [in response] to those who objected that bodies are never 
devoid of what you mentioned, he responded that it is not possible, since 
the condition of pre-eternity is only proven for each of them thtough 
the existence of the other. This entails the negation of [their] existence. 
He drew inferences based on what was pteviously mentioned about 
entering a house. Furthermore, he also argued that two birds flying in 
one direction at an equal level a cubit’s length apart cannot do so without 
a limit to their priority, since removing the limit requires that they come 
together at the same level, when there had been a rivalty for 


precedence.*” 


[Muhammad ibn Shabib] argued that the opposite of things such as 
heaviness and lightness, heat and cold etc. is proven, and it is proven 
that a thing cannot derive from another thing infinitely without 
beginning. In addition, mutual repulsion is the nature of opposites, 
which entails their distance from each other. In particular, since the 
proponents of this argument made two differing things mix together 
when they were opposites, it is not possible for them to amalgamate as 
mentioned. Therefore, their difference is by nature, and if it were 
possible for them to deviate from the nature mentioned, then it would 
be possible for the thing that was made cool to be hot and the thing that 


was made hot to be cool. If that were possible, then their annihilation 


“4 Here most likely al-Maturidi refers to the issue of Baga (perpetuity) and the belief 
of some Mutazalites that the end of this Universe will be followed by another Universe 
that will eternally be made to persist. 

"® Meaning when two equal bodies are travelling in the same direction at the same 
speed then their distance from one another will remain the same unless something 


causes the distance to be reduced, such as the second body travelling faster. 


283 


would be possible in that they could deviate from perpetuity. If this 
[argument] is void, then it proves the monotheists’ argument for a 
Knowing Designer who put things in order. There is no strength to find the 
truth except by God. 


[Shaykh] Aba ManSur said that we say’”° that the claim that there is more 
than one fgod] is not free from the possibility that either each one of 
them possesses the power to annihilate the other, or that one possesses 
this power specifically. In either case, the former case ot the latter, both 
are afflicted by incapability, due to the benightedness of planning 
destruction by overcoming [the other], [even] if it is not by force. If the 
one was capable, what is other than it would be negated, since it does 
not allow [anyone] to oppose the one in its power or contest its lordship 
and it has the power to discharge fanyone from its] kingdom. 
Furthermore, it is more proper for an incapable and benighted being to 
be a servant without it being a Sovereign Lord. There is no strength to find 


the truth except by God. 


This invalidates the beliefs of the proponents of Light and Darkness, 
because Light is ignorant of where it falls in the confines of the other, 
and Darkness of when it is prevented from its work on the other, {a 
work that| is evil, such that their parts spread and their states scatter until 
each one is unable to manifest its dominion and take control of what 


belongs to it. God’s Divinity does allow for such ascription. 


Then there is the teaching of the Dualists that each of the [gods is 
responsible] for one aspect [meaning the Light and Darkness] and [these 
gods] ate [physically] above all aspects. If elevation is proof of pre- 


eternity, there must have been origination with respect to extent, even if 


476 Once again, I have removed the supplication that is found mid-paragraph and left 
the supplication at the end of the paragraph. The temoved supplication is the same 
that is found throughout the book ‘God és the grantor of success’. 


284 


there was not origination in everything. Moreover, if Light is not able to 
liberate its bounded part from its enemy in that unbounded part, and 
those parts are not able to preserve that part from them before they fal] 
into theit confines, how can [Light] escape, if it wishes, from the 
confines of Darkness after it falls into them? In regard to those who 
make all senses and knowledge Light and not Darkness, as well as [that 
the Light is] everything that befits God, He is theteby a God who is blind 
and cannot see, incapable and cannot act, weak and cannot exert 
strength, and evil by nature and not by force. So we ask God to protect 
us from turning away from His path and being affected by the 
propagation of Dualism since there is no strength to find the truth 


except by God. 


Furthermore, either of two things must be alone in a location if it is q 
body or an accident. If it is an accident, then its contradiction requites 
its destruction, and if it is a body, then the place of either of them with 
regards to its essence does not subsist in the opposite of its state, such 
as the liquescent on dry land for when] the nocturnal is removed from 
sight during the day. In addition, if it is not of its essence, then Good 
could associate with Evil and Evil with Good, which violates the 
position they have adopted with respect to number. There is no strength to 
Jind the truth except by God. 


285 


Refutation of the Teachings of the Dahriya (Materialists) 


[Shaykh] Abu Manégur said that we have mentioned the teachings of the 
Dabriya according to Ibn Shabib and others so that the teachings of their 
school are clear.’ Clarifying the dogmas of their school is part of 
proving their defectiveness, once it is known that they agree on the pre- 
eternity of the Universe’s Prime Matter, but then they disagree on the 


pte-eternity or origination of [the Universe’s] making. 


The naturalists claim that there are four [natures, namely,] Hot, Cold, 
Wet and Dry, and the Universe differed through the differing mixture 
of each and was balanced by their equal mixture.” In this manner, the 
rotation of the Sun, Moon and stats continues as is seen, and there is no 
beginning for things. They called their movements accidents, and gave, 
as an example for their falsehood, dyes such as white, red, black and 
ereen; that their colours differ when mixed in large amounts or little 
amounts, ot thin consistencies or thick consistencies, not that [according 
to them] there is an accident of colour, even if [the colour] perhaps turns 
out in [such] a way that [even] an expert of these colours may not be 
[aware of| its results; and according to their position it is the same case 


for natures.*” 


477 What makes this chapter different from the previous chapter is that al-Maturidi is 
relaying the position of Naturalists according to Muhammad ibn Shabib. 

478 Al-Maturidi is referring to the concept of the four temperaments that were used in 
Greek and Chinese medicine and later by Avicenna, namely; hot, cold, wet and dry and 
that all things in the Universe consist of the balance of these basic elements. They then 
apply these to other aspects such as the Seasons of the year and the makeup of one’s 
characteristics. 

479 He is explaining that the Naturalists believe that all things in the Universe come 
about as a result of the mixture of the Four Natures. They don’t believe in the concept 


of ‘accidents’, even though they then try to explain motion is an accident. Avicenna 


286 


[Shaykh] Abu Mansur said that whoever considers this argument with 
the example they cited, finds that it supports the claims of monotheists, 
because dyes do not mix by themselves. If they [do] mix by themselves, 
they turn out a repugnant colour, such as is considered corruption of the 
dyes according to reason. But if a wise, knowing being that knows the 
outcome of that mixture mixes them, they tutn out dexterous and 
beautiful. Whereas the Universe turned out dexterous, it is proven that 
through which the Universe exists is a knowing, wise being that knows 
the outcomes of things and brought them forth in this way. This results 
in the defectiveness of the argument that those natures or Prime Matter 
ot whatever names they called it became in such a way that the Univetse 
is [spontaneously], and therefore signifies that the one who originated 
them is a wise designer and that it must have been Creatio ex Nihil, 
Whereas for colours each one is not described as a thing [which comes] 
out of what they mentioned in terms of Hot and Cold, and since among 
things there may be one in which one colour predominates when it is 
hot, and another predominates when it is cold, then it proves that 
colouts are nothing like what they have mentioned, which requires other 


than what they have argued. God is the grantor of success. 


Furthermore, in the same vein, we find the flavours in them are different, 
so that it is of one colour and one nature and turns out as one type of 
flavour, such as saltiness, sourness, bitterness or a material that does not 
tend to any of that. It is proven that this was by the design of the One 
who is capable of making everything as He wills without {any] reasons. 


There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


Howevet, it is necessary that these natures ate either corporeal 


substances or accidents. If they are corporeal substances, they attain the 


later developed the concept of the Four Humours/ temperaments to include motion, 


and therefore it wasn’t an ‘accident’ in that scheme. 


237 


differences mentioned through the accidents that arise in them, namely, 
amalgamation and separation, and if it were not for these two, every 
corporeal substance would be scattered. The differences of corporeal 
substances with the amalgamation of [properties] within them indicates 
that accidents prevail in them and cause them to transform from state 
to state. [Since] the accidents on their own do not subsist in or breach 
things, it is proven that this operation was worked in them through one 
who knows that they operate in such a way. In addition, no one could 
know this except for the one who is able to make those substances 
suitable to bear such accidents, and it is impossible to have such 
knowledge except for the one who makes them such. This results in the 
claim that there is a capable, knowing One for whom nothing is hidden 
and for whom it is not difficult to create what He wants. On the other 
hand, if they are accidents, it is impossible for them to exist and subside 
in themselves, so it is necessary to claim that there is a pre-eternal 
Creator who creates what is in it and through whom it enters into the 
bounds of existence. However, the created nature of accidents contains 


no mutual contradiction. There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


Furthermore, it is known that such natures are opposite, and the reality 
of being opposites is mutual repulsion, which results in separation, and 
separation leads to scattering and mutual annihilation. It is not possible 
for the foundations of things to exist for themselves and subside in 
themselves with the contradiction that I have mentioned. It is proven 
that if it were possible, it would be through some check on this mutual 
repulsion that leads to scattering, which is something amalgamating 
them after separation, something subjugating them, and since [it is| 
through amalgamation [that] the Universe exists, this proves that [the 
Universe] is originated. This means that the argument for ‘natures’ is 
defective, because the emergence of one thing from another thing is not 


so improbable based on reason as is the subsisting of a thing with its 


. 


288 


opposite, which negates it. Due to the improbability of this for their 
[application of] reason, they reached the position that they stated. Ang 
if in their position they were bound by [the result], they saw the 


defectiveness of their claim and had no excuse. God és the protector. 


Another sect argues a similar case, but they claimed that categories 
[natures] do not have a known number, and ail of them argued for the 
pre-cternity of things in their entirety, from the North and the South, 
and the West and the South, and from above and below. 


A sect of Astrologers claimed that the stars infinitely direct the state of 
the world, that they are connected to it and its fortunes derive from 
them, and [fortune] differs with the different stars it is connected to, like 
the tool of a brocade maker through threads joined to the silk with the 
top of the tool, so that [the threads] appear and disappear by raising and 
lowering the wood. In the same manner, the form of the stars’ 
relationship to the world changes with the changing motion of the stars, 
and in their variation and conjunction lies fortune and misfortune. *° 
They ate always moving, and from each motion something occurs that 
is different from what occurs and is produced due to another motion. 
In the same way that they talk about the chicken and the egg, they say 


that the motions of the stars are like the brocade that I mentioned. 


They claimed that bodies are pre-eternal and are not accidents, and 
motions are accidents that come into existence without limit. They made 
the condition of the whole Universe dependent on the amalgamation 
and divergence of the stars and orbits, so just as with [bodies], they say 


that the stars are pre-eternal. God ts the grantor of success. 


“8 Astrologers hold the opinion that stars and planets affect people, so that each 
person has heavenly bodies that affect them. For example, a person born in July is 


affected by the Sun, meaning it affects their personality and character. It was an idea 


that was later held by Avicenna. 


qq“, 7 » 


oa 


e 


289 


[Shaykh] Abi Manégur said that in terms of the argument for motions 
without end, we have explained above that this is defective. There is no 
doubt that a motion that ended is an end to the preceding motions, so 
that nothing of what preceded it continues afterwards. If it is proven 
that there is an end to the motion through annihilation and termination, 
it is not possible for the termination to come to an end because the 
beginning does not come to an end. Therefore, this proves that thete is 


a beginning. 


Furthermore, we see based on observation that all corporeal substances 
are of differing dimensions. It is not possible for them to be in this way 
as opposed to another way, except that they are so, because of the least 
difference [between them] which appears to be most. It is established 
from this that [these substances] started from the smallest and then 
gained magnitude and density after not having them. The fineness of 
their magnitude and density at the time of their coming into existence 
after non-existence was not because of anything that preceded them. 
This is because it is necessary that all of them in the preceding state 
would be equal, but in fact, the actual difference has been established. 
Therefore, this proves that which precedes them is their coming into 
existence after non-existence, and this is exactly what is meant [by the 


Universe being originated]. 


Furthermore, if [the] circular motion [of bodies] were to be made 
straight from one direction, [then] some of them would succeed others, 
and the existence of some [would] entail the annihilation of others. As 


such, if motions were necessarily pre-eternal, them ceasing to exist 


481 Here, he is once again arguing against the doctrine of those who believe that the 
Universe came from Prime Matter: if everything proceeded from Prime Matter, then 
all those things would be the same. ‘The fact that we observe that there are differences, 


large or small, means that they must have been originated in this way. 


290 


would also be [pre-eternal]. This is a contradiction, because existence 
and annihilation cannot be together in the same state - which means that 
they cannot be together in any state. This proves that it is necessary that 


they have a beginning.*” 


Furthermore, based on observation, if one comes to rest or slows down, 
the other would take the lead. Also, since they are moving in a Straight 
line, it is impossible that the starting point of one of them is not the 
starting point of the other, or that one of them is faster than the other. 
This means that the elimination of the distance between them results in 
the limits [of distance] being nullified. This nullification results in the 
rejection of [what is] perceived [in terms of the pre-eternity of the 
Universe]. This is because the beginning [of things in motion] has been 
established. This is also applied to [things that are in] circular motion. 


God ts the grantor of success. 


This negates [the belief of] all those who argue for the pre-eternity of 
substances [and] that [they] did not emerge from accidents. The same 
argument addresses the teachings of Naturalists. bere is no strength to find 
the truth except by God. 


Then it is said to both these sects: ‘How did you know that it is this way?’ 


They claimed an authoritative transmission that was contested by the 


#2 As Al-Maturidi has explained previously, the fact that a body contains accidents 
such as motion and rest that exist in it only when the one of these ceases to exist le 
it doesn’t possess the accidents of ‘motion’ and ‘rest’ simultaneously) means that its 
existence is not pre-eternal, as this would be a contradiction. 

*° Al-Matutidi claims that those who believe that the Universe emerged from Prime 
Matter argue that this Prime Matter is not a substance and not is it an accident. Maturidi 
argues that the process of something emerging involves some form of motion and an 
increase in the quantity of the Universe after it emerges from the Prime Matter (began 
accident), but then they also argue that the Universe did not emerge as a result of 
accidents, which is a clear contradiction. 

** The supplication was moved to the end of the paragraph. 


291 


transmission that has been received from those who have proofs of 
truthfulness, who are mote deserving of being believed and are 
Prophets. If they claim that observations and the senses gave [credence] 
to the lie that they know through themselves, they [still] do not mention 
their [own] pre-eternity nor did they witness the direction of the stars 
and natures. If they go back to inferring what they inspected, there is 
nothing in what they inspected that indicates that the stars provide 
direction or that natures are pre-cternal and generate the Universe 
through their mixing, but rather if the argument of the two sects were 
reversed, it would be closer to [the position of] existence [after non- 
existence] and it is more correct in inference. In terms of ‘Nature’, it 1s 
the case that much disturbance and motion generate heat in the 
disturbed, moving body, and much rest and stability generates moisture, 
such that ‘natures’ are [merely] accidents [from] among the states of the 
Universe, rather than the Universe being generated from them, and this 
is closet to the truth of the senses. Then it is said to them that the 
disturbance of the Celestial Sphere and the motion and fluctuation of 
the stars in states of amalgamation and separation occurs through the 
fluctuating states of the substances of the Planets, and the trees, seas and 
waters they contain, and the essence of separation, whose vapours rise 
ot which is by its essence like fire, and the teal substance, through which 
the states of the stars fluctuate and so on. This is more correct, since it 
is closet to the observation of the eye and more likely to be proof of the 


unseen." There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


Then they argued with respect to what the Naturalists posited; that the 


Creator’s act proceeded dexterously and proficiently due to the wisdom 


485 Even though al-Maturidi is relaying the position of Muhammad ibn Shabib in 
relation to the viewpoint of the Naturalists, a significant number of the arguments 


presented in this chapter have been relayed previously. 


292 


and power He possesses, and if it were not for that, what I mentioned 
would not be possible. Due to the foregoing design, God acted perfectly 
in this, and the situation of the stars is similar. If it were as the 
[Astrologers] claim, there would be the same design of a knowing, wise 
being who created them on this basis. If they had this capacity for design, 
it would not be possible for them to tire themselves and be pained 
through their course and constant motions, since such is the state of 
living beings in the present Universe. Such states tire them and pain 


them. 


On the other hand, if [the direction of the Universe] was through 
inanimate bodies, it would be through directing other things in the 
mannet of the brocade, as was mentioned. However, if it is known that 
God was abie to do this without tiring Himself through His free will, it 
would be known that all of this is through the design of a wise, self- 
sufficient being who uses all that which was mentioned. There is no strength 


to find the truth except by Goa. 


Furthermore, if it was possible to say about our Universe that it was due 
to the design of the one that has been mentioned - a being such as Him 
- then it is possible that it can be said that [a person] was designed by a 
being that is higher than him, and so on ad infinitum. This results in the 
nullification of their argument that the stars direct the Universe. Or the 
Universe does eventually teach an end, which invalidates their claim that 
things are without end. It requires arguing for the One to whom the 
design of all things reverts, and God is the one who knows the outcome 
of affairs, and who pte-ordains every end that is attained. However, in 


theit argument, they acknowledged that they do not [in fact] have an 


*86 Here al-Maturidi is attempting to argue that if you posit that something was 
designed by something created and that in turn was designed by something else that is 


created, then you can continue this argument Ad infinitum. 


293 


atgument, because they claimed that they do not have a choice but rather 
they are compelled, as they say, as their opponents are likewise in their 
denials. Such mutual denial and contradiction derive from the designer, 
and the one whose design is such is a corrupter, and thus it may be said 
that he did not speak about himself. There are two aspects to this. One 
aspect is that their argument fails and only the argument of the 
monotheists remains. The other aspect is to deny the testimony of the 
eyes and the free will that every rational being knows. And [it is a flaw 
to] deny the testimony of the eyes that his senses are surrounded by and 
[instead] claim [the truth of the] unseen thing that his senses do not 
apprehend in order to deny that which his senses grasp. All praise 1s to 
God who provides sufficient help and true separation from evil. And 


Assistance is through God. 


If the states were compelled, then no one would give up food and drink 
out of fear, and they would not go towards them out of appetite and the 
delights that are found within them. But all this is found in things that 
ate subject to natures, to the extent that in large beings there is 
something less of this than in small beings. If this were by nature or the 


conjunction of the stars, then this would consistently apply to all.’ 


Furthermore, the emergence of acts of divergent states is impossible 
from something with a nature, such as cooling and heating, ot good and 
evil, since it is proven that the foundation of a thing is not from a thing 
with a [blind] nature, but through a wise, knowing being who made 


everything this way through creation and existence. If acts were by 


487 This is the same point that al-Maturidi argued earlier in the book; that if nature 
compels one to act then everyone would eat the same quantity of food, desire the same 
quantity and need the same quantity. The fact that this is not the case means that there 
must be a being that is the real cause for everything that causes variances in all aspects 
of life. This argument requires developing further because in its original form it lacks 


strength, 


294 


compulsion, the doer could not refrain from them - like someone 
pushed by the nape of his neck, or pushed off the roof of a house, of 
tied by a rope. There zs no strength to find the truth except by God. 


It is the case that in existence that a paralysed [person] knows that he 
cannot refrain from what he does, and likewise for the blind man and al] 
those with an afflicted organ. [The person] also knows that the removal 
of such afflictions enables the opposite of such states. This proves that 
the claim of [nature] necessitating on the whole is false.” 

Once sect said that the Prime Matter of the Universe was pre-eternal 
and called it Hayala"”, and [said] that it had force and perpetually had 
the following attributes; that it has no length, no breadth, no depth, no 
weight, no extension, no colour, no taste, no smell, no smoothness, no 
roughness, no heat, no cold, no moisture, no motion, no rest and no 
accidents in its original state. It was for this reason that it was called 
“Hayula’. Hayala was transformed into force by nature and not by choice, 
and so these accidents came into being, and they called it ‘substance’, 
meaning that it is one substance, which is called the substance of the 
Universe. Meanwhile, separation and amalgamation came about through 
accidents, and accidents ate not described by difference and 
amalgamation, because they only exist through something other than 
themselves. An accident does not subsist in an accident, but [instead] in 
a substance, and it is through [the accident] that the substance differs 


and amalgamates. 


488 Al-Maturidi is attempting to argue that if nature compels everything, then nature 
would ensure that there are no afflictions in what it creates, because nature would not 
create something for a purpose such as being tested by God, but instead nature would 
create all things naturally, which would mean creating something without deficiencies. 
489 As explained in a previous footnote Al-Maturidi categorises Aristotle as As-Adb al- 
Hayula - people who hold the position that the entire Universe came from Prime Matter 
(Hayula). 


295 


The Categories of Aristotle 


Aristotle, who is the author of this statement in his book called ‘Mantq’ 
(Logic)*”’, mentions ten categories. (1) The category of Substance; like 
‘man’ i.e. what is called substance [essence]; (2) The category of Place; 
like saying ‘where’; (3) [the category] of Quality; like you saying ‘how’; 
(4) [the category of] Time; ‘when’; (5) Quantity; [meaning] “how much’; 
(6) [the category of] Relation, in which mentioning one thing involves 
another as well, like father/son, slave/master, companion, and the like; 
(7) [the category of| Possession; like you saying ‘nobility’ and “one who 
has family’ and the like - they call it the category of ‘Possession’; (8) [the 
category of] State or Position; such as standing and sitting; (9) [the 
category of| Action; like you saying ‘he ate’ and the like; (10) Being 
‘Acted upon’; like you saying ‘eaten’. No one is able to mention anything 
that goes beyond this totality. They claimed that force is ignorant and 


acts by [its innate] nature and that the Hayzla does not need accidents. 


[Shaykh] Aba Man§ir said that whoever contemplates theit conclusions 
knows that they proposed them because they were ignorant of the 
blessings of God and wete blind to the path of guidance and went astray. 
Then the confusion of error impelled them to heed a conception that 
reason does not accept, and imagination does not summon. God zs the one 


who supports. 


If this was not the case, then what is it that they were presenting [in 
terms of] the beginning of the Universe being what was said? ‘Then the 
Prime [Matter] that was described contains [the Universe] as [they have] 


mentioned, and its operation that was characterised is that the substance 


490 The Categories are mentioned in Aristotle’s ‘Ozganon’, which is a collection of 


Aristotle’s six works on logic. 


296 , 


of the Universe does not contain evidence [of this], and transmission 
[from people] does not contain the possibility [of this]. However, they 
accepted the argument of the monotheists in [their] description of God 
in that they described Hayz/a [in the same manner]. However, they did 
not consider what that argument binds them to, since they went back 
and negated what they had affirmed, because they made it {so] that 
[Prime Matter], for which [according to them} it is not possible to 
undergo accidents, is removed from the meaning of ‘substance’, [which 
then means that we have] substance by substance by substance 4d 
Infinitum. Then it became a sign with respect to that which did not remain 


of its initial state. What remained of the [Prime Matter] is that the 


) Universe [emetged from it], so that it was [initially] pre-etetnal and [then] 
created [when it became the Universe], and this Universe was only 

| {composed of] substances and accidents, and anything [ftom the Prime 
Matter] that did not have the description of [substance and accident] 
became evanescent. This entails the annihilation of the Universe in itself, 
and the impossibility of the pre-eternal in itself bearing accidents that 
subjugated it and caused its annihilation, which [anyway] means that it 
does not subside in itself [in the first place]. This results in the claim that 
the whole Universe is originated, and the magnitude of this claim drove 
them to that conception, since everything that is received [by the senses] 
is either accident or substance, and was not the foundation Jof the 


Universe]. 


Then [Aristotle’s own] saying is void if [Aristotle] called himself wise, 
since he forces others to deviate ftom his opinion and follow his whim, 
after he says that the Prime [Matter] that [the Universe] is from was 
| ignorant and foolish, and that accidents are other things generated by a 


weak force that has no wisdom or knowledge in it, which is one of its 


297 


members without which nothing is attained.‘ So from where did it 
attain priority over it? If this were possible, without a Prime [Matter] 
through which it becomes this way, then let him say that the whole 
Universe is like what he says of himself. Then the force that transformed 
the Hayzla necessarily has dominion over that through which it 
transformed it, So let him say of God that He cteated Hayala or what 
God wished in a way that accepts transformation and through which 
God engages in composition. Then let [Aristotle] call what he wishes the 
annihilation of what God transformed. Therefore, the foundation 
through which the Universe exists and is destroyed is nullified, since it 
is impossible for a being subsiding in itself to be destroyed so that 
through his destruction is the transformation and subsiding of 


something else. 


Moreover, Haya involves the destruction of [Prime Matter], so that it 
becomes without the force of transformation, which invalidates the 
Universe and its transformation from state to state constantly. Its 
existence indicates the defectiveness of this Prime [Matter]. 
Furthermore, in the present Universe, there is nothing that becomes 
suitable for a thing that was not suitable for it before except that a wise 
being makes it that way. So it is proven that if the beginning of the 
Universe was suitable, that it is possible that the existence of these 
substances anid accidents likewise derives from it, and each of them was 


made in this way. 


Further, since this force transformed it by nature, it does not depart from 
it, so why is it that it was devoid of its operation in pte-eternity, when 
something with a nature does not cease its operation in the present 


Universe? The accidents that were originated must have either been in 


491 Here al-Maturidi is arguing that Aristotle holds the opinion that the Universe was 


generated from Prime Matter naturally, without any choice from this Prime Matter. 


298 


the Hayula, which would invalidate his statement that Hayala was devoid 
of [accidents] until they came into existence, or they did not exist and 
then came into existence from nothing, since he described the force jn 
the same way that he described the Hay#/a, and it did not have accidents, 
so it is proven that they also are from nothing. This point compelled 


them to make the claim that they did, which is invalid, thanks be to God, 


However, he made it possible to contradict them in everything they said 
about force [and] that this [Universe] is made from Hayzla by force. It ig 
not free [from being affected by] something other than Haysla such that 
there would be two [of them co-existing]. [Aristotle] claimed that ‘how 
much’ falls within the category of number, so there was no origination, 
and it was tequited to be here, or it is Hlayala, and this invalidates 
[Aristotle’s] claim that it is with Hayzla, or it is what Haysila transformed 
[into], as if it transformed itself and not Haydlz. Furthermore, [Aristotle] 
claimed that such accidents emerged in Hay#/a and set it into motion and 
rest, raised it and lowered it, without there being another thing by which 
it was moving, resting, rising or lowering. And there are defective 
examples of what it originated from, and it is in its fundamental essence 


the most defective. 


Muhammad ibn Shabib claimed that [Aristotle] called force ‘motion’. In 
his natration, it cannot be described by that with which it is 
impermissible to describe Hayzla, and he mentioned that [Aristotle] 
retracted something concerning Hayzla. So I do not know whether one 
ot the other is correct. However, he called force ‘motion’ and force is in 
Hayala. Thus his claim that Hayd/a is not described using ‘motion’ is 
invalid, since he [did indeed] describe it that way. Then [force] must 
necessarily be connected with or separate from [Hayala], and whichever 


of the two he says, involves an assertion of being corporeal and 


299 


contingent, since being between and contiguity are different to that 


which is [completely] connected or separate. 


Then they say, as do the Astrologers, that corporeal substances came 
into being from motions of the Prime Matter. It is known that corporeal 
substances exist from above, below and evety side, despite the 
impossibility of such movements, so it is proven that this is void. In this 
issue, al-Nazzam contradicted them, [saying] that if force's 
transformation of Hayd#la was what caused accidents to come into being, 
whereupon they differed, such as colour, taste, heat, texture, and so on, 
then does all this come into existence at the same time and by a motion, 
or is it ftom one side? It is [then said by them that] it is from multiple 
sides. [Such as in the of case Aristotle who] claimed that the maximum 
numbet of such sides is six and more than twelve such accidents may 
come into being, which proves that this is not in order for the 
transformation [because of the] force. However, the fact that the 
transformation is [only] from one side whilst the accidents are [still] 
multiple [which is contrary to their claim], proves that this is not as he 


has mentioned. 


Muhammad ibn Shabib objected to them that before the accidents come 
into being, Hay#/a does not have length, and the accidents do not have 
length, so how do they acquite length once they exist? The same goes 
fot breadth. If this were possible, then it would be possible to join that 
which is devoid of something with that which possesses it, so that a lack 
of it would become like non-blackness and blackness, and likewise for 


all attributes. 


He adduced lime and arsenic in response, of which each separately does 
not burn, but which burn when they are combined. Each of them 
separately could not be further from causing burns, but one of them 


contains that which prevents burning, while the other contains that 


300 


the case that it does not contain [something that] burns or that both were 


which prevents the prevention from preventing, and so it burns. It is not 


this way. In your view, the situation of accidents is as we have 


Hy) mentioned, and it is impossible for the preventive factor to exist within 
3 


. | if it was long or black, and it is the same case with Hayula, so therefore 
1 they differed. 


[Shaykh] Abu Mansur said that according to our position, the basis of 
this and in what was said concerning the stars and natures, is that 


authotitative transmission must inevitably be referred to on this - and 


| concerning these things the transmission of the monotheists is more . 
teliable, because it is accompanied by proofs of truthfulness. Or 
inferences must be drawn from the seen reality concerning the unseen 
i | reality.“ If that is his approach, that which exists through it must have 
a) | this description, since the existent being is in a certain state and through 
its being it is considered, so this invalidates their claim that the Universe 
| comes into existence and is moved by the stars and the transformation 
| of Hayula by force, and Haydla and force ate all [there is]. And if this is 
the case, it is by considering that qualities in existence indicate it and that 
the Prime [Matter] and anything with a natute does not change from its 
condition to the opposite without another being, either wise or foolish, 
| working the change, although it is clear both situations have 
consequences. It is the same way with the Prime [Mattet] to which they 
attributed this situation, [namely] that it does not change to other than 
the state whose consequences are suitable except by a wise being, since 
it is in this manner. This invalidates their Prime Matter and proves that 


the Prime Matter bears the accidents it bears by something else making 


“° Once again, he is referring to message from the Prophets being a reliable 


transmission. 


301 


it this way, which means that it is originated by a wise Creator.*” God is 


the grantor of success. 


Furthermore, it is known concerning [a thing] whose nature is to burn 
that it only burns that which is able to receive burns by nature, and 
likewise in the case of {something] turning black [due to this burning}, 
and likewise for all states and substances. Then it is not in the nature of 
something that lifts to transform into the thing that is lifted by nature, 
and it is not in the nature of a thing which burns to [itself] turn into 
something that burns. For whoever seeks that in the present Universe, 
nothing less is prepared for [the person] other than knowledge of 
existence and combination between the two. Thus, on this basis is the 
situation of the unseen reality. Therefore, that which they strove to 
prove is void, which is the meaning of their stance. God és the grantor of 


SHECESS. 


If all the foundations [of the Universe] that they mentioned are 
inanimate objects that have no direction and operate by [innate or blind] 
nature and not free will, it would not be possible for the things whose 
existence derives from them to [then] be knowing, hearing, secing, 
capable, living and mortal, and [it would not be possible] for {the 
Universe] to have limits [or for it to be] outside of [being affected by] 
limits. This proves that all of it is through a knowing Creator. There is no 
strength to find the truth except by God. 


493 Al-Maturidi argues that even if one believes that the origination of the Universe is 
from Prime Matter, because it is affected by accidents, then this Prime Matter itself 


must have been originated by a Creator, 


302 


Refutation of the Sumaniya’s Thesis that the World is Without 
Beginning and Incessantly Sinks Downward: Al-Nazzam’s 


Arguments with a Commentary by Al-Maturidi 


The Samantya,™ a sect of the Dahriya, who agree with them that things 
were ofiginated in pre-eternity, said that the Earth incessantly sinks 
downward because of what is above it [that causes it to sink]. ALNazzam 
asked them about this, and they adduced it [is due to its] weight, since 4 
heavy thing cannot resist falling and does not rise in the air. [Al-Nazzam] 
objected by pointing to the speed at which a stone falls by its weight if 
it is dropped with a feather, [which would] mean that the Earth was 
heavier than both of them and [yet] they caught up to it. Then he 
objected to them by pointing to the fact that they have seen the wind 
catry something and lift it high without [any specific] directions. ‘So what 
would you say if [the wind] was beneath the Earth and [the Earth] was 
cartied by its force? How do you ascertain that things fall without rising 
of moving up, when you have observed something like the above 


happen?’ At this point, the argument relayed was cut off. 


If this is the result of the debate, then it is a mockery. Instead, since the 
sky has been in one state since we have been observing it and we have 
observed the Earth to have weight, and that each of its parts, if they were 
dropped from the highest conceivable point, would catch up with the 
Earth, This indicates that the Earth settles in one state, as does the sky, 
and they are both heavy by nature and have no tendency to float, proving 
that their stability is through a powerful, wise being, and that He created 


them in such a way that the [the mind] cannot grasp, and reason cannot 


4 Sumaniya wete a sect of materialists who held the view that the Universe is pre- 


eternal. 


303 


attain. This tesults in the invalidation of the pre-eternity [of the 
Universe] and its derivations. Their debate was absurd, since their 
method was to seek to illuminate hidden matters and to dwell on the 
limits of wisdom.* They claimed that the Universe was in its state of 
difference and conjunction and that the difference of substances and 
accidents subsists by nature and is generated by the motions of things or 
admixed with that which has no direction or knowledge and is not 
capable of wisdom. Human beings are among these, so in theit view, it 
is impossible for there to be knowledge or wisdom, except if it is proven 
that something other than that ftom which the Universe detives has 
[these qualities]. The deviation of the highest substance of the Universe 
[i.e. humans} from the nature of the Universe is evidence that [a person] 
is as God wished to create him. There is no strength to find the truth except by 
God. 


495 Al-Maturidi is refuting the point of the Swmaniya that the Universe is incessantly 
sinking downwards. He didn’t know about the laws of gravity, but it was known that 
if you drop an object it will travel downwards until it hits the surface. He is saying that 
this always happens, and there is no instance of an object being dropped and due to 
the Earth sinking downwards it does not reach the surface - although what was 
ovetlooked by al-Matutidt was that the object would also hit the surface if the object 
was travelling faster than the speed at which the Harth was sinking. 


304 


Against the Sophists: Ibn Shabib’s Argument with a 
Commentary by Al-Maturidi 


[Shaykh] Abu Mansur explained that the Sophists argued that when we 
find that a person knows something which then turns out to be false, 
and he finds pleasures that later pass away, and the vermin of land die at 
sea and vermin of sea die on the land, and that bats see at night and are 
blind during the day — [all] this proves that there is no use in knowledge, 
and rather there is only belief and nothing else, and that anything else 
[other than this] differs [in terms of it being teal knowledge]. 


[Muhammad] Ibn Shabib raised the question that you say that ‘there is 
no knowledge’ through a knowledge that you have presumed to have 
proven, or if it is not through knowledge, [then] you cannot advocate it 
with what you know is your presupposition that there is no knowledge. 
If they argue that [this information is attained] ‘through knowledge’ they 
have in fact proven that knowledge exists; and if they say [something] 
other [than this] they are forced to keep silent. That is the teaching 


telated to this chapter. we 


[Shaykh] Abu Manégur said that in reference to the debate, what [the 
Sophist] said is meaningless argumentation - because [the Sophist] said 
that he has concluded that there is [only] belief and not [sensory] 
knowledge, but then everything he relays in the debate [is in fact 
information gained through sensory knowledge]. Instead, [Muhammad 
Ibn Shabib] debated this with those who deny the reality [of things], and 


therefore his argument is contested by verification, and it is a similar case 


“6 Once again, despite the fact that al-Maturidi has treated this subject extensively 
earlier in the book, this time he is relaying the points of contention of Muhammad ibn 
Shabib against the Sophists. 


SUD 


with his claim. Meanwhile, whoever claims that there is nothing other 
than belief, since anything that is said is [a kind of belief], then you 
[should] scare him by beating him or giving him pain [as he denies 


“7 Tit will demonstrate that] he believes what others 


sensory knowledge], 
actually believe [in terms of knowledge], and [you can| deny this by 
[stating] the opposite or by saying that you believe that his denial is an 
affirmation, until he is compelled of necessity to affirm what he denies. 
The fact fis] that it [too] is [a] belief, and nothing else contains proof of 
the belief, since his argument denying knowledge is rendered invalid by 


proving that it is belief. God zs the grantor of success. 


The Sophists cite by objection that there are things that turn out to be 
their opposite, [but] even if knowledge is not definite, the defence that 
the opposite emerges is invalid. There is no strength to find the truth except by 
God. 


Muhammad ibn Shabib asked himself how does one man see one thing 
to be two, and another sees only one thing, which of them is right? He 
claimed that the first man considers it this way because his sight sees it 
from its perspective - meaning that he sees with one eye something other 
than that which he sees with the other. The proof of this is that he does 


not see it [in] this way if he becomes one-eyed. 


[Shaykh] Aba ManSur said that the position in terms of this and related 
[issues], is that sensory knowledge differs through the different states of 
sensation. The person sending fand receiving information from the 
senses] knows what affliction [the senses] have, so he knows that the 
affliction is a veil. Hence, through sensation, he knows the opposite of 


reality when there is an affliction [of his senses], and he knows [true] 


497 Please see footnote 19 for the explanation of the point relayed by al-Maturidi in 


terms of al-Maturidi speaking in jest due to the fallacy of the position. 


306 


reality when the affliction is removed. This is that [at the specific] time 
that the sensation occurs [a person may be blocked from seeing] based 
on the specification, distance and obstacles in the air between [the object 
and the person], whilst at another time it falls within the sight, It is the 
same way with every sensation. This is all known through the senses, 
and there is a negation of that. Since this argument is invalidated by the 
opposite claim, they protest it or affirm it, so their claim to deny 
[sensory] reality is invalidated, since the difference is proven. There zs no 


strength to find the truth except by God. 


He knows that which is mentioned by dtawing close to it or increasing 
the light on it in order to know its reality if his sight is too weak to 
perceive it due to affliction. In such conditions it becomes clear [when 


removing the obstacle]. ‘There s no strength to find the truth except by God. 


Our response is to cite the [example of] a person with a bilious 
humour*® who finds honey to be bitter due to the affliction he knows 
himself to have in the organ through which he tastes. There is no strength 
to find the truth except by God. 


Ibn Shabib said that then there was a disagreement. One sect said that 
honey [in fact] contains bitterness, so if it connects with that which is in 
his taste, its bitterness becomes stronger and he finds it bitter. Another 
sect said that the bitterness of bitter things lies in the taste of a person 
with a bilious humour, and so it is since the sweetness of the honey 
connects with the ‘bitter’ that is in his sense of taste, and moves in his 


taste, that his sense of it is as such. 


498 ‘Bilious humour’ is once again referring to the Four Humours of the Greeks. Like 
many of his purported enemies’ ideas that Maturidi insists on chastising, it seems he 
himself has learnt from the same sources and often actually subscribes to them — such 
as his apparent belief here in the “Four Humouts’ or his repeated use of categories such 


as ‘substances’ and ‘accidents’ etc. etc. 


[Shaykh] Aba Man$ur said that the [correct] position on this is that ja 
person] contains limits and sides, and each side faces the side of the thing 
that is perceived, and [the person] only perceives from the side that 
actually faces him. So if an affliction besets the side through which he 
perceives what is facing it, or what is facing him is covered by a thing 
that conceals it, a portion thereof disappears from the side and what ts 
facing it, so that it is ike perceiving without the side that is for that type 
of perception. The conditions of this are threefold; transforming the side 
through which he does not perceive anything at all; stabilizing by 
removing all obstacles so that he perceives the reality of the thing 
perceived; or a mixture of the two - so [that] through their variation the 
perception varies. All of this is a truth of the senses which is known by 
the senses, so in the knowledge of the senses it is not possible for there 
to be disagreement as to the reality [of things]. There is no strength to find 
the truth except by God. 


Then according to al-Nazzam, the Swwaniya held certain positions that 
there is no use in, such as [that] they claimed that cold and moisture are 
the prevailing natures in fish, so if they come to the shore, where heat 
and dryness prevail, it overcomes the moisture and dampness and the 
fish die. It is a similar case for all opposite natures; if an opposing nature 
prevails, it is destroyed. Therefore, it is a similar case with birds in the 
air and dogs in water, since they are more balanced than fish - living in 
both water and the land. The bat’s sight is weak and not strong [and] it 
is dissipated by the light of the sun, just like it blinds a man if he looks 
directly at the sun. If the sun disappears, then what weakened the bat’s 
sight is removed, and it can see. Thus, if the darkness is intense, it does 
not see. The lion, on the other hand, has strong sight - it sees in the day 
more than what others see, and so likewise the hindrance for it at night 


is less than what hinders other creatures. 


308 


[Shaykh] Abu Mansur said that all of this is absurd. The argument should 
tather be that it was created this way, with this nature, in that some 
substances fly in the air, whilst others swim in the water, and yet others 
walk on the face of the Earth. So to undertake justifications like this 
presumes more wisdom than the Lord of the Worlds, and seeking 
reasons for that which is not permitted does not attain understanding, 
This is not of the type of investigation of corporeal substances that is 
within the bounds of the law.” There is no strength to find the truth except by 
God. 


Then he raised the objection to himself that the one that dreams sees 
something and [yet] it turns out to be the opposite of what he saw, so 
maybe wakefulness is similar, or that one cannot be distinguished from 
the other. He claimed that what distinguishes between the two states is 
that he sees what is not rational in a state of sleep - he can see himself 
dead for example, and the dead do not know, or he can see his head 
tossed onto his [own] lap, and such a thing cannot be seen by waking 
sight, Therefore, it is said to them: then how does one who sleeps 
imagine the impossible [in his dreams,] but it does not come to pass [in 


reality]? 


It was said that when he sees himself in a dream, he does not think he is 


alive or dead, which is not possible [when in a wakeful state]. Likewise, 


” Al-Maturidi is quite flippant in this paragraph and seems to yet again display an 
unfortunate tendency to attack his perceived enemies in the harshest terms - even when 
they are in the right or seem to be sincere. This was a common occurrence amongst 
theologians at that time, as all of them wanted to aggressively present their own 
doctrine, He also makes the bizarre assertion that such researches are prohibited in 
Islam - whilst failing to offer the slightest textual or other justification. This 
demonstrates how Matutidi fluctuates between demanding the use of reason in certain 
chapters in the book and completely abandoning it, such as in this paragraph, On the 
other hand, al-Nazzam’s treatment of the point is effective, explaining how different 


types of creations have various natures and how these natures relate to the Universe. 


309 


if he sees his head tossed onto his [own] lap, he does not imagine that 


[he} is in two places. 


He claimed that knowledge of the truth of what is seen in wakefulness 
and the falsehood of what is seen in sleep is by acquisition, the evidence 
of which is what was stated. He said that a person might sec in his sleep 
[something] that is true, but rather this [true information] 1s through an 
angel that shows him [true information] or by way of warning [from 


God|, or something in that regard. 


[Shaykh] Aba Manégur said that [our teaching pertaining to this issue] 1s 
what we initially stated, [meaning] that the sleeper has an affliction due 
to what he knows during wakefulness, and this is the reality of his senses. 
In sleep, he sees something that is forced and in wakefulness he does 
not. In this way, the pain of being struck remains in a state of 
wakefulness, and he knows the pleasure of what he eats. There is no 
issue between them and us concerning these circumstances, but rather 
the reality of wakefulness and the verification [detived| from it 
necessarily requires us to accept what we mentioned. Then [the 
perceptions of the senses] change due to afflictions upon them. The sum 
of this is that nature, the stars or foods, are unable to generate [the ability 
to see] and they do not contain that which requires such [but instead it 
is based on one’s own non-afflicted senses]. For each of these, there is 
something harmful and something beneficial. What they contain of 
predominance and balance cannot exist due to nature or the stars, with 
respect to the wisdom and skilfulness from which they emerged in this 
state, and natute is incapable of this. The explanation of this has already 


been provided. God zs the grantor of success. 


310 


On the Teachings of the Manicheans: An Exposition of their 


Incorrectnhess 


[Shaykh] Abt Mansur said that the Manicheans™ claimed that things 
exist as they come from a mixture of Light and Darkness. They were 
distinct; Light was high, boundless in all four directions, North, South, 
Fast and West, and Darkness was beneath in the same manner. On the 
side where they met, they came to an end. But the Darkness overtook 
the Light, and they mixed, and the Universe emerged out of their 
mixtute in proportion to it. Each of them has five categories: Red, 
White, Yellow, Black and Green.” Everything that comes from this 
type of substance and came out of the essence of Light is good, and what 


comes out of the essence of Darkness is evil. 


Similarly, each of them has five senses: Hearing, Sight, Taste, Smell and 
Touch. What the essence of Light perceives through them is good, and 
what the essence of Darkness perceives is evil. Light has a spirit and 
Darkness has a spirit. The spirit of Darkness is called ‘Hamama’ and is 
living and covers the Universe in order to trap Light within it. The Light 
cannot be sensed and what ts from it is due to [its] nature, and all of it is 
good, Hamama can be sensed. In addition, each of them attains its 
spatially determined boundaries. ‘Then it was founded that the highest 
things [in position] are the purest, and the lowest things are the most 


polluted. Lightness and heaviness are also of this nature, and they tend 


°00 The Manicheans were a group of Dualists whose founder was Mani. 

1 ’The Manicheans held that the Universe was the result of the mixture Light and 
Darkness. What made their dogma distinct was that they believed that the Light and 
Darkness had five categories, red, white, yellow, black and green. Whatever came out 
of these categories from the substance of Light was good and whatever came from the 


substance of Darkness was evil. 


311 


to mutual repulsion - since as time passes, light things rise higher and 
heavy things sink downwards. Since they are this way, they free 


themselves from the manner of their boundedness, just as they mixed. 


[Shaykh] Aba Manédr said that whoever contemplates the claim finds 
that it is entirely contradictory and does not need one to indicate its 
falsehood other than to express it. The first thing [in respect to this issue| 
is that it removes the end from the sides Jof Light and Dark] and affirms 
they have a side, so it makes the bounded unbounded, since the end is a 
limit, and a limit is a restriction of what is greater than it, which is the 
direction of another thing over it, which is evidence that a side from it 
is created. And that is a part, and it is unlikely that all the bounded parts 
ate unbounded, because that notion is possible in every part from it and 
is connected. However, each of them [Light and Darkness], in the sides 
that are unbounded, either have the other in them - which invalidates 
the claim that ‘they mixed from one side,’ or they were mixed from one 
side first and then also from the other side, and if each of them did not 
temove themselves from the four sides that belong to the other, they 


became bounded on those sides.” God és the grantor of success. 


Then, if it is of the nature of the lower to sink and of the higher to rise, 
which is due to the quality of mutual repulsion, this should affect the 
outcome [in that they should move away from one another]. Since how 
did the lower™ start to tise when rising is the nature [only] of the pure 
and high, which is the quality of the good. Thus [it means that] both 


things came from below. Hence, the notion required by the argument 


502 Al Maturidi is arguing that the Light and Darkness are finite and anything that is 
finite has been originated. Briefly, what this means is that finitude equivocates limits 
which are accidents. As al-Maturidi explained previously, accidents - according to his 
own ideas - are originated. 


503 In the case of Manicheans’ dogma, the Primal Darkness 


a2 


for Dualism is invalid. Then it is the nature of the high [i.e. the primal 
Light] to escape upwards, and it did not fulfil this or withdraw from what 
sinks by nature until something rose above it - and the Universe was 
created by containing it. So how do they aspire to escape from the hands 
of Hamama? With this [the Light] is an active sensible thing [which is] 
bound, restricted and contained by tricks, and it does not have the 
strength to free itself, and by nature [the Light] did not withdraw when 
it was free [of Darkness], so how can it free itself after being bound? 
They said that Hamama frees its path, which would make [Hamamal] a 


doer of good." 


Furthermore, the essence of Darkness, if it sees Light and is what 
associates with Light in order to contain it, is described as knowledge 
and sight, and not that which someone cannot see to fortify himself ftom 
it, and he does not know how to escape ftom its subjugation. Therefote, 
knowledge, vision, power, self-sufficiency, and honour ate all in the 
essence of Darkness, and subjugation, ignorance, incapability, 
degradation and abasement are in the essence of Light. If the one is all 
Light, and the other is all Evil, then how perceptive of Good and Evil 


ate you?” 


° Al-Maturidt argues that if the nature of positionally lower things is to sink (in this 
case the primal Darkness of Manichaeism) and of higher things is to rise (such as the 
Light which is posited to be above the Darkness before the beginning of the Universe) 
and if these are mutually exclusive, then how does the lower Darkness ever tise - rising 
being a quality only of good - to mingle with the Light and create the Universe in the 
first place, as they claimP Which means that as a result the lower Darkness by rising, 
became both Light and Darkness, which negates their teaching concerning there being 
dual gods. 

** Al-Maturidi argues that if Darkness overcome Light, it would mean the Darkness 
possess attributes such as knowledge, power etc., which are meant to be exclusive to 
Light. 


313 


Likewise, according to your teaching, the act of Light is by nature, and 
the act of Hamama is by free will, and Hamama created the Universe, 
which invalidates the argument for Dualism.*” Instead, the Universe 1s 
entirely the act of one being, but it mixed its parts with the parts of 
another. If this other, through which [mixing] was done became another 
[type of thing], [then] in order to complete the argument for Dualism, 
anything with a nature could be that through which and in which the 
Universe exists, which is an atgument for Pluralism as opposed to 


Dualism. 


Since Darkness was that which overtook Light and then Light freed itself 
from it, then [Light] escaping from it is by its essence ts impossible, 
because it did not withdraw from it. This also requires the freeing of its 
patts from Hamama’s containment, and there is no place higher to 
proceed to that has been wrested from [Hamama|, since Light is 
boundless other than on this side, and by its freeing it returns to what is 
boundless and does not find a place of rest for itself. So the only meaning 
that its freeing has is that Darkness repels [Light] from itself, and then 
its repelling would be good, since its containment is evil. Therefore, if it 
repelled parts of it and what is higher is nothing other than its parts, then 
some of them intermix, and that is an end. However, [Darkness] was 
containing Light in its essence and then subjugated all of Light and 
imprisoned it for itself, containing its enemy within it so that its enemy 


becomes in its essence contained for itself. 


Furthermore, Darkness has no limit except on the side of mixing, so to 
what end will Light free itselfp This shows that there is no meaning to 
its freeing itself. There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


506 A].-Maturidi argues that because Hamama has free will and otiginated the Universe, 


then they ate Monotheists as opposed to Dualists. 


[Shaykh] Aba Mansur said that then it is bewildering that they claim that 


all light in the Universe is from the essence of Light, since from where 
does this derive when it is subjugated and contained? The act to contain 
it is entirely from another, so Light can only persist in the prison and 
bonds of another, so from where does it derive ‘good’? - Unless it sees 
the rest of its parts that were not overtaken and throws its parts into the 
containment of the other’s parts - which would be evil. If this is the case, 
then what about the King of Good, which serves entirely toward 


salvation and is not prevented [from its acts]? 


Then the contradiction is that [the Manicheans] made a difference in the 
essefice, so it is impossible for [Light and Darkness] to mix when they 
have distinct essences that subsist in their state, since [Manicheans] do 
not see mixture as anything other than this. However, it is said to |the 
Manicheans]; ‘Is the mixture not after [Light and Darkness] came into 
existence? The answer must be ‘yes.’ It was said that; “Was it Light or 
Darkness or something other than the two [that was the reason for 
creation|’? They argued the first two, because they affirmed the mixture 
and distinction for [both the Light and Darkness], and if that were 
possible, then it would be possible for them to exist together, which 
[would be a] clear [conclusion]. There 2s no strength to find the truth except by 
God. 


In terms of their belief with respect to [Light and Dark] meeting; they 
ate either contiguous in pre-eternity or not contiguous. If they are 
contiguous, then [Manicheans also] argue that the contiguity is 
originated, since creation of the part necessarily entails creation of the 
whole by virtue of inference from the visible known to the unseen 
unknown. If they were not contiguous, one of them must necessarily 
have incteased until it mixed with the other or deviated from the other 


in order to enter itself. Whichever of the two it is, there is an increase of 


315 


what [previously] was not of cutting off and insertion in an essence. 
Hence the claim that it [Light or Dark] is boundless is invalid, because if 
its parts were boundless, there would be no overlap with the other so 
that it became mixed - if it is capable of mixing, that proves that it is 
bounded. Moreover, it is unlikely that Darkness, with its bulk, overtakes 
Light with its low density [which can] withdraw from the Darkness, since 
[Light] is entirely full of things that are fine and cannot hold that which 
is thick. If this [mixing] was initiated by Light, then Light acquired evil 
and threw itself into containment with the stability of the dense |i.e. 
Darkness] in one essence. Instead, it finds the thin penetrating the thick 
if they ate from different essences, between which remains an opening 
[between the thick and thin]. Meanwhile, [the Manicheans] did not 
explain what is the method [by which the thin penetrates the thick}, 
therefore no [this cannot be accepted as a valid proposition]. There zs no 


strength to find the truth except by Goa. 


If the mixing that occurred took place previously after there was 
nothing, then either it was through one of the two ot through both of 
them, which entails the possibility of coming into existence, which 
would likewise be the case for everything; of it was neither of the two, 
since this entails proving a third being, ot it was for themselves, and so 
it was necessaty to deny the distinction [between Light and Darkness}, 
or Darkness overtook itself, and the tme [of its occurrence] was prior 
to [anything] that it is [claimed] [came] before it. If nothing happened in 
the two parts that did not mix, and the mixing did in fact occur, why did 
they not mix in their entirety? They cannot avoid separation - since the 
means of mixing is due to [their innate] nature, and natures do not 
change, so it must forever be this way. They expanded on the type of 
nature, but narrated that Darkness is active by choice, and thus calling 
this a ‘nature’ [when they mean ‘of its own free will’] on this basis is 


defective. It was reported by them that Darkness moved until it 


316 


overtook Light, and so if they said ‘forever’, something is interjected into 
their speech that was never said about pre-eternity, and if they said ‘at 


the beginning’, then origination is required. God zs the grantor of success. 


Then there is complete ignorance in their claim; they free themselves 
because it is in the nature of the heavy to sink and light things to rise. 
[Yet] in the beginning, with these natures they [nonetheless] mixed. 
Unless each one of them had the nature of the other in terms of 
heaviness and lightness, it would be impossible for them to mix. If it 
were possible, then this indicates that these two natures were present in 


both. There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


If one of them were capable of both, then either Good or Evil would be 
capable and the other’s [claim of Divinity] would be void. There is no 
strength to find the truth except by God. 


However, since they made them both opposites in [their essential| 
natures, it is necessary to make one of them responsible for mixing and 
the other for in-betweenness, and [for] one of them prevail so that the 
situation would be like that. Then with regards to their claim [that], once 
they separate, they do not mix afterwards - what taught them that? We 
found certain amalgamations, so how is it that separation exists by 
effort? And what taught them that [Light and Dark] are forever in a state 
of separation and amalgamation, and likewise [exist in|] pre-eternity? This 


invalidates the argument for Light and Dark. 


Moreover, their judgement is bewildering, because according to them, 
they do not report on states that were and are from the essence of these 
two, and there was no knowledge of these two before their mixing, and 


no knowledge of how they separate. God zs the grantor of success. 


Then it is claimed, against every judgment, that they claim no end [for 


the Universe] in addition to what they said about the beginning of the 


al? 


Universe, without there being Universe after Universe Ad Infinitum. [But] 
this is based on evidence, just as with mixing and separation, so they 
[well] know their stubbornness. It is said that they did not examine 
anything unmixed of Good and Evil, and they received no report that 
beats truthfulness. They said that we realised based on evidence that the 
characteristic of things is separation, and everything reverts to its Prime 


Matter. 


Shaykh [Aba Mangir al-Maturidi] said: Instead, it is argued that their 
tendency is to amalgamate, since if the end of everything occurs on the 
basis of its substance [this means] that it is amalgamated and [one can 
apply this] Ad Infinitum. It is said that since separation is dispersal and 
amalgamation is confirmation and strength, then why would their 
tendency not be amalgamation? There is no strength to find the truth esccept by 
God. 


If it were possible to prove that which is not visible in the present 
Universe on the condition that [the Universe] is from the essence [of 
Light and Darkness}, it would be possible to claim that the senses act in 
the opposite of the known way, or that perception is the opposite of 


what is perceived. 


An objection was made to their claim that ‘nothing but good proceeds 
from Light and nothing but evil proceeds from Darkness,’ that if a man 
committed murder and then confessed it, then the person confessing 1s 
the same one who committed murder, which is truthfulness, so good 
was working through him after evil. If the confessor was other than the 
one who committed murder, then it is falsehood, which is evil, even if it 
came ftom goodness, as well as [allowing] the murderer to go [free]. It 
is likewise with the claim that ‘each sense does not perceive what the 
other senses perceive.’ Then concerning what someone hears, it is said 


‘T heard’, or concerning what someone saw, it is said ‘I saw’, and one 


318 


does not say ‘I saw and heard’ [for something] other than that which can 
be seen or heard. That is the response to the claim of perceiving 


[something with a sense] that [it] cannot be perceived [with]. 


[fhe Manicheans] were asked about the blackness of the Darkness 
[namely]; if it increases over the blackness of Light, has the blackness 
increased at all? They said, ‘no’, [and thus] they made that which became 
much that which did not become much. If they said, ‘it increased,’ it is 
said [to them]; ‘is it Light or Darkness or something other than the two” 
If they reply, ‘both Light and Darkness,’ then Light and Darkness both 
increased, which is unlikely - since [this means] each of them increases 
in the essence of the other. If they said, ‘something other than the two,’ 


they prove that there is something other than the two. 


Then what taught them that there is no increase in Light or Darkness 
over those five categories, when they do not know of all the parts of 
[Light and Dark], as there is no end to each one? If they claim inference 
from the visible known to the invisible unknown, this invalidates their 
argument for separation and the lack of an end [to a side], because they 
did not observe it. If they claim that that ‘we know through Messengets,’ 
it is said that since Messengers were parts of the Light, and Darkness 
hinders [them], what taught you that Darkness hadn’t prevented and 
concealed reports about itself other than the five [components it is 
allegedly made up of], and so it is not known? If they claim concerning 
Light that it perceives through every sense what it perceives through the 
others, their claim of ‘five senses’ is void and it concludes as only one 
[sense]. Then incapability exists along with transmission, as with the rest 


of this, which thereby proves the difference. 


Then it was objected with respect to the senses of the Darkness, that 
since they perceive what the senses of Light perceive, and everything is 


as it is, how can one of the perceptions be good and the other be bad? 


319 


Then the issue of pardoning the guilty was as an objection, [in terms of 
the question that] it is the work of whom? If they say, it is the act of 
Light; then it benefitted its enemy who is evil; if it is the act of Darkness, 
it is [performing the act of] pardoning, which is good. The foundational 
[principle] is that we observe in the visible Universe an ignorant man 
who gains knowledge, an erring man who regrets [his actions] and a man 
who makes a promise and goes back on his word. However, if the latter 
and the former fare found in one entity], this proves that the two 
opposite acts are from one, and if it was from other than it [they would 
not be unified in one essence], this proves the falseness of the report in 


the three ways [that we have explained]. God zs the grantor of success. 


320 


On the Teachings of the DaySaniyyah: An Exposition of their 


Incorrectness 


Shaykh [Abu Man$ur] said that the Daysaniyyah’” are like the Manicheans 
in principle, but they argued that Light is entirely white, and Darkness is 
entirely black; Light is living, and is that which mixed with Darkness 
when it was dead, due to the roughness that it found on the side [of 
Darkness] that it encountered, so 1t wanted to mix [with it] to devise a 
way to smooth it. And a smooth thing can become rough, just like steel 
can become rough from [being rubbed with] a saw. It is necessary to 
remove parts of it with a file and if such a fragment is removed and [the 


steel] levelled, it becomes smooth [again]. 


Some of them said ‘no,’ [the Light] is harmed by [Darkness] and so 
repelled [the Darkness] from itself, and mixed with it like one who is 
stuck in mud; if he struggles to escape, he only sinks further. The motion 
is from Light, and rest is from its opposite, since they are both opposites. 
Thus, the Daysaniyyah require two Prime Matters, [namely,] Light and 
Dark, and two derivations: the motion and sense of Light, and the rest 
and senselessness of Dark - without proving anything other than Light 
and Dark. 


[Shaykh Abu Mansur] said that we have mentioned their teachings so 
that you may know God’s hatred for those who preferred to be hostile 
to Him, who refused to obey God, did not contemplate His creation 
with thoughts submissive to God nor sought His aid so that He makes 
successful their religion and opens the doot to truth for them. Instead, 


they inclined towards the Universe, relying on it out of desire for the 


7? The Dayfdantyyab are another sect of Dualists that were founded by Ibn Daysain who 


was also known as Baredesanes. 


Sal 


appetites of their selves, so God entrusted them to themselves and did 
not preserve them from becoming His enemy, since they did not beseech 
God, and did not desire other than what they inclined to. It zs to God that 


we turn for aid. 


The rule is that God makes the destruction of His people through that 
by which [the person] claims his denial of God and refusal to obey God 
out of fear of a matter that adheres to [the person], such that it destroys 
[the person] by binding him to something he hopes to escape from. So 
these [the Daysaniyyah], because of theit supposition that evil cannot 
emerge from the same source as good, came to argue for Dualism, and 
by making the foundation of each something other than the foundation 
of the other, then they made that which is the foundation of good to be 
in the end evil, and that which is the foundation of evil to be the end of 
good, because they made Light ignorant of the consequences of what it 
was heading towards, until they made one of two arguments by which 
they wanted to dispel its harm and remain in it; it does not know that it 
cannot, and not that it remains in the end of what it aimed to repel, and 
cannot free itself because it is stuck. The first [Light] proceeded to 
[Darkness] in order to smooth its roughness and repel its harm out of 
ignorance of the fact that it does not have power over it and cannot free 
itself from it. This is like the Manichean argument that Darkness is what 
overtook Light and thtew it into its containment and bound it with 
restraints until it became ignorant of its origin and was unable to escape. 
The beginning of all good, the end of knowledge, and the understanding 
and attainment of all good is rather through power over it. Thus, they 
removed both [good and evil] from Light and attributed them to 
Darkness. They went over to the opposite of all they built by claiming 
that good is entirely from both of them, so they made Light emerge from 
the greater part of good, and the other from the greater part of evil, then 
they affirmed both for one, and for this one they argued for Dualism. 


So let it be known how each sect is destroyed by that which it supposes 


is its salvation. God is the grantor of success. 


If it is for these two sides that it is necessary to claim Dualism, then it is 
also necessary to claim that there are four fundamental essences such as 
natures, since they are opposed and each harms the other. And if it is 
necessary to claim four, then it is also necessary to claim six, since a thing 
existing necessarily has six directions, which necessarily entails arguing 
for seven, since the thing bearing those directions cannot be described 
by having a direction that preceded it, or it is necessary to argue for five, 
due to the fact that the thing 1n which those natures amalgamate is the 
fifth, and it is not described as ‘hot’ or ‘cold’. And if it was as the 
Dualists say, then it is necessary to claim a third, because the two existed 
when the Universe did not exist and nor did good or evil [exist], and it 
is impossible for a self-existent being to mix by itself without 
amalgamation or contradiction, which proves that there is a [third], a 
being other than those two, through whom all good and evil exists. So 


their claim is invalid with respect to what they attempted to prove. 


On the other hand, the [the view that a person] is not being compelled 
[to act in one way meaning good or bad| means the existence of the 
other [meaning God]. The basis of this is that the intellects of those 


people have not reached the extent of understanding things that Divine 


°08 Al-Maturidi is arguing that the position of the Daysdniyyah is flawed because if they 
argue that there can be two opposites that ate the reason for the existence of the 
Universe, then why can the four fundamental natures not be the reason for the 
existence of the Universe, because they also have opposing natures? Or why can it not 
be six because all things in the present Universe ate subjected to the six directions, or 
seven because of the thing that bears the directions, or five - because the Four Natures 
being brought together would be because of the fifth that is external to them; and why 
can it not be that there were originally three, because it required a third that brought 
the Light and Darkness together? 


323 


Wisdom possesses, and they supposed that God possesses the same 
qualities as them in terms of needs, appetites, and the possibility of 
bearing afflictions and defects, so they determined God’s action by that 
which they [themselves] know as wisdom in their own actions. If they 
contemplated the concealed necessities they are in, that hinder them 
from understanding things, as well as their own interests, they would 
take great pains and strive to know that it is ignorance which prevents 
them from understanding the wisdom within them. They are the people 
who most properly should undertake this, since they claimed that the 
Universe is a mixture of Light and Darkness, and that there is no part of 
Light that is not mixed with a part of Darkness, and Darkness conceals 
and then subjugates the Light. So [then] there is no good that can be 
hoped to come into being from it but that Darkness subjugates it and 
conceals it from [the] manifestation of all of its members; then how 1s it 
possible for them to know and consider the path to wisdom so that they 


can claim that the other is evil? 


The bewildering thing is that their Light, with its self-subsistence and 
purity from the defects of Darkness, did not know what it faces [when] 
mixing, in terms of hardship and oppression, ignorance and incapability. 
Then how is it hoped that a part of it, when 1t emerges from its essence 
and falls into the hands of its enemy, would apply to it the wisdom that 
it did not attain when it was whole? And the most justified of those who 
do not claim wisdom or debate those who do profess wisdom or attempt 
wisdom is the Dualist, since he refers back to the two Prime Matters in 
himself which are good and evil, as does anyone among [them]. If 
attempting and speaking of wisdom is from the essence of Light, then 
accotding to them there are two wise beings for whom nothing is 
concealed, and there is no sense in the both of them speaking [and 
attempting| wisdom as the [both of them, namely Light and Darkness] 


will then in [their essence] be the same, ot if [it is] from the essence of 


_ 


324 


Darkness, when it is impossible for both of them to bear wisdom, or 
one of them is the essence of Light and the other is the essence of 
Darkness. It is impossible for one to beat ignorance and the other to 
bear knowledge, and so speaking [about this] is vain and meaningless. 


There es no strength to find the truth except by God 


[Shaykh] Abu Mansur said that the principle is that whoever performs 
an act that he does not benefit from or performs it for the destruction 
ot annihilation of a thing, is shameful. God would not benefit from what 
He creates because God is above needs and is self-sufficient in Himself 
from other than Himself. So it is false to say that God’s act was so that 
He can benefit from it. Then if it were for nothing but destruction, His 
creation would be meaningless; hence it is proven that God created and 
formed the Universe for certain consequences. Then the creation of 
cteatures whom God did not give the power to distinguish or grasp the 
consequences of things proves that God did not cteate them for 
themselves. And He created creatures that know this and seek by their 
evety act benefits of consequences, even those whose action deviates 
from [this benefit]. Since God is what everything other than Him needs, 
and God is wise in His action, they must love Him so as not to lose the 
blessings of the Creator for them, in terms of [Man’s God given] reason 
that grasps the consequences [of actions] - because if [people] were left 
to their own direction, they would not allow themselves to vacillate in 
that which does not bring benefit now or praise later, and whoever treats 
them in the same way is foolish and ignorant. If it is necessary to cteate 
the harmful and the beneficial due to the requirements of wisdom, and 
God created substances that can experience pain and pleasure, and the 
afising of pains and pleasures, so that they know what their soul desites 
and recoils from, so they ate cautious and desirous of the like in those 
things where they are put to the test; and so that they know benefit from 


harm, without which their creation would have no meaning, God created 


g25 


them on the basis of the difference He created for [benefit and harm]. 
Then out of His kindness, God created every substance capable of 
receiving benefit and harm, and of doing it to another. God conveyed 
the benefit of every substance to other substances that contained harms, 
so that observers would know that the designer of all this is One, and. 
that if they were from different [designers], then [their] creations would 
clash; because if only good came out of the essence of good, and only 
evil out of the essence of evil, the work of each would be in some of the 
work of the other [as they are amalgamated in the present Universe], and 
would corrupt what it undertakes with what [is similar to it]. The 
harmony and dependence of benefits on one another indicate the 
falseness of this [belief]. However, if we cannot say that [both good and 
evil] derive from one, we could not say [that] there are multiple gods 
either, since on their own, one of them could not make a proof to 
indicate his existence, or [provide] a sign to point to him, and through 
that is similar to him, [provide] true experience of him, and knowledge 
of his state would not be necessary, and this would corrupt all 
knowledge, due to ignorance of the Prime [Matter], that all types of 


knowledge and its branches derive from.” 


Furthermore, the presence of one of the essences [Light and Darkness] 


in one body is beneficial, and the presence of the other is harmful, which 


509 Here al-Maturidi is referring to the same argument he made earlier in the book, in 
that if there were multiple gods, there would be conflict between them, with one god 
being prevented by other gods from providing a sign of his existence. There is the 
additional argument that was made by al-Maturidi about how multiple gods cannot be 
responsible for the Universe as there would be a conflict with each of them wanting to 
create theit own creation. He further explains that the Universe is as a result of a wise 
and knowledgeable creator and it is on this basis that God gave people things such as 
knowledge in order to know Him. On the other hand, if the Universe came from Prime 
Matter which in itself is ignorant, this conflicts with things such as knowledge being in 


the Universe. 


means that harm encounters benefits, which means that benefit is 


entirely negated due to the presence of that which precludes it. In the 
existence of the Universe and what is in it, both of them [i.c. Light and 
Darkness] have benefit, which indicates the truth that the designer of all 
this is one, due to the holding back of any harmful thing from God’s 
operation (in respect of its harm) through His kindness, in order to attain 
the benefit God intended for whomsoever He intended to benefit. And 
the same goes for those God intends to harm. There is no strength to find 
the truth except by God. 


It is known that intellects are not composed for food and drink, because 
what is not for the intellect in these things is stronger than what is for 
the intellect, and due to the great rank of a group that stayed away from 
food and drink, namely the angels.’"” So it is proven that [intellects] were 
created for instruction and inquiry, because of the praise and honour 
they hold. If that is so, then it is necessary to create various substances 
in wisdom so that the path of instruction is complete, and the truth of 


inquiry is abundant. There zs no strength to find the truth except by God. 


In the visible world, it is known that whoever knows both things is more 
complete, or rather a person cannot be wary of what harms him if he 
does not know it. On this basis, the creation of both [benefit and harm] 
in wisdom is more necessary and more complete than the creation of 


just either one of them alone. This is evidence of the self-sufficiency of 


510 A person’s spiritual rank is not based on the consumption of food and this can be 
seen from the angels who have a high rank and are not in need of food or drink. 
Instead, a person’s rank is based on the use of the intellect, which has no connection 
to the consumption or lack of consumption of food. The intellect was created for 
instruction and inquiry. Based on God’s wisdom, things were created so that a person 
can fulfil the role of the intellect, which is the application of instruction and inquiry. 


327 


the doer and God’s perfect might and knowledge of the rightful place 
that all things should be. There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


If the monotheists did not have anything but the evidence of the 
truthfulness of those who preached monotheism and the luminous 
proofs with them, namely the Prophets, which |is a proof that] none of 
those who deny the existence of one Creator possess, [then this proof] 
would be enough. How, when there is nothing that does not in its 
essence observe that it is originated, and so created by a wise creator? If 
it were not for the atheists’ stubborn insistence in claiming the pre- 
eternity of corporeal substances, which there is no way for them to prove 
other than by accepting the authority of someone who has no proof, or 
by making his foolishness to be proof for him, even when he is incapable 
of understanding the existence of something that does not emerge from 
something [else]. There is no doubt that all of them know that they 
themselves have been ignorant of things and then knew them; and have 
been incapable of things and then became capable, and in need of things 
and then became without [having a] need of them. Hence the reality of 
one with this description is that he does not trust his opinion and does 


not follow what he sees to be the indication of his reason. 


Whoever attributes this to natures that do not comprehend what ts 
generated from them and by them, or to stars, of to a number of creators 
- the beginning of whose work was ignorance and blindness, or to 
acceptance of the authority of teachings on the pre-eternity of things, as 
they are in contradiction and opposition - such a petson and those 
similar to him are necessarily stupid and ignorant, since how can they be 
rational using proofs from these irrelevant principles of which they are 
the derivations, or consider the realities of things until they claim that a 
thing possesses wisdom, the path to it, or foolishness? There is no strength 
to find the truth except by God. 


=~ Ss 


328 


However, what led the Dualists to deny that a thing can emerge from 
nothing is that it deviates from what reason can conceive, or the fact that 
in seeking wisdom based on reason they only considered what they 
examined among themselves. If they knew that claiming the origin of 
the Universe on the basis of their view, which is a deviation from what 
[reason] can comprehend, ts similar to that which they denied, or they 
knew that which accompanies it in terms of soul, reason and senses, or 
[that] their judgment itself deviates from what the [mind] can conceive, 
[then] they would not deny it. Then if they knew that they witnessed the 
behaviour of the weak and the ignorant in themselves, based on what 
they knew by transmission - that they were non-existent and then 
existent - they would know that the existence of things after they did not 
exist is more properly attributed to the One through whom the whole 
Universe exists. Then if they knew God’s self-sufficiency, His power and 
that God is above being described as ‘created’, their hearts would not be 
agerieved when they are unable to grasp the wisdom in His creation. 


From God, we ask for help, and to God, we turn for ad. 


It was reported that Ja’far ibn Harb*"' asked a Dualist about a person 
who killed another wrongfully and then apologised for the crime and 
acknowledged his wrongdoing. He is forced to admit that the second act 
is good, and if the essence of the first act were from someone else, it 
would be a falsehood by the Light, which would be evil. He wrote this 
to one of their leaders, and the leader wrote in response that this is like 
one whose beast kicks [some bystander] and he apologises [on behalf of 
the beast]. Jafar said that rather, this is compassion from him, and if he 
apologised for real, he is ignorant, unless the excuse was for making the 


beast his friend. So the man conceded, and it was right for him to 


ol Ya’ far ibn Harb (d. 850) was a follower of the School of the Mutazalites. He has been 
mentioned ‘Krab Makatat al-Islanan’ (“Treatises on Islam’) of Abt al-Hasan al-’ Ash ‘ati. 


a29 


concede, and what [Jafar] Ibn Harb mentioned is necessary. Lhere is no 


strength to find the truth except by God. 


Then the question as to the claim of the Mutazalites is incorrect, since it 
is part of their school that there is no evil in God’s creation, and that 
rather He gave the name ‘evil’ figuratively. Meanwhile, their method of 
debating the Dualists is to deny that what they supposed to be evil is [in 
fact] evil. As for the fact that they concede to the Dualists and [yet] 
require them to claim one creator, in such a way that there are other than 
[good and evil] in God, and they ascribe [evil] to God even after they 
denied this [asctiption of evil], then this is an impossible and defective 
[position by the Muazaktes], because it proves God’s Knowledge and 
Oneness in creating good and evil, but then they deny one of them 
[namely evil], so that the issue reverts to the Dualists’ argument that evil 
is created by something other than that which created good, so [the 
Mutazilites| are forced to be ‘monotheist dualists’. The way they can claim 
this is that they deny the creation [by God] of the acts of God’s servants, 
with the offences, sins and evil they contain. In objection, it was argued 
that evil was created from substances and it was not called ‘evil’ or ‘bad’ 
ot a ‘corruptor in the corruption of things’, so it is the same case for the 
acts of evil and corruption, in that they are not called as such. They 
responded that the substances were called evil figuratively and not in 


reality and in reality, they are not evil.” 


According to our belief, we say that God is the creator of the essence of 
evil and good and [He is the] creator of good and evil acts [as well]. It is 
not possible for something to be in God’s dominion that He did not 


create, since it would be a partner to God in His dominion and an equal 


512 This is the same teaching that was relayed previously in relation to the Matagalites - 
namely that humans have complete autonomy of their acts and the evil acts ate a by- 


product of human autonomy and do not come from God. 


in creating His Universe. God’s Divinity is beyond [such ascription]. We 


say that the creation of creation is not [the same as] that [first] creation, 
and it is a similar case for God’s acts, in that His act is not described 
with [the terms] good and evil, and God ts not described by the fact that 
His acts are good or evil, because God is described by His act. We did 
not say that God was good or evil, nor [is] the one whose act is such 


called [good and evil]. There zs no strength to find the truth except by God, 


What is necessary for wisdom in terms of creating harmful substances 
and repulsive sights, and the creation of afflictions of the senses, [is that] 
this is because all human beings have believed [in] something that is 
unperceived by their senses, either in denial or affirmation; some of 
whom professed the truth, and some of whom feigned ignorance and 
pursued their appetites. If He did not create those things above those 
which strike their senses, they would not know ugliness from beauty or 
harm from benefit. If they did not understand this, then their reason 
would not be able to distinguish ugliness from beauty and harm from 
benefit. Hence God created things in this way, so that they show through 
what assaults the senses that which is not perceived by them, so that 
every object of belief that is out of sight becomes known as it ts through 
what is visible. There zs no strength to find the truth except by God, 


Then whoever negates [the view of] the Dualists, [despite] all their 
divergent [opinions], what they all agreed on was their propagation of 
[the existence of] the essence of Light, [even though] they varied [on 
what this essence was]. If they are telling the truth then their differences 
[ate because of this issue], and if they are lying, then the entire issue ts 
false. And likewise, 1f some of them are telling the truth and some of 
them are lying. So it is proven that those who are of the essence of 


Darkness prefer the Light to the point that they chose to affiliate with it 


ciel 


in place of Darkness,” and preferring something with excellence is 
good in the observation of reason, so this entails invalidation of the 
claim that nothing but evil comes from Prime Matter that is evil, and 
good does not come from other than good. There is no strength to find the 
truth except by God. 


513 As some Dualists say the Darkness chose to mix with the Light. 


332 


On the Teachings of the Marcionites: an Exposition of their 


Incorrectness 


The Marcionites’™’ argued that Light is up high and Darkness is down 
below, and in the middle between them, there is neither Light nor 
Darkness, but rather sensitive, perceptive humankind. In their view, 
mankind is life in a body, and that these three were separate and then 
mixed, and that each category of them imitates what follows it like the 
shadow follows the Sun; the middle imitates the Light and what is below 
it [imitates] the Darkness, and the two substances do the same in mutual 


imitation in the view of [the Marcionites]. 


The Sabians””’ claim is like that of the Manicheans, except - according 
to [Muhammad] Ibn Shabib - between them there is a slight difference 
that he does not specify. The Manicheans claimed that Light encounters 
Darkness from the North heading South, and that Darkness encounters 
it from the South heading North. Furthermore, they meet each other on 
one side where some Darkness enters within Light, and they are 
boundless on the other sides. So he spoke about them in that same 
manner that he spoke about the Dualists, after asking from [what] did 


they argue [for this]. 


Then the middle area is necessarily an arrangement from which the 


Universe derives, or it came into being from out of the amalgamation 


>14’The Marcionites are another sect of Dualists and were founded by Marcion. 
°15 Al-Maturidi is mentioning the Sabians in terms of believing in Dualism, But in the 


Quran they are mentioned as believers in God such as in the following verse of the 


Holy Quran: “Tdeed, those who believed and those who were Jews or Christians or Sabians - those 
[among them] who believed in God and the Last Day and did righteousness - will have their reward 
with their Lord, and no fear will there be concerning them, nor will they grieve.” (Quran, Surah al 
Baqarab (2:62)) 


fe 


[of Darkness and Light]. If it was by design, this invalidates the mixing, 
since where would this take place when it is between Light and 
Darkness? Darkness has a tendency to sink, and Light has a tendency to 
rise, and between them, there is a divider than hinders, unless there is a 
combination and mixing between them by design, so it was the origin of 
all evil, since it was [caused] by mixing. If there had not been mixing 
between them, neither of them would have found a path to the other, 
so this leads to the conclusion that the designer of good and evil is one. 
If they were both prevailing by nature and subjugated the middle until 
they mixed, then its sense and perception were of no benefit to it, since 
it came under the subjugation of something with [only] a nature [and no 
consciousness], so the fact that it is a middle is meaningless, and the 


whole matter amounts to [only] Light and Darkness. 


Then he said that they made the middle bounded and the other two 
boundless, and the bounded under the boundless, because it is like that 
which falls short of all that is boundless, and like the short with respect 
to the long. And a human being, if he is the life that ts in a body, then 
he is sensible of the body and uses it, and so the middle must be that 
which directs the higher, and the lower, which [the life that is in the 
body] is the user of. Therefore, in reality, the [two] gods would become 
one, and the mixing and what was said about imagination [existing in the 
middle] would be void. Then [Man’s] reference to the mixing [of Light 
and Dark], which is [the purported cause of| his life, is an error - since 
no man knows the design of his beginning, nor does he know the 
optimum [configuration] of what is corrupted, or how to repel what 
befalls him. This proves that the designer is One, and that He is other 
than what was said [by them], and that what was mentioned is under the 


design of this One. 


334 


Then there is no difference between a mixture that did not exist coming 
into being out of Prime [Matter] that is not a mixture, and between a 
separation that did not exist coming into being out of a Prime [Matter], 
that is a mixture [or in between]. Then, there is no difference between 
enabling a change that took place to bear accidents, after it was not such, 
through the power of a capable being, and between the accidents being 
through God’s Essence, not by transferring to the pre-eternal [the] 
meaning of being created, since both [the Power and the Essence of 


God] are one in their distance from the sight and the {mind}. 


335 


On the Teachings of the Magians: an Exposition of their 


Incotrectnhess 


[Shaykh] Aba ManSiir said that the Magians’"® said that God was pleased 
by the excellence of His creation and He feared what opposes it and 
after that [He had a] thought, and from this thought, Satan came into 
being. Some of them said that [Satan] struck God in His eye, and He 
turned around and saw Satan and reached an agreement with him to give 
him a period of time |i-e. a respite] and [God] reached an agreement with 
Satan on this basis, until the allotted time expires, and God destroys him. 


Thus, all evil is from Satan, and from God [comes| all good. 


This is the story that they told. Their claim was to understand evil based 
on Dualism, since Dualists argued for two essences, because they 
believed that the creation of something from nothing is not conceivable 
in the [mind] and the claim that the Universe came into existence from 
nothing was too great [a leap] for them. Then they saw that the Universe 
contains good and evil, with everything whose act is good and just being 
described with praiseworthy attributes and anyone whose act is evil and 
oppressive being described with blameworthy attributes, and they 
thought it was too great a claim for both to be attributed to one [Divine] 
being, so that it would be one being that is worthy of both praise and 
blame at the same time, as is customaty. Therefore, they claimed that 


there are two pre-eternal essences. 


The Magians determined that it was possible for the Universe to be 
created out of nothing and [it did not come from] Prime Matter. But for 
them it was an enormity to describe the one from whom all good things 


proceed as doing evil, so they did not require it to be the act of a God 


516 "The Magians are another sect of Dualists, who were followers of Zoroastrianism. 


336 


of evil, but they [nonetheless] made Him its origin, since a base thought 
is evil and what arises from it, such as Satan, is evil and was from God. 
So this proves that both [good and evil] proceed from God, which is the 
reason that led them to argue for two beings, so their claim is 
contradictory. Furthermore, it is not believed that thought proceeds 
from God time after time, as all evil would be like that. If it is meant that 
[thoughts coming from God] is impossible, the existence [of evil] once 
again tefutes the impossibility, unless the claim is that the origin of good 
is a thought that is good. However, if God bid Satan farewell to leave 
for that duration, then either God did not know that [Satan] would do 
the evil that he does, and ignorance is evil, and so God is another evil, 
ot God knew and allowed him to sow corruption, and that is evil from 
God. Likewise, either God knew beforehand what His thought would 
do and so [still] thought [it] fully knowing what would proceed from it, 
which is evil, or God did not know, and ignorance is evil. Then God is 
necessarily either able to prevent and subjugate Satan, ot He is not [able 
to do so]. If God is capable, and He decreed [Satan] to corrupt creation, 
then God is evil, and if He is not capable, then the Lord of the Universe 


cannot be incapable.” 


Furthermore, it is said that then God knew that Satan, during this time, 


would be faithful to what [Satan] promised. But fulfilling a promise is 


°” Some may argue that the idea that God decreed Satan to corrupt creation is a belief 
held by Muslims. ‘This is the case for the theological groups that do not believe in free 
will, but for those that do, such as Maturidi and the Mutazaties, then they believe that 
Satan chose to corrupt creation based on his own free will and God merely gave him 
leave to try and do this ic. God didn’t ordet or decree Satan to corrupt creation. The 
fact that evil and good exist is interlinked with the concept of human free will and 
being tested by God. If there were only good, then there would be no free will as people 
would be free only to perform good acts. Therefore, the creation of evil is so that a 
person has free choice in their actions and thus a person’s acts can be tested and 


recompensed in the Hereafter. 


S37 


good and right, so this would be from evil. This was necessary for the 
Magians, because if evil proceeded from He who is the origin of good, 
we could argue the contrary and make all good proceed from Satan, and 


all evil from other than him.°® 


Moreover, how can God be sure that He would have power over [Satan], 
at a time when Satan had none other than himself for assistance, and the 
One from whom [Satan] proceeded had all things for assistants? Then 
[Satan’s] creation who [became] his assistants was mixed with those who 
are assistants of God, which prevented them from assisting [God]. May 
God’s Divinity be above the description [that is applied by] these non- 
believers. If they said that the agreement was for certain advantages, then 


it is a similar case for harmful vermin and things [that cause] damage. 


Furthermore, God’s fear that someone oppose Him entails ignorance of 
the fact that He is Lord of everything, as does the idea that His eye was 
struck, since in this case His eye would be harmed, and one whose eye 
can be overpowered, whose power be deprived, and whose knowledge 
can be refuted, is lord through other than himself and not in himself, 
and is creator through other than himself. Hence it must be claimed 


about their deity that he is a servant and not a deity. 


There is no harmful substance but that it [also] benefits creation, since 
they did not become harmful except through a wise, knowing designer 
who made them so as to harm one person and benefit another. This 


proves that the claim that the creator of evil is separate is unlikely. 


Then, if there was nothing in the creation of a thing (from [something] 


other than it) except its emergence from the capacity of creation and its 


918 Al-Maturidi is demonstrating that unlike the Dualists, the Monotheists do not see 
evil as an equivalent to God. It was the fact that Dualists did not want to ascribe evil 
to God and viewed it as equivalent to good that resulted in their view that there were 
two Gods. 


338 


elevation from conceptualisation, then no one refrained from arguing 
that the same could be realised [by God], because the emergence of the 
body and its existence in the womb by nature, its creation by the motions 
of the stars, or the emergence of the Universe from this nature, and the 
mixing of Light and Darkness followed by separation - all of this 
emerges in the way mentioned above. However, whoever contemplates 
the reality of everything finds it to be this way, because there is not in a 
drop of sperm, or in all foodstuffs, or in wombs, any of the qualities of 
a human being in terms of reason, hearing, and sight.°! Rather, these 
things emerge from them by the determination of a wise, knowing being. 
It is a similar case with all the different natures or the essences of good 
and evil. If they are separated from their action such that an essence 
becomes manifest and creation cannot be through them, the claim that 
it is through something similar is difficult to conceive. There is no strength 
to find the truth except by God. 


We have explained the manner of wisdom in the creation of different 
substances, and that the act of God cannot be described by that, and 
that their creation in terms of the ugliness of the ugly and the beauty of 
the beautiful is an indication of wisdom and harmony. In addition, that 
God, since He did not create for His own needs but rather through His 
own Essence, is a Creator, so that the creation is that in which God 


composed intellects and made them people of knowledge and blessings 


19 Here al-Maturidi is summarising his arguments that the nature of the Universe 
indicates that there is a wise and knowledgeable designer. He argues that food, semen 
and the womb etc. cannot in themselves hear or see or apply reason, but instead these 
abilities emerge in humans due to a wise and knowing designer. Furthermore, he argues 
that all the alternative and rival positions for the emergence of the Universe also allow 
for the possibility of God being the ultimate creator. For example, the emergence of 
the body and its existence in the womb by nature, the alleged creation of the Universe 
by the motions of the stars, or the mixing of Light and Darkness followed by separation 
are all because of God being the ultimate cause of everything. 


339 


and trials by which they are tested by putting each thing in its [rightful] 
place and giving thanks for the blessings they receive. In that, God made 
for them all creatures in their different essences as evidence, lessons and 
a tial in opposition to other substances and loyalties, and so that they 
know how to fear and the manner of caution and the terror [contained] 
within it. Also, the ways of proceeding from it to praiseworthy outcomes 
in the intellect, and fearing others for a hateful thing from it, through 
the different substances and states they examined in invitation and 
intimidation. Thus, the promise and the threat [of the Hereafter] are 
considered by the senses and obsetvation, since that is the path of 
knowledge, through which they attain understanding of ultimate ends. 
There is no strength to find the truth except by God. 


If it is possible to deny the creation of something from nothing on the 
basis that it is inconceivable in the [mind], then it would be possible for 
anyone with a defected sense to deny what is perceived thereby - since 
it is not perceived, and to deny every unseen thing that does not reach 
the senses. This negates the Magians and others, since they all followed 
their predecessors. Conceivability in the [mind] is its consideration of 
what the sense hits upon when the sense is removed, so one conceives 
the state of the sense in one’s [mind] ot considers something similar. But 
God is not known by way of the senses, and He has no like in the known 


Universe, and so consideration based on [the senses] is void. 


Then the basis of this is that conceiving in the [mind] is knowledge of 
the senses, or the knowledge of senses contains evidence for the 
necessity of knowledge of what is not sensed because it is known; since 
everything with sense is ignorant of the what and how of the sense. This 
is necessaty in anyone who is such, so the senses must [come into 
existence] through whoever knows their realities and creates them in 


such a way that sensory beings see that the one who created them cannot 


340 


be grasped through the senses, since everything with senses is ignorant | 
of their own states and is incapable of bearing the corrupt among them. 
This requites that there be a wise, knowing being behind this, who does 
not bear the attributes of what is perceptible by the senses, since if that ; 
wete possible and God bore those attributes, it would not be possible 
for what is perceptible by the senses to exist through Him, just as it 


would not be possible for those [senses to be] like our [senses]. Through 


God ts protection and salvation. 


341 


Acknowledgements 


Lam grateful to the following people who financially contributed to the 
production of this book: Mohammad Tahir Akbar and Family, Raseen 
Peerzade and Family, Rouf Ditta and Family, Soneel Minhas and Family, 
Abdul Raheem Ahmed and Family, Haji Mohamed Jaffer and Family, 
Ismaeel Hussain and Family. 


I would also like to acknowledge the following people who helped with 
vatious aspects of the book, such as translating difficult passages and 
sections, helping with the various manuscripts, editing, the cover of the 
book and general support which allowed me time to produce the book: 
Daud Yaqub, Muhammad Rahman, Aqsa Aaminah Ahmed, Shahreen 
Ahmed, Mahmut Bogan, Rouf Ahmed Ditta, Nouman Hussain, Kiran 
Khalid, Henna Ali, Khadija Podd, Kirren Amin, Saba Shakeel, Samreen 
Majid, Atabek Sukurov, Kiran Hussain, Shakoor Ahmed, Sadiq 
Muhammed, Shaheen Ahmed, Saira Shah Ayesha Choudary, Naseeem 
Hussain, Zunara Majeed Jabbar and Sultan Mujahid Jabbar. All 


contributions, whether great or small, are valued. 


I am gtateful to my family and friends, whose help and love was the 
greatest support. I am deeply indebted to the person who helped support 
me with the book and without whom the book would never have been 
produced. Despite the fact that he wants to remain anonymous, he has 


displayed the true meaning of friendship, and I am forever grateful. 


342 


Glossary 


Ahad (2s/); A chain of narration in which the number of narrators, in 
each generation never reaches the number of mashhur or mutawatir (see 
below). 

Afi al-Sunnat wa al-Jamda‘ah (\43\)5 43) Sal); (Also called — Abl al- 
Sunnah/ Sunnis The ‘people of the Swenah and the consensus of the 
Muslims’, The largest body of Muslims in the world yet they too in reality 
exist in sub-sects that differ in polemics as well as major issues. Many 
hold the claim that they are Sunni but it is logically evident that some 
differences in fundamental issues, such as beliefs about God, render 
them as completely opposed to one another. Therefore, arguably they 
ate similar in their reverence of the Sababah as a body, their acceptance 
of certain collections of Aadith and their adopting Iya’ (or at least the 
Tima‘ of Sababah) as a source of Islam. More accurately, Sunnis have been 
defined as those that hold beliefs in accordance to the Ash‘ari or 
Maturidi theological schools. 

‘Aqida (*38@): Islamic Theology — the theory, study and codification of 
beliefs or ‘dogmas of the religion’, 

Ash ‘ari (¢ #5): The school of theology codified by Imam Abu Al- 
Hassan Al Ash‘ari (d. 324/936), a theologian who left the beliefs of the 
Mu’tazahtes. He based his school on various teachings of the early 
generations (Tabi in and Taba’ al-Tabi'im) and his theology strongly 
opposes the Mu tazalites. The Ash ‘ati School is recognised historically as 
part of AA/ al Sunnat wa al-Jamd ‘ab. 

Fagih (+): The jurists in Islamic Law (see Figh) 

Fard (v= 4): An obligatory act that the believer is required to perform. 


All such acts will have prerequisite conditions and rules. The one who 


343 


fails to perform the act will incur sin. However, denial of the necessity 
of a Fard will constitute disbelief. 

Figh (43): Jurisprudence — the theory, study and application of law 
through legal principles. 

Fugaha’ (+\¢4): Plural of Fagib (see above). 

Hadith (—94): literally means ‘speech’, in hadith terminology it is 
something from the Prophet Muhammad. The Mafn (‘content’) and 
Sanad (‘chain’) combined together make a hadith (see below). 

Hanafi (<5): Legal school based upon the principles of Imam Abu 
Hanifa Numan bin Thabit (died 148 AH/767 CE). Imam Abu Hanifa is 
the earliest of the Jurists (Fugahd’) whose school of thought survives 
today. 

Hanbali (45): {Pronounced as Hambali’} Legal school based on the 
principles derived by followers of Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal (died 241 
AH/855 CE). 

Haram (@\ >): An act that is prohibited. To commit the act incurs sin. 
To deny the impermissibility of any act that is proven to be Haram 
constitutes disbelief. 

‘Tjtihad (144!): The linguistic meaning is the exertion or endeavour on 
a task. In Islamic terminology, it means independent judgment in a legal 
or theological question, based on the interpretation and application of 
principles (see Us#/ to the sources of Islam (Qut’an, Sunnah and Ijmd’). 
Ijma‘ (¢\43!): The consensus of the Islamic community on a legal, 
theological, or historic issue. 

Innovator (44): An innovator is someone who affirms or denies that 
which is not/is within the religion of Islam. An innovator could be a 
heretic ot in a severe scenatio a disbeliever. For Hanafis it is anyone who 
has beliefs that ate contrary to the Ash‘ari or Maturidi creeds ot he/she 


denies a mashbir hadith or goes against Ima’ (‘consensus’). 


344 


Islam (e>!): Belief according to the theologians is the testifying by the 
tongue and affirmation of the heart. However, practically to establish if 
someone is a Muslim, we need to look at the outward signs that someone 
is a believer. 

‘Isnad (244): Plural of Sanad (sce below). 

‘Isra’ (¢\«)): In the Quran, in Chapter 17 (called AL Isra ) and verse 1, 
we ate told about the miraculous night journey of the Prophet 
Muhammad from Mecca to the ‘Farthest Mosque’, which is in the city 
of Jerusalem. 

Ka ‘bah (489): The sacred cubical structure in the city of Mecca. It is the 
holiest site of Islam, the direction that worshippers face to pray the 5 
daily prayers and the point of citcumambulation in the Holy Pilgrimages 
to Mecca. 

Khawarij (¢ »\s4): Literally the ‘ones who exited’. The name given to an 
eatly group of heretics who disobeyed the rulers (an act contrary to Ap/ 
al-Sunnat wa al-Jama’ah) and declared war upon Muslims. Khawanij are 
typically known to declare Kujr (disbelief) on other Muslims over matters 
that Sunnis do not recognise as Kufr. 

Kutt (48): Disbelief. 

Madhhab (bx); School of Thought based on a particular set of Us#/ 
(principles). 

Maliki (4): Legal school based upon the principles of Imam Malik 
ibn Anas (died 179 AH/795 CE). 

Mashhar (0564): In Arabic mashhar means ‘famous’. In hadith 
terminology this refers to any hadith that became widespread during the 
time of the Tabi in ot Taba’ al-Tabi‘in. The hadith in this category 
however start as ahad narrations hence they differ to Mutamatir. 
Maturidi (623 4); The school of theology codified by Imam Abu 
Mansur Al-Maturidi (d. 333 Hijri) based on Imam Abu Hanifa’s 


345 


teachings and recognised historically as patt of Ad/ alSunnat wa al- 
Jama ‘ab. 

Mi‘raj (¢'5*4): This is the name given to the second patt of the 
miraculous Night Journey from the Farthest Mosque (Masjid Al-Aqsa) 
to the Heavens. The people of AA/ al-Sunnat wa al-Jama‘ah affirmed its 
existence based on multiple ahad natrations. 

Muhadithan/ Muhadithin (© puheaf ogists); These are the specialists 
in the science of hadith. Mubadithin narrate hadith and maintain 
knowledge of Mustalah al-Fladith. 

Mujtahid (43+): The literal linguistic meaning is ‘diligent’ or 
‘industrious’. In Islamic usage it is the title given to a legist formulating 
independent decisions in legal or theological matters. There are several 
categories of Mujtahidin (plural) with each category being restricted to 
the extent of their scope in carrying out ‘[jthdd (see above). 
Mutawatir (553): The linguistic meaning of Mutawatir is ‘sequential’. 
In hadith terminology it means a hadith narrated by such a large number 
of people in each generation (of narrators) that it would be impossible 
for them to collude on a lie. There is no agteed upon specific minimum 
number of natrators in each generation. 

Mu ‘tazilah (134); Theological school based on rationalist principles 
first ascribed to the theology of Wasil ibn Ata who is known for his 
belief in the “state between two states” regarding major sinners. They 
are Hanafi in jurisprudence. My‘tazilites disputed with Ahmed bin 
Hanbal on the issue of the Qur’an and whether it is a created or a non- 
created entity. 

Mutazalite. A follower of the Mu ‘tazilah theology (see above). 
Natrations (34"'): ‘Khabr’ is a report or ‘news’, In the Science of Hadith 


this is synonymous with hadith. 


346 


Qiyyas (4): Linguistically, this is analogy. In Islamic terminology this 
is the use of deductive analogy from the Quran and Swxnah to create 
rulings for situations that are new or not found in the text. 

Sahabah (Als): Literally companions. This is the generation of 
believers at the time of the Prophet (PBUH). According to Muhadithin 
they are defined as those who believed in the Prophet, met him and died 
in that state. There are however additional constraints placed by the 
scholars of Usui. 

Salaf (aly); The first three generations of the Muslims; they are the 
Sahabah, Tabi‘in and Taba‘ al-Tabi‘in. Their ranks, as a group, have been 
mentioned in an authentic hadith. 

Sanad (44): Literally means to ‘put something against the place on 
which you rely’, but in Aadzth it refers to the chain of narrators that 
transmitted the hadith. Each narrator has to possess intellect (Agi, 
Memory (Pati), Belief (slam), and Righteousness (Add/ah). Two 
consecutive narrators in a chain must have met each other and they must 
observe certain rules during the process of passing the Aadith from 
teacher to student. 

Shafi’i (444): Legal school based upon the principles of Imam Abu 
Abdullah Muhammad ibn Idris Ash-Shaft’i (died 204 AH/820 CE). 
Sunnah ()!): A primary source in Islam, the Sunnah comprises 
statements, actions and silent approval of the Prophet Muhammad. 
These categories of Sunnah are passed to us though /adith which describe 
purported acts witnessed, statements heard or that the Prophet remained 
silent (neither approving or disapproving) when an act or statement 
happened in his presence (the accepted principle is that silence means 
consent). 

Taba‘ al-Tabi in (Cael @4): The second generation after the Prophet. 


Tt means ‘those that followed on from the followers’ (see below). 


347 


Tabt‘in (0235): The first generation after the Prophet. They are called 
followers as they succeeded the Sahabah. An individual of this group is 
called a Tabi 7. 

Tafsir (o+%); Quranic Exegesis. 

Thought (64): ‘Zabnn’ - probable thought or belief. This is when one 
believes that something is true but there is a doubt that it may be false. 
In the case of Zahun/thought, the belief in something being true 
outweighs the doubt. 

Tranquillity (aglaby: ‘Thamaneenah’ - reassurance of contentment in 
ones belief on a matter. 

Usual (J shal); In Arabic, this means principles or fundamentals of a 
science; in Islamic terminology U%#/ are the principles or rules that are 
applied to the sources of Islam to derive theology or jurisprudence. We 
could say the Us/are like a template, the sources (Quran, Sunnah, Ijma’ 
and any others) are the raw materials and the rulings are the finished 
product once the template is applied to the raw materials. 

Wajib (>'s): An act that is compulsory. In the Hanafi Madhhab, it is 
only different from Fard by the fact that denial does not result in 
disbelief. 

Zahnn (or ‘Dhan’): See “Thought’. 


, oo bf 


About the Translator 


Sulaiman Ahmed grew up _ in 
Middlesbrough, in the North East of 
the UK. He graduated with LLB (Hons) 
in Law and subsequently undertook a 
PGCE in Mathematics to become a 
Secondary School teacher, before 
completing his Masters in Philosophy. 


He previously authored the influential 
book ‘Hanafi Principles of Testing 
Hadith’, which took a unique and 
timely look at the controversies 
Surrounding sayings attributed to the 
Prophet Muhammad _  (Hadiths). He 
advocated vetting such narrations in a 
rigorous manner - unlike the /aissez 
faire practices of Salafists and many 
others, who seem to wish to drown 
Muslims and non-Muslims alike in a sea 
of irrelevance and confusion. He has 
written numerous articles about issues 
facing Muslims in the West, such as 
Liberalism, blasphemy laws, sexuality 
in Islam and Islamic finance. These 
articles can be accessed on his blog 
www.sulaimanahmed.com 


Ts 
S 
¥ 


2 


Translation and ! THE a oes M | Ap. 


AAT? RIDA 


gol 
f 
{ 
f 
tA 
i 
rat 
i: 
MAT? 
ANGIE 


epee ne 
as io tw ar 
Ear ced and the Universe 
s a: See “ee | ges 
oS n ao ~ Ar GPa oS S ne er cbs aa aad 
Cee HEEPRELS 2 PER AA ss: 7 
@ls MirkesrCuh Shaykh Abu Manscoo: al-Mae‘aridi . 


; _— A ( GN i) ee a7) eo La ~ oy 
BPS 5 sab eg oe Raa 
: fe ; ee SS. 


os - a 7 Py ler “ali 
PRS eg ase te cae RO Oe 
Sern ro ee, eee Fl gt Bay eas 
eh gts i as Les pis Jp t= ah Pet ols Bae se 
ate | Pera yi BT ds ue oe “ar 
Ni Pe ao ) ace Vues Tk e. wD. ee 
ra <_< aa 1 ‘ beat _ eerie. | =. 4 ; 
&) shied ea i oa it eth Moe a4 wet? ee 
- mes rT Pa = » : eh bE poe a — = . a» . 
23 CN eral oo Peyote aes oi Pe ye 
ean Gi. ain ee ee | a at wits at 
7 S J ve. A oi » & i 4 
mil a ey i Ua 
hae ie aaah — wis ' fee ps A ae 
5 j 7 he tz , aes - : ‘ 
pe Gp ae . 


Se Oo a Rae 
REO id wi > lucite VOR. ed Bol 


ta”. 
Di 
~/*> 
~~ 7 


oy 
¢ 


7 ‘ . ater 
: ine } 


A ; = ¥ 
a a x * 
oe 


ee ake 
tite ak 


ois ew en 


Wes es ry 
‘ 


‘The Book of Monotheism’) is the famous Sunni 
oor al-Maturidi's magnum opus (d. 333AH/944AC) 
id its author are a foundation of Sunni thought to 
ily provenance and originality, as well as wide and 
nake this book essential for students of theology, 
history of ideas. Yet despite the wide purported 
votion to his ideas, Maturidi’s work has been 
and untranslated by Muslim and non-Muslim 
is the first ever English translation — with 
2 first half of ‘Kitaab at-Tawheed'. 


providing a detailed and holistic approach to 
ilst also being its earliest extant comprehensive 
sents the epistemological foundations of his 
s detailed arguments in defence of Monotheism, 
gical doctrines — such as proofs for the creation 
Iniverse. He also focuses on God, His existence and 
| Issues related.:to anthropomorphism and 
many others. 


gical affiliation, this Is an indispensable work for 
n alike. 


30000 
WATT 


THE BOOK OF MONOTHEISM 


KITAAB AT-TAWHEED: 


God and the Universe 
A Manual of Sunni Theology 


poulyy ueulrejns 
Aq 
Arequaului0’) 
pue uonelsuely 


- 
“ { 
ATi «, 4 a i 
eo > & »e, i / A 


= 
se 
ies! 

2 lO 

gas 

FORA 

Fz251O 

a lee 

ax 

i 

» 26 Z ; 

1. & 

a - 

She —— 
sz aa 
\¢ 2) 
<= 


" a: 


About the Translator 


Sulaiman Ahmed grew up in 
Middlesbrough, in the North East of 
the UK. He graduated with LLB (Hons) 
in Law and subsequently undertook a 
PGCE in Mathematics to become a 
Secondary School teacher, before 
completing his Masters in Philosophy. 


He previously authored the influential 
book ‘Hanafi Principles of Testing 
Hadith’, which took a unique and 
timely look at the controversies 


' surrounding sayings attributed to the 


Prophet Muhammad (Hadiths). He 
advocated vetting such narrations in a 
rigorous manner - unlike the /aissez 
faire practices of Salafists and many 
others, who seem to wish to drown 
Muslims and non-Muslims alike in a sea 
of irrelevance and confusion. He has 
written numerous articles about issues 
facing Muslims in the West, such as 
Liberalism, blasphemy laws, sexuality 
in Islam and Islamic finance. These 
articles can be accessed on his blog 
wana ciilaimanahmed com 


