JL Commentary on the Creed of Islam 

NUMBER XLIII OF THE 

RECORDS OF CIVILIZATION 
SOURCES AND STUDIES 



Austin P. Evans, Editor 



JL Commentary on the 
Creed of Islam 

Sa'd al-Din al-Tafta^ani 

on the Creed of 
T^ajm al-T)in al-TSJjtsafi 

TRANSLATED WITH INTRODUCTION 
AND NOTES BY 

EARL EDGAR ELDER 



MCML 

Columbia University Tressj TS{ew Yor\ 



COPYRIGHT I95O BY COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS, NEW YORK 



Published in Great Britain, Canada, and India by 
Geoffrey Cumberlege, Oxford University Press 
London, Toronto, and Bombay 



MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 



RECORDS OF CIVILIZATION 
SOURCES AND STUDIES 



EDITED UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY 

Editor 

AUSTIN P. EVANS, ph.d. 
Professor of History 

Advisory Board 

DINO BIGONGIARI, Da Ponte Professor of Italian 

ROBERT HERNDON FIFE, l.h.d., Gebhard Professor of the 
Germanic Languages and Literatures 

CARLTON J. H. HAYES, litt.d., Seth Low Professor of History 

ROGER SHERMAN LOOMIS, b.litt., Professor of English 

ROBERT MORRISON MacIVER, litt.d., Liebcr Professor of 
Political Philosophy and Sociology 

DAVID S. MUZZEY, ph.d., Gouverneur Morris Professor Emeritus 
of History 

JAMES T. SHOTWELL, ll.d., Bryce Professor Emeritus of the 
History of International Relations 

LYNN THORNDIKE, l.h.d., Professor of History 

WILLIAM L. WESTERMANN, l.h.d., Professor Emeritus of 
Ancient History 



To 0. N. E. 



Preface 



D uring recent years there has been a revival of interest in things 
mediaeval. The Neo-Thomist school of philosophy is but one evidence of 
this. Different scholars have reminded us that the Middle Ages are not a 
backwater nor a bayou having little connection with the great stream of 
intellectual movements in our civilized world. Nor can one fully appreci- 
ate this period in the history of Europe and ignore the contributions of 
Islam and Judaism. The dependence of the theologians of the three faiths 
on the metaphysics of Aristotle for terminology and expression made for a 
mutual exchange of thought that refutes forever the idea that the reli- 
gions which thrived in the Mediterranean world existed in isolated com- 
partments or dealt with one another only through war and persecution. 

Etienne Gilson in his Unity of Philosophical Experience records the simi- 
larities in principles and conclusions between al-Ash'ari and Descartes. 
Spinoza, the Jew of Amsterdam, was influenced by Maimonides, the Jew 
of Cairo, who although a real Aristotelian was greatly indebted to Ibn Slnsi 
and other Muslim writers. Miguel Asin in various volumes has shown the 
influence of Ibn Rushd on the theology of Thomas Aquinas, of Ibn 'Arab! 
on Raymond Lull, and of Muslim eschatology on Dante's Divine Comedy. 

The three groups, the Christians, the Jews, and the Muslims, used simi- 
lar arguments to prove the creatio ex nihilo. Yet in spite of much agree- 
ment in the scholastic method, doctrines peculiar to each naturally per- 
sisted. The orthodox theology of Islam developed a unique theory for 
explaining the active relationship of the Creator to His universe. This con- 
tribution to the catalogue of cosmologies is not so well known in the 
West. Maimonides, to whom we are indebted for the best systematic state- 
ment of this doctrine, 1 agreed with a number of Muslim thinkers in con- 
sidering these explanations of world phenomena as fantastic and as contrary 
to the accepted principles of Aristode. 

But it is just because this theory of Continuous Re-Creation and Atomic 
Time lies behind the explanations given by al-Taftazant of the Creed of 
al-Nasafi that this exposition of a Muslim creed is of great interest. The 

1 The Guide for the Perplexed, tr. Fricdlandcr, I, chap. 73. 



viii PREFACE 

book is also valuable as a comprehensive and authoritative statement of 
Islamic belief made at the time when it had become crystallized. While the 
Western world has reveled in a new birth of ideas which continued through 
the Renaissance, the Reformation, and the Enlightenment the world of 
Islam has largely held with a tenacious grasp to the doctrines set forth here. 
Until the present day it has remained an authoritative compendium of the 
arguments setting forth an explanation of the articles of Muslim faith. As 
a textbook of theology it has long held a leading place among the scholars 
attached to the great Muslim University of Al-Azhar in Cairo. 

The translation was first made as a part of the requirements for the 
degree of Doctor of Philosophy at the Kennedy School of Missions of the 
Hartford Seminary Foundation. I am greatly indebted to the late Professor 
Duncan Black Macdonald for having been my guide to the way of under- 
standing many of the intricate problems of Muslim theology. My sincere 
thanks are due to Professor Harry A. Wolfson of Harvard University for 
assistance in translating many difficult portions of scholastic reasoning. 
Among others who have helped in this task I gratefully mention the late 
Professor W. G. Shellabcar and Professor E. E. Calvcrley of the Kennedy 
School of Missions of the Hartford Seminary Foundation. I wish to ac- 
knowledge the help and advice of Professor Austin P. Evans, general editor 
of the Records of Civilization. Professor Arthur JefTery of Columbia Uni- 
versity has given valuable assistance, especially in reading the proof. 



Evangelical Theological Seminary, Cairo 



E. E. Elder 



Introduction 



J ust over a millennium ago Abu 'l-Hasan al-Asharl (d. a.d. 935) formu- 
lated the doctrinal position of orthodox Islam. He is credited with having 
saved the faith from corruption and having silenced the heretics. Three cen- 
turies separate his death from that of Muhammad. In time of appearance and 
importance he occupies in Islam a place comparable in the history of Chris- 
tian doctrine to that of the Council of Nicaea. There is something repre- 
sentative in these two, al-Ash'ari, the individual, and Nicaea, the church 
council. In Islam creeds and expositions of dogma are written by men who 
though they claim to give expression to that which is according to the 
Approved Way of the Prophet and the Agreement of the Muslim Community 
have no more ecclesiastical authority back of them than their own pens. In 
the evolution of doctrinal statements one never hears of "church" councils 
and their decisions but only of learned men and their convictions as to the 
essential truths of the Muslim's belief. 

Muhammad himself, as reflected in the Qur'an and Traditions, gave little 
attention to the systematic arrangement and logical presentation of the revela- 
tions to which he laid claim. His message was theocentric, but he was not a 
theologian. As long as he lived there was no necessity for a reasoned, methodi- 
cal statement of Belief, just as there was no need for a political constitution 
or a code of laws. As the medium of instruction and guidance Muhammad 
met events as they came. If necessity demanded, verses were abrogated by 
new ones, or a more detailed explanation left no uncertainty as to Allah's 
purpose and desire. 

When the Prophet died, loyalty led his followers to seek guidance from 
the verses of the Qur'an which he had given them although they were 
not yet collected into one volume. One interpretation of such verses as "This 
is a detailed explanation of everything" (Qur'an 12:111) and "We have 
neglected nothing in the Book" (Qur'an 6:38) was that this revelation 
through Muhammad was sufficient in itself for all times and occasions. But 
experience taught the community of Islam that even a book purporting 
to come direct from the Almighty and All-Wise was not enough. Recourse 
was had to the practice and commands of the Prophet, then analogies were 



x INTRODUCTION 

drawn, and if guidance was still lacking one looked for the Agreement 
of the Muslim Community. 

Orthodox Islam is accustomed to consider the days of the Companions 
of the Prophet and their Successors as the golden age when the use of 
dialectics was unnecessary. Because of their fidelity to Muhammad and be- 
cause throughout their lives they were in the shadow of the memory of his 
presence, these early Believers are pictured as relying absolutely on his 
authority. 

The reason given then for much of the early theological controversy is 
that people lost their first love. Fidelity to the dead Muhammad waned be- 
fore loyalty to a living leader. Zeal for the faith degenerated into jealousy 
and party strife. 

In reviewing the evolution of doctrine one might easily fall into the 
error of attempting to separate what in the West is designated theological 
speculation as being in a different category from political theory. But in 
Islam oftentimes the early differences on religious matters had their origin 
in diverse political opinions. 

The adherents of the family of 'All and Fatima claimed the Khalifate as the 
legitimate right of the Prophet's descendants. This narrow claim has been 
rejected by the great Sunnite majority of Islam, but the Shi'ite minority 
through frustration and persecution has developed a passion motive that has 
colored much of their thinking. 

Less than three decades following the Prophet's death there arose the 
Kharijites, who held that the headship of the Muslim community belonged 
not to some branch of Muhammad's family, nor to a certain Arab tribe, but 
to the one best qualified for it. This political revolt against the ruling powers 
produced theological discussions over the distinction between Belief and 
Unbelief, the meaning of Islam, and what actions make man a great 
sinner. 

To support the position that questioning about theological subjects was 
unnecessary there are traditions from Muhammad which discourage the 
discussion of dogma. Not only would he have no system of theology 
in his time, but for all time as well. Just as his utterances, as the in- 
strument of revelation, settled metaphysical problems during his lifetime, 
so they were to go on settling them for the community of the faithful who 
accepted him as Prophet. The traditions regarding theological speculation 
which are said to have come from him not only teach the futility of divisions 
over matters of belief but also the inherent wickedness of schisms. One tradi- 



INTRODUCTION xi 

tion has it that he said that the Magians were divided into seventy sects, the 
Jews into seventy-one, the Christians into seventy-two, and the Muslims into 
seventy-three, only one of which would escape the Fire. The Prophet, when 
asked which sect this was, replied, "It is that to which I, myself, and my 
Companions belong." 1 

This attitude of mind that deprecated discussion and schism was responsi- 
ble in the end for the formation of a school of thought, the Murji'ite, which 
counseled delaying judgment as to the real faith of a professed Believer. 
Because his final destiny rested with Allah, an evil-doer who professed 
Islam was still to be reckoned as one of the people of the qibla, that is, 
those who in worshiping Allah faced towards Mecca. This position was a 
result of their attitude towards the Umayyad rulers, whom they obeyed even 
though most pious Muslims were skeptical as to the real faith of such im- 
pious potentates. 

Another explanation given for the rise of theological disputation is that 
suggested by Ibn Khaldun. 2 It was the result of attempts to decipher the 
obscure and ambiguous passages (al-mutashabihat) in the Qur'an. One 
explanation of certain verses produced a crude anthropomorphic conception 
of Allah; other ingenuous interpretations saw in the Qur an the embryo of a 
pantheistic faith. 

A third reason for the development of Muslim dogmatics was the neces- 
sity for an apologetic. Through the rapid expansion of Islam into other 
lands beyond Arabia it came more and more into contact with Greek and 
Christian thought. Centuries before, Christian teachers had laid the founda- 
tion for the science of dogmatics by using such philosophical propositions as 
suited their purpose. Now when Muslim parties saw in the writings of non- 
Muslims arguments which would defend their position they were quick 
to use them. The close resemblance between material that appears in the 
writings of John of Damascus and the Murji'itc and Qadarite 8 doctrines is 
proof of this. The Kharijite doctrine that those who were guilty of great sins 
were no longer to be considered as true Believers is essentially that of Chris- 
tians who classify sins as mortal and venial. 

It was in refuting the positions of the Mutazilite party that orthodox Islam 
finally came into its own and arrived at a mature expression of its Belief. Al- 

1 Sec al-Shahrastanl, al-Milal wa 'l-Nihal, p. 3. Cf. also similar traditions about the 
sects of the Muslim community, Wensinck, A Handbook, of Early Muhammadan Tradi- 
tion, p. 47. 

2 Al-Muqaddima, III, 44 f. 

8 The party which taught that the creature has power over his actions. 



xii INTRODUCTION 

though when al-Taftazanl wrote five hundred years had passed since the 
great Mu'tazilites had flourished and but litde less than that since they had 
been eclipsed by al-Ash'arl, he often presents the orthodox position by first 
answering the Mu'tazilites. 

In spite of the fact that al-Nasafl makes no mention of them in his Creed, 
al-Taftazanl used this accepted method of commentators. 

The origin of the dissent of this school of thought from the orthodox posi- 
tion is given by al-Taftazanl. 4 The name given them by their opponents 
meant Withdrawers or Secessionists, but the Mu'tazilites called themselves 
the People of Unity and Justice. It is around these two points that one may 
focus the peculiarities of their reasoning. 

In early Islam there developed a remarkable reverence for the Qur'an, 
largely because of its own witness to itself. It is presented as the very speech 
of Allah to Muhammad. Its style is oracular. In all probability from con- 
tacts with Christianity and its doctrines of the Logos, the idea that the 
Qur'an was uncreated and eternal was adopted by Muslims. The Mu'tazi- 
lites held that this undermined the unity of Allah by establishing some- 
thing eternal alongside of Him. It really meant the ascribing of a Partner to 
Him and was therefore to them the worst kind of infidelity. 

In addition to Speech Allah had other attributes such as Life, Power, Will- 
ing, Seeing, and Hearing. Over against the accepted opinion that these were 
also eternal many Mu'tazilites said they were the essence of Allah itself, that 
is, His essence is said to be knowing when connected with things known. 
He wills but does not have the attribute of Willing. He speaks with a 
speech but it subsists in something that is other than He. They were not 
alone in this. Al-Ash'arl says, "The Mu'tazilites, the Kharijites, many of 
the Murjfites as well as many of the Zaydites say that Allah is rich, mighty, 
great, majestic, grand, master, overpowering, seeing, lord, possessor, con- 
straining, high, but not on account of might, greatness, majesty, grand- 
ness, mastery, lordship and constraint." 5 The orthodox on the other hand 
said that all these characteristics were to be predicated of Allah and that He 
possessed eternal or essential attributes (si fat azallya or dhattya). 

The relation of unity and plurality in God had also been discussed by 
John of Damascus and others such as the Pseudc^Dionysius, the Neoplatonic 
mystic, and their arguments are echoed in the Mu'tazilite controversy. Faced 
with the task of defining the exact relationship between the essence of Allah 
and His attributes, the Muslim theologians took refuge in the use of negative 

* See below, pp. 8 f. 6 Kitab MaqaLat al-lslamiyyin, p. 177. 



INTRODUCTION xii* 

terms as had other theologians before them. Although the attributes were 
eternal they were careful not to establish a plurality of eternals. "The attri- 
butes are not His essence itself, nor are they anything extraneous to His 
essence/' 

From their position on the attributes the Mu'taziiites showed themselves 
anxious to avoid any literal interpretation of the passages using anthro- 
pomorphic terms of Allah. They were vigorous in their denial of the Beatific 
Vision. This may have been the starting point for working out their doc- 
trine of Allah's absolute uniqueness. From reading the Qur'an and Tradi- 
tions orthodox Muslims came to believe that they would see Allah in the next 
world. Among the Jews and the Christians there was often fear or doubt 
about the thought of beholding God. However, the Christian emphasis on the 
resurrection as well as Hellenistic mysticism had turned men's attention 
to the other world. In discussing its realities the matter of the Beatific Vision 
became in the early Middle Ages one of importance. But in Islam to accept 
this as a reality meant, if literally interpreted, that Allah had a shape, a face, 
hands, arms, and feet. Many of the early Believers accepted the verses but 
refused to comment further on their meaning. Malik b. Anas, in answer to 
the question about Allans seating Himself on His throne, said, "How it is 
done is unknown, it must be believed, questions about it are an innova- 
tion." 6 

The question of the justice of Allah, which was also a rallying point for the 
Mu'taziiites, went back to very early debates about the punishment of sins 
and man's responsibility for his actions. Christian teaching regarding pre- 
destination influenced these controversies even though discussion was in- 
evitable from what appeared in the Qur an and Traditions. Allah is de- 
scribed as having created the world and established His decrees in eternity. 
Some creatures are destined to do good, others to do evil; some are Be- 
lievers, others arc Unbelievers. Men are also urged to repent and turn to 
Allah. Had it been possible to identify absolutely the body of Believers 
with those who do good and obtain entrance into the Garden, and the Un- 
believers with those who do evil and deserve the Fire, there would have 
been little place for dispute. The Qadarites, who appear to have been fore- 
runners of the Mu'tazilites, said that man possessed free will to choose good 
deeds. The Kharijites taught that one who committed a great sin must be an 
Unbeliever; the orthodox Muslims, influenced by the Murji'itc teaching 
which delayed judgment on sinners, since it is Allah who passes judgment, 

*MacdonaId, Development of Muslim Theology, p. 186. 



xiv 



INTRODUCTION 



said that the professing Muslim who is an evil-doer should not be con- 
sidered an Unbeliever. The Mu'tazilite position also hinted at delay or at 
least uncertainty by saying that the evil-doer is in a middle position and not 
to be identified with the Believers nor the Unbelievers. In general they 
held that his final destiny rests on his actions and on the absolute justice of 
Allah. Faith is not granted freely to some and withheld from others. Allah 
acts for the good and the guidance of man. If man accepts he enters the 
Garden; if he refuses he receives the punishment he deserves. 

Undoubtedly in reaching their position the Mu'tazilites were greatly in- 
fluenced by Christian thought and Greek philosophy. They avoided hypos- 
tatizing the attributes of Allah, especially that of Speech, into anything 
like the persons of the Trinity, and they affirmed His absolute unity. Again 
they had recourse to Greek dialectic to support their positions. 

The dialectic used by the Mu'tazilites and others to rationalize their re- 
ligious tenets was called \alam (speech). Al-Taftazani reviews the rise of 
this science in Islam. At first the term was used by pious Believers in con- 
tempt of those who relied on logic and philosophy to give a rational explana- 
tion of their faith. Eventually it came to mean scholastic theology. The term 
Mutakallim (or one who used foldm), instead of being applied to here- 
tics, was used of the ultra-orthodox who taught such a barren intellectualism 
that al-Ghazzali (d. 505 a.h.) when he appeared voiced a vigorous protest 
against them. 

The close of the second century after the Hijra ushered in the rule of the 
'Abbasid Khalifas, Ma'mun and Mu'tasim, at Baghdad. They not only 
favored the heterodox teachings of the Mu'tazilites but by persecution tried 
to impose these views on their subjects. During the reign of the latter an 
abridged edition of the Enneads of Plotinus by Porphyry of Tyre was 
translated into Arabic by a Christian of Emessa in the Lebanon, under the 
title of "The Theology of Aristotle.' , Unfortunately those who sought to 
harmonize the doctrines of Islam with Greek philosophy considered this 
book a genuine exposition of Aristotle's teaching. For them it was just as 
authoritative as the Qur'an. Al-FarabI, writing after the time of al-Ash'ari, 
was a combination of the loyal Muslim and the Neoplatonist and still 
looked on this work as authentic as did also his disciple, Ibn Slna. But the 
great work of translating the texts of Greek philosophy came after the hey- 
day of the Mu'tazilites. The influence of Greek thought on orthodox theology 
from the fourth to the sixth centuries of the Hijra had only an indirect 
effect, for the mold for Muslim dogmatics had already been formed. When 



INTRODUCTION xv 

more light is thrown on the early period we shall doubtless see as well that 
Indian and Oriental philosophies too have played a part in producing the 
dogmatics of Islam. 

To return to the beginning of the third century of the Hijra, even though 
the heterodox thinkers turn to non-Muslim sources for the rational state- 
ment of their position, the general attitude of orthodoxy remained as before. 
The use of logic and philosophy was an abomination. Al-Shafi'I held that 
certain men should be trained for defending the faith, but that it would 
be a great calamity if their arguments were disseminated among the com- 
mon people. It is reported that he said, "My judgment is that those who use 
\alam should be beaten with palm sticks and led about among the clans 
and tribes and it should be said, 'This is the reward of those who have 
forsaken the Book and the Approved Way and have taken up with 
kaldm.' " Abu Yusuf held that whoever sought knowledge through \alam 
had become a zindlq (a dualist or an atheist). 7 

Ahmad b. Hanbal, who died in the middle of the third century, led a 
reactionary movement that insisted on a literal interpretation of the Qur'an 
and abhorred rationalizing. With him dogma had for its real basis the 
Qur'an and Traditions that went back to the first generation of Believers. 
His popularity with the people saved the cause of orthodoxy for a time but it 
remained for Abu '1-Hasan al-Ash'an who called himself a disciple of lbn 
Hanbal to give the coup de grace to the Mu'tazilites by turning their argu- 
ments against them. Kalum instead of being despised as an innovation now 
became the handmaid of revelation, just as in Latin Christendom under Al- 
bert the Great, Bonaventura, Thomas Aquinas, and others, scholastic the- 
ology used Aristotle and any available Greek philosophy that suited its 
purpose. Being a convert from the doctrines of the Mu'tazilites, al-Ash'arl 
was able to use effectively their dialectic in defending orthodoxy. The well- 
known story of his conversion to the Approved Way is told by al-Taftazani 
in the opening section of his commentary. 8 

But al-Ash'ari was not alone in making a statement of Islam's belief 
which was supported by the arguments of scholasticism. Contemporaneous 
with him in Egypt there was al-TahawT, and in Samarqand Abu Mansur 
al-Maturldi became the founder of an orthodox \alam. Both followed the 
legal school of Abu Hanlfa, the great interpreter of jurisprudence (fiqh), 

7 Macdonald, Development, p. 187; 'AH al-Qari, Commentary on al-Viqh al-Akbar, 
pp. 2 ff.; 'I.D., supercommentary of al-Isfara'ini (Cairo text of a.h. 1335) on al-Taftazanl, 
p. 14. 

8 See below, p. 9. 



xvi INTRODUCTION 

which in his time included theological topics in addition to canonical sub- 
jects. 

With the triumphs of al-Ash'arl the prestige of the Mu'tazilite party was 
lost. True, now and again one of their partisans got into power and the 
name of al-Ash'arl was cursed in the Friday sermon at the mosques and his 
disciples were persecuted, but such a recrudescence was of short duration. 
Almost a century after al-Ash'ari the atomic philosophy, as sponsored and 
established by al-Baqillam (d. 403 a.h.), was being developed into one of 
the fundamentals of scholastic theology. The earlier orthodox theologians 
down to and including the period of al-Baqillanl and his followers are un- 
doubtedly the Mashayikh or Early Theologians referred to by al-Taftazanl. 
After some time Muslims used the formal logic of Aristotle as an essential 
of their thinking although they rejected philosophy in itself. New proofs 
were forthcoming which made use of the physics, metaphysics, and mathe- 
matics of the philosophers. This new development was known as the way of 
the later scholastics (tariqat al-mutd a\hkj\trin) as contrasted with the 
earlier ones whose methods were largely negative. Al-Ghazzall (d. 505 a.h.) 
and Fakhr al-Din al-Razi (d. 606 a.h.) are considered as leaders of this 
new movement. In the case of the former there seems to be a conversion to the 
Aristotelian-Neoplatonic philosophy of matter, form, and emanation, while 
some others maintained a noncommittal attitude regarding the atomic ex- 
planation of the world processes. However, most of the scholastics in the 
centuries that followed held to the atomic theory. This process of the 
amalgamation of theology and philosophy went on until they differed little 
from one another except that theology concerned itself also with subjects 
based on revelation and authority. 

Ibn Khaldun (d. 808 a.h.), writing of the scholastic theology of his time, 
bemoaned its decline 0 from its exalted position of the past. It had once been 
useful in repulsing heretics and innovators in their attacks on the faith, but 
they had passed from the scene of action. During this period of impending 
decline philosophy took the brunt of the attack in place of the Mu'tazilite doc- 
trines. However, the writers rehashed the arguments of the past and were 
not at all timid about beating the dead horse of Mu'tazilitism. 

Already the teachers of dogma, sensing their inability to add anything 
original to the mass of dialectic in defense of orthodoxy, had begun to make 
commentaries on statements of faith and articles of belief. Rather than go 
back to original sources and reconstruct their theology, it was preferable to 

9 Sec ahMuqaddima, III, 43. 



INTRODUCTION xvii 

reinterpret the articles of belief of someone of the past. This process went on 
until there were numerous supercommentaries and glosses on commentaries. 

It will be necessary to retrace our steps and notice the development of 
creed-making. The earliest statements which give an epitome of Muslim Be- 
lief are to be found in the Qur'an and the Traditions. Sura 112, in which 
Muhammad is commanded to declare the unity of the Deity and that He 
begets not and is not begotten, and the Throne verse (Qur'an 2:256), which 
proclaims that Allah is living, self-subsistent, and knowing, and that to 
Him belongs what is in the heavens and the earth, arc favorite sections 
of their Holy Book and are often quoted by Muslims as giving the es- 
sence of their religion. But in neither of these passages or elsewhere in the 
Qur an do we find in one sentence the exact words of the witnessing 
formula, "There is no god but Allah and Muhammad is the Messenger of 
Allah." 

Different verses in the Qur'an admonish men to believe in Allah and His 
Messengers. Twice at least His angels and His books are added. In Qur'an 
4:135, which reads, "Whoever believeth not in Allah, His Angels, His 
Books, His Messengers, and the Last Day hath certainly erred a wide 
error," there appear in the negative form all but one of the elements men- 
tioned in one of the well-known traditions which aims to summarize the 
principles of the Muslim faith. "Belief ... is that you believe in Allah, His 
Angels, His Books, His Messengers, the Last Day, and His decree of good 
and evil." 10 

But the very simplicity of such statements made them inadequate when 
party loyalty became heated, when explanation of difficult passages was 
demanded, and when problems raised by Greek philosophy and Christian 
theology were encountered and demanded a satisfactory solution. 

The late Professor A. J. Wensinck in his The Muslim Creed has made all 
Orientalists his debtors for a thorough study of the statements of Muslim 
belief. 11 It will thus be necessary to mention here only some of the forms 
which the creed assumed in the early centuries of Islam. 

The first attempts at a confession of faith outside these very brief state- 
ments in the Qur'an and Traditions are striking in things they omit, as in 
al-Fiqh al-A\bar (I) which, even though it is wrongly attributed to Abu 
Hanlfa (d. 150 a.h.), reflects his teaching. Written probably in the early 
part of the second century of the Hijra, it makes no mention of the attri- 

10 Musnad, III, 134 (I. 

11 The Muslim Creed: Us Genesis and Historical Development. 



xviii INTRODUCTION 

butes o£ Allah nor of the Qur'an as the Speech of Allah, neither is there a 
discussion of Muhammad and the prophetic office. 

A much more detailed statement is that known as the Testament ( Wastyd) 
of Abu Hanlfa. This supposed testament of one of the founders of the four 
orthodox schools of religious practice also is not a systematic outline of 
Islamic principles but a protest against some of the outstanding heretical 
opinions that had crept into theological thinking. Again, neither the 
prophetic office of Muhammad nor the attributes of Allah around which 
later confessions were built receive consideration. 

Another stage in the development of the creed is seen in an early chapter 
of al-Ash'ari's Kitab al-lbana 'an Usui al-Diyana. Having given the position 
of innovators and those who have gone astray the author follows with a section 
setting forth the articles of Belief of the Muslim Community. The first person 
plural, with expressions like "We believe," "We say," is used throughout. 
Faith is affirmed in the Unity of Allah, His attributes, His uncreated Speech, 
His decision and decree regarding the actions of creatures, the Beatific Vision 
of Allah on the Day of Resurrection. Belief is defined, the Garden and the 
Fire and other eschatological matters are stated to be realities, and the 
Imamate is explained as well as other matters over which there had been 
dispute. 12 In his Maqdldt al-hldmiyin al-Ash'ari in the chapter dealing with 
the beliefs of the People of Tradition and the Approved Way again sum- 
marizes the Muslim creed, but this time in the third person. 13 As for his 
own position as revealed in his Ibdna, al-Ash'ari not only follows the teaching 
of Ahmad b. Hanbal, but says, "We hold fast to the Book of our Lord, to the 
Sunna of our Prophet, to what has been handed down from the Com- 
panions and their Followers and the masters of hadith, and to what Abu 
'Abdallah Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Hanbal says opposing that which op- 
poses him, for he is the excellent leader and the perfect head, through whom 
Allah has shown the truth, taken away error, made clear the path, and sub- 
dued the innovations of the innovators, the schisms of the schismatics, and the 
doubt of the doubters." 14 Although al-Ash'ari is usually represented as the 
theologian who introduced into orthodoxy such methods of logic and inter- 
pretations as he had gained from his study with Mu'tazilite teachers, yet both 
in al-lbana, where he warmly defends the position of Ahmad b. Hanbal, 
and Maqdldt, where he presents in a detached manner the multifarious views 

12 Al-Ash'ari, Kitab al-lbana 'an Usui al-Diydna, pp. 8 W. C. Klein, Abu 'l-Hasan 
' Ali Ibn Isma'il al-AVans Al-lbdnah 'an Usui ad-Diydnah, pp. 49 ff. 

13 Pp. 290 ff. 14 AUbdna, p. 8. 



INTRODUCTION xix 

of sectaries and innovators along with those of the People of the Approved 
Way, there appears to be little of \alam in his writings. 

Among other writers contemporary with him Abu Ja'far Ahmad al-Tahawi, 
an Egyptian who died in 331 a.h., wrote a compendium of Muslim beliefs. 15 
A follower of the legal school of Abu Hanifa, he does not agree with the ex- 
treme conclusions of al-Ash'arl, which jeopardize the moral basis for Al- 
lah's actions. Al-Maturidl, another contemporary also of the Hanafite per- 
suasion, has given his name to the rival school of orthodox theology, but no 
creed by his pen is extant. 

From the fourth century of the Hijra the statements of the orthodox creed 
assumed a more logical form. Al-Ghazzali (d. 505 a.h.) is credited with 
having won the day for the Ash'arite position in the west. He wrote at least 
three treatises on things necessary to Belief. His exposition of the two 
phrases of the Witnessing formula which appears in the first section of the 
second book of the Ihya is the forerunner of a whole group of creeds which 
center all the articles of Belief around Allah and His attributes and His 
Messenger Muhammad. This type of creed signified a reversion to the bare 
essentials of faith and became later very stereotyped in the creeds of 
al-SanusI (d. 895 a.h.) and al-Fadall (d. 1236 a.h.) where all arguments for 
Allah's existence rest on the existence of the universe. 

By the time, then, of Abu Hafs 'Umar al-Nasafi, who died (537 a.h.) 
about thirty years after al-Ghazzali, there had been three distinct stages in 
the development of creed-making. The Qur*an verses and Traditions, which 
briefly stated in a dozen words the objects of faith, gave way to a loosely 
connected group of sentences which answered heresies that divided the 
community. The third stage introduced a more logical arrangement of 
material; considerable space was given to the discussion of Allah's attributes, 
followed by articles on the prophetic office and on eschatologicai matters, 
but much less space was given to subjects on which there had been dif- 
ference of opinion. 

The formal statement of the tenets of Islam made by al-Nasafi is one 
of the most noted of all the many treatises on the Articles of Belief, which 
take the place in Islam played by creeds, confessions, and catechisms in 
Christianity. A canon lawyer of the school of Abu Hanifa, al-Nasafi gives the 
viewpoint of the MaturTdites in theology. Made in a period that included both 

10 Abu Ja'far Ahmad al-Tahawi, Bayan al-Sunna wa '\-]ama'a (Halab, a.h. 1344)- 
English translation by E. E. Elder in The Macdonald Presentation Volume (Princeton, 
1933)> PP. 129-44. 



xx INTRODUCTION 

al-Ghazzali and Fakhr al-Dln al-Razi, his short statement of faith has been 
the subject of more comment than any of the works of these more famous 
writers. 

With al-Nasafl and others of the fifth and sixth centuries a.h. the ac- 
cepted arrangement of materials called for an introductory section setting 
forth the sources or roots of knowledge. Al-Baghdadl (d. 429 a.h.) is 
credited with being among the earliest to adopt this method, although the 
Jewish author Sa'adya al-Fayyumi had already given the sources as three, 
namely, the knowledge of the Perception, the knowledge of Reason, and 
intuitive or necessary knowledge. 10 

Following the introduction in al-Nasafl, the world as something con- 
sisting of substances and accidents is examined. From this al-Nasafl pro- 
ceeds to enumerate the attributes of Allah who is the Creator and Originator 
of the world. The questions next discussed are the possibility of the Beatific 
Vision of Allah and whether or not all the actions of creatures are brought 
into existence from nonexistence by Allah alone. Following a description 
of many of the eschatological elements of Islam, the subjects of the great 
and small sins and their relation to Unbelief are examined. Next there is a 
section defining the meaning of Belief. The Messengers, Prophets, and 
Angels through whom Allah has communicated with the world are in- 
vestigated, and then follows a study of the gracious acts or wonders of the 
so-called saints or Walls. After a full inquiry into the Imamate or sovereignty 
in the state the treatise closes with a series of conclusions reached concerning 
various and sundry matters of faith. 

The outstanding commentary on al-Nasafl's Articles of Muslim Belief, 
which has had a remarkable reputation over a period of half a millennium, is 
that of ai-Taftazanl. 

Although Sa'd al-Dln al-Taftazanl is in no sense an original writer, his 
treatise is a standard textbook on Muslim theology and in turn has been the 
subject of many supercommentaries. Because it was written just after the 
subject matter of theology had been precipitated into the form it was to re- 
tain for five hundred years without perceptible change, this book of al- 
Taftazani has remained for scholars a compendium of the various views re- 
garding the great doctrines of Islam. There is little indeed in his comment 
that is not found elsewhere. One needs only to read al-Razi's discussion of the 
Beatific Vision of Allah or al-Iji's explanation of the Reality of Belief to 
realize that the detailed statements in this commentary on al-Nasafl's Articles 

16 Kitab ci-Amanat wa 'l-Vtiqadat (Leiden, 1881), pp. 12 f. 



INTRODUCTION xxi 

of Belief (al-Aqaid) had been used by others before. Al-JurjanT and al- 
Taftazanl must have drawn from common sources, for many of the defini- 
tions given in the former's al-Ta'rifat are identical with those employed by 
al-TaftazanT. A glance at the definitions of the five senses given by both is 
sufficient proof of this. 

Lest his work as a compiler give an unfavorable impression of al- 
TaftazanT the reader should turn to an illuminating paragraph in lbn 
Khaldun. He says, "I found in Egypt numerous works on the intellectual 
sciences composed by the well-known person Sa'd al-DTn al-TaftazanT, a 
native of Harat, one of the villages of Khurasan. Some of them are on 
J{alam and the foundations of fiqh and rhetoric, which show that he had a 
profound knowledge of these sciences. Their contents demonstrate that he 
was well versed in the philosophical sciences and far advanced in the rest of 
the sciences which deal with Reason/' 17 

There are some interesting facts to be noted in connection with this 
statement. Ibn Khaldun died in the year 808 a.h., while al-Taftazanfs 
death preceded his by only a few years. It did not take al-TaftazanT centuries 
or even scores of years to attain a place of prominence as a theologian. By 
the time of his death or very shortly afterwards he was being studied and 
appreciated as a scholar in Cairo, which was in those days some months 
distant from the regions of Khwarizm and Samarqand, where he taught 
and wrote. And after five hundred years he is still a celebrated authority 
studied in the schools of the East. 

We know very little indeed regarding his life and environment. The fol- 
lowing facts concerning him are mentioned in the Encyclopaedia of Islam} 8 
He was born in the month of Safar, 722 a.h. (February-March, a.d. 1322), 
at Taftazan, a large village near Nasa in Khurasan. He is said to have been 
a pupil of 'Adud al-DTn al-IjT and of Qutb al-DTn. His earliest work was 
completed at the age of sixteen. The Mutawwal, the Mu\htasar al-Ma'ant, 
and the Talwih were completed in 748, 756, and 758 respectively, at Harat, 
Ghujduwan, and Gulistan. The commentary on the al-Aqaid al- Nasaftya 
was completed at Khwarizm in 768. According to lbn 'Arabshah, al- 
TaftazanT, like Qutb al-DTn al-RazT, was one of the scholars attracted to the 
court of the Mongols of Western Qipcfaq. When Timur invaded Khwarizm, 
Malik Muhammad SarakhsT b. Malik Mu'izz al-DTn Husayn Kurt asked his 
nephew PTr Muhammad b. Ghiyath al-DTn PTr 'AlT, who was then in the 
suite of Timur, to obtain Timur's consent to send al-TaftazanT to Sarakhs. 

17 Al-Muqaddima, III, 92 f. 18 IV, 604 tf. 



xxiv 



INTRODUCTION 



A comparison of the relative positions of al-Nasafl and al-Taftazani in 
respect to the two schools of orthodoxy is of value. 

1. Regarding the sources of knowledge for mankind most Muslims, ex- 
cept the extreme Hanbalites, would admit the sound (that is, not defective) 
senses, true narratives, and Reason. 20 Al-Nasafi in his creed says, "And 
Illumination (al-ilhdm) is not one of the causes of the cognition of the 
soundness of a thing/' This is the position of Abu Hanlfa, who was inclined 
to ignore the claims of mystics to special knowledge because of his leanings 
towards rationalism. But al-Taftazani agrees with al-Ghazzall and many 
other Ash'arites by saying that in the way of the mystic there is perfection 
of Belief and absolute knowledge. In attempting to explain away al-Nasafl's 
opposition to ilhdm, al-Taftazani says that he must have meant that ilham 
is not a cause by which knowledge results to people in general, nor by 
which one can enforce it on another, since there is no doubt that knowledge 
does result from it. 21 

2. In the matter of the origin of the universe the Qur'an everywhere teaches 
that Allah is Creator and Maker. Repeatedly man's nothingness is con- 
trasted with the power and wisdom of Allah who brings all things into 
existence. Most Muslim philosophers, through the use of an amalgam of the 
Neoplatonic Chain and the Aristotelian Cosmos, came to look at the world 
not so much as a creation but an emanation from the Deity. The language of 
the Qur'an, because of its implicit pantheism, lent itself to this interpreta- 
tion. Both al-Ash'arl and al-Maturldl believed that Allah had created the uni- 
verse out of nothing. This created world consists of substances and acci- 
dents; the former subsist in themselves, the latter only in something else. 

But the unique contribution of Islam in the realm of philosophy was an 
elaborate atomic theory which is a combination of material atoms and time 
atoms into a complete system to explain the origin and working process of the 
universe. Maimonides, who gives in The Guide for the Perplexed a most 
systematic summary of the theory, says that Muslims borrowed it from the 
Greek philosophers but notes that there are fundamental differences be- 
tween the Muslim position and that of Epicurus and other atomists. Al- 
Baqillanl (d. a.d. 1013) has been called the original atomist among the 
Muslims. 

Although al-Nasafi uses the term atom (jawhar) and explains it as "the 
part which is not further divided," this is insufficient basis for believing that 

20 Sec below, p. 16. 21 See below, p. 27. 



INTRODUCTION xxv 

he held the interpretation characteristic of the thoroughgoing atomists and 
which has been maintained by the scholastic theologians of the later days of 
Islam. On the other hand al-Taftazanl as well as most Ash'arites accepted 
this theory in its entirety. 

The following is a very brief summary of the twelve propositions of the 
Mutakallim atomists as given by Maimonides: 22 

(1) The universe is composed of individual atoms (jawhar jard) which 
are all exactly alike. They do not have quantity but when combined the 
bodies thus compounded do. 

(2) A vacuum in which nothing exists provides for the combination, 
separation, and movement of the atoms. 

(3) Time is also made up of atoms which cannot be further subdivided. 

(4) There are accidents which are elements in the sense of non-permanent 
qualities, which are superadded to the substance and which are inseparable 
from all material things. 

(5) Atoms do not occur without accidents nor do accidents occur apart 
from atoms, even though the atoms do not have quantity. 

(6) Accidents do not continue through two atoms of time. There is thus 
no inherent nature in things. Allah creates a substance and simultaneously 
its accidents. Immediately after its creation it is destroyed and another takes 
its place. That which is called natural law is only Allah's customary way of 
acting. 

(7) The absence of a property is itself a property that exists in the body, so 
death is just as real an accident as life, rest as real as motion. 

(8) There exists nothing but substance and accident. All bodies are 
composed of similar atoms, so the difference in bodies is caused only by their 
difference in accidents. 

(9) One accident cannot exist in another accident. Every accident is 
directly connected with the substance which is its substratum. 

(10) There is unlimited possibility in the world, with the exception of 
logical contradictions, because the divine will is not limited by natural 
laws. 

(11) The idea of the infinite is inadmissible, whether actual, potential, 
or accidental. An infinite body, an infinite number of bodies, and an infinite 
number of causes are all impossible. 

(12) The senses are not always to be trusted. Their evidence cannot 

22 The Guide for the Perplexed, tr. Friedlander, pp. 120 ff. 



xxvi INTRODUCTION 

be accepted in face of rational proof. This last proposition answers those 
who oppose the preceding as contrary to the perception of the senses. 

There were variants of this form of the atomistic philosophy in Islam, but 
that held by al-Taftazani and most other Ash'arites, if analyzed, would 
agree in practically every detail with this scheme set forth by Maimonides. 

Though the system is still taught in Muslim religious colleges like al-Azhar, 
reform movements in modern Islam like that of Muhammad 'Abdu tend to 
go back to Ibn Sina, Ibn Rushd, and the Aristotelian system for their inter- 
pretation of the cosmos. It has been suggested, however, that modern Western 
atomic speculation may galvanize the atomic system of strict orthodoxy into 
a semblance of life, just as the facts regarding microbes are interpreted as 
being in harmony with the Qur'anic teaching concerning the jinn. 

3. Orthodox Islam, in opposition to the Mu'tazilites, reached early in its 
development the position that Allah has attributes (si fat), which indicate 
more than the term "the Necessarily Existent" (wajib al-wujud) connotes 
and which are from eternity. The disciples of al-Ash'arl posited seven essen- 
tial attributes or those consisting of ideas (si fat aLma'arii), namely, Power, 
Will, Knowledge, Life, Hearing, Seeing, and Speech. To these seven the 
Maturidites, including al-Nasafi, added Creating (ta\wln), which they say 
is also an eternal attribute and not an indication of activity in the realm of 
originated things. Al-Taftazani presents in his commentary the Ash'arite ob- 
jection, which is that there is no proof that Creating is another attribute in 
addition to Power and Willing. However, he favors the view that the act of 
Creating is from eternity to eternity and that when anything is created it hap- 
pens through the creation of the connection with the attribute of Creating, just 
as in the case of Knowledge and Power. In another place he lists ta\win 
among the attributes of Allah. 23 

4. As to the Eternal Speech, which is an attribute of Allah, al-Ash'arl is 
credited with holding that it can be heard, but al-Maturldl denied that it 
could be. Al-Nasafi says that the Qur'an, the uncreated speech of Allah, is 
heard by our ears, but he seems to make a distinction between the attribute of 
Speech and the Qur'an. Al-Taftazani takes the view that the meaning of the 
verse in the Qur'an, "Until he hears the speech of Allah," is that he heard that 
which indicates it. So also Moses heard a sound which indicated the speech 
of Allah. 24 This approaches the position of the later Ash'arites, who held 
that Moses did not hear this speech as an ordinary act of hearing, but spirit- 

28 See below, p. 57. Many of the differences between the Ash'arite and the Maturidite 
theologians which follow are mentioned in Al-Rawtfa al-Bahlya. 
24 See below, pp. 64 f. 



INTRODUCTION xxvii 

ually and as coming from every direction and perceived by every one of 
his organs. 

5. Muslims believe that Allah is the creator of all actions of His creatures 
whether of Unbelief or Belief, of obedience or disobedience. The Jabrites 
went so far as to say that no action belongs to the creature at all. Many, how- 
ever, have realized the moral difficulty of such a position for it contradicts 
experience. The Mu'tazilites, adopting the teaching of the Qadarites (that 
is, that man has power for actions), denied that Allah wills wicked and vile 
things. They had recourse to such Qur'anic verses as, "Allah does not impose 
upon a soul legal responsibility beyond its capacity. It has that which it has 
acquired and it owes what it has acquired" (Quran 2:286). The idea of 
acquisition (\asb or ifyisab) which appears in this verse (as a verb) became 
the key word of the Ash'arite explanation of the creature's actions as related 
to Allah's creative activity. Free will and compulsion are both denied. Allah 
creates, man acquires. Al-Ash'arl is credited with introducing this technical 
usage, since in al-lbdna he says, "It is impossible under the authority of 
Allah that there be any acquisition by creatures of that which He does not 
will." 25 The term is found in aUViqh al-A\bar (II), which, if it is by the 
hand of some immediate follower of Abu HanTfa, would suggest that it 
antedates al-Ash'ari. 26 In a century's time after his death it was in common 
use among his disciples. Al-NasafI, in line with the teaching of the Maturi- 
dite school, undertakes to explain the dilemma of the presence of evil and 
man's freedom alongside Allah's eternal Will by adding, "His creatures have 
actions of choice (iJ^htiydr), for which they are rewarded or punished, and 
the good in these is by the good pleasure (ridd) of Allah and the vile in 
them is not by His good pleasure." 27 

Al-TaftazanT states the Ash'arite view in saying, "When the creature ex- 
pends his power and will in action it is an acquisition, and when Allah 
brings it into existence as a consequence of that, it is a creating (l(halq)" He 
realizes how unsatisfactory this explanation is, but admits that he is unable 
to do more than this in summarizing the expression used which proves 
clearly that the creature's action is by Allah's creating and bringing into 
existence along with what the creature has of power and choice. 28 

6. Closely allied to the creature's acquisition or choice of actions is the 
problem of whether or not all these actions are by Allah's good pleasure, 

25 Al-lbdna, p. 63. 

26 Al-Fiqh al-Akbar (II), p. 20. See translation in Wensinek's The Muslim Creed, 
p. 191. 

27 See below, pp. 84 ff. 28 Sec below, p. 86. 



xxviii INTRODUCTION 

wish, and command. Al-Nasafi states that the good actions are by the good 
pleasure of Allah and the vile ones are not. This is the Maturidite position 
which followed the teaching of Abu Hanlfa. 20 The Ash'arites held that ac- 
tions occurred according to Allah's will and did not make the distinction that 
the good ones were by his good pleasure while the bad were not. Al-TaftazanI, 
although he emphasizes the fact that many actions which we deem vile 
sometimes have in them wise and beneficial matters, does not dissent from the 
principle enunciated by al-NasafL He goes on to explain, "This means that 
Willing, Desiring, and Decreeing are connected with all actions, while good 
pleasure, desire, and command are connected only with the good to the 
exclusion of the vile." 80 In this he takes his stand with the Maturidites. 

7. Another question upon which there was difference of opinion was 
whether the creature possesses ability for every responsibility or not. Abu 
Hanlfa taught that the ability with which the creature disobeys is the same 
ability which is good for obedience. Al-Ash'ari permitted the rational pos- 
sibility that a creature be burdened with responsibility beyond his power 
because he attributed nothing vile to Allah, neither is Allah limited or in- 
fluenced by purpose. His school believed that the ability which is sufficient 
for evil deeds is not sufficient for good ones. The Maturidite teaching is ex- 
pressed in the words of al-Nasafi, "The creature has no legal responsibility 
imposed upon him which is not in his capacity." 31 Al-Taftazani favors the 
belief that the creature's responsibility fits his ability, which is essentially 
the position of al-NasafL 

8. There are varied opinions in Islam regarding what constitutes Belief 
{imdn)P Ai-ShafVl, the traditionalists, the canon lawyers, and many of 
the scholastic theologians held that it consisted of three things: assent by the 
heart, confession by the tongue, and the doing of the ar\an (such as worship, 
fasting, and the pilgrimage). Al-Ash'ari said that Belief is in word {qawl) 
and in deed ('amal) and that it may increase and decrease. This follows 
from the inclusion of works in Belief. Al-Nasafi said that Belief is assent to 
that which the Prophet brought from Allah and confession of it, and that 
though works increase, Belief neither increases nor decreases. Al-TaftazanI 
held along with the Ash*arites in general that Belief is assent. A man may 
for some reason not confess with his tongue and yet be a Believer in the 
sight of Allah. This, too, is the position of Abu Mansur al-Maturidl. 

In general those who followed Abu Hanlfa said that the Belief of a 

Al-Fiqh al-Akbar (II), p. 21 ; Kitab d-Waftya, p. 8. 30 See below, p. 87. 
S1 See below, p. 92. 82 See below, pp. 116 ff. 



INTRODUCTION xxix 

muqallid (one who accepts on the authority of others) was sufficient for 
salvation. 88 It is taught that when one is in doubt regarding any of the 
fine points of theology he must hold for the time being that which is right 
regarding Allah until he finds a scholar and asks him; nor is he allowed to 
delay. This shows the development of the position adopted by the Ash'arites 
which required men to give a reason for their faith. This naturally was the 
Mu'tazilite view, since that school emphasized the use of Reason. 

Al-Ash'ari held Islam to be a more general term than iman (Belief). Per- 
haps in this he was influenced by the tradition recorded of the Prophet by 
Ibn Hanbal, "The Messenger of Allah used to say, Islam is external. Be- 
lief belongs to the heart/ " 34 The terms appear to be synonymous in many 
Quranic passages and are so considered by most Muslims today. An expres- 
sion of their relationship is seen in the passage, "Language distinguishes 
between Belief and Islam. Yet there is no Belief without Islam, and Islam 
without Belief cannot be found." 86 Al-NasafI says that they are one, and 
al-Taftazanl in his commentary takes the same position. 86 

9. Another ground for argument between the two orthodox schools was 
over the use by a Muslim of the words "in sha Allah" (if Allah wills) after 
saying, "I am a Believer." Al-Nasafi, following Abu Hanlfa and the position 
taken by the Maturidites, says that it is right for one to say, "I am a Believer 
in reality" and not fitting for him to add, "if Allah wills." Many of the 
Ash'arites held that this phrase was to be added since it may show true 
humility on the part of the Believer and a longing for perfection, and since 
the real estimate of one's Belief or Unbelief came at the end of life and the 
creature did not have the assurance of the outcome. Al-Taftazanl in his 
commentary appears to set aside the difference between the two positions by 
pointing out the different aspects from which each school looks at the 
matter. 37 

10. The Ash'arites held that there is no change in the destiny of the 
happy or the miserable one throughout life, but al-Nasaf 1 as a Maturidite says 
that the happy one sometimes becomes miserable and that the miserable 
one sometimes becomes happy; however, there is no change in Allah's attri- 
butes of making happy and miserable. On this matter al-Taftazanl favors 
the position of al-Nasafl. 88 

11. The followers of Muhammad, from the nature of their religion, be- 

88 Al-Fiqh al-Ak]bar (II), p. 48. 84 Musnad, III, 134 f- Cf. also I, 27 f., and 51 f. 
85 Abu Hanlfa, al-Viqh aUAkjbar (II), pp. 35 f. 38 Sec below, p. 123. 

87 See below, pp. 125 f. 88 See below, p. 126. 



xxx INTRODUCTION 

lieve that Allah has sent Messengers to mankind with good tidings, warning 
people and explaining to them what they need to know of this world and 
the Judgment. To what degree prophets might be liable to error in conveying 
their message and in their conduct receives little consideration in the 
Qur an and Tradition. In these sources the prophets appear quite human. 
There is no trace of sinlessness, nay rather some are guilty of grave sins. It 
remained for theological speculation to formulate a doctrine which grew 
out of the Agreement of the Muslim peoples, even though it goes contrary 
to written tradition. One of the earliest statements on this subject, if not the 
earliest, is to be found in the teachings of Abu Hanlfa: "All the Prophets are 
far removed from sins, both small and great, from Unbelief and vile things, 
although slips and mistakes (\hafdya) may happen on their part. . . . 
He [Muhammad] never committed a small or great sin." 39 Abu Hanlfa is 
reported as maintaining that a prophet should be preserved from error, 
whereas al-Ash'arl held that he might commit smaller sins. 

The Mu'tazilites held that a great sin is impossible for a prophet, for that 
would nullify his mission. The Shi'ites deny the appearance in a prophet of 
great and small sins both before and after revelations are made to him. 
Nevertheless they permit dissimulation in feigning Unbelief for a pious 
reason. 

It came in time to be accepted as the orthodox position that prophets and 
especially Muhammad were preserved from error and falsehood. Since it was 
Fakhr al-Dm al-Razi among the Theologians who first especially emphasized 
this principle as of primary importance, we are not surprised that al-Nasafl, 
even though a disciple of the Hanafite school, does not mention it in his 
Articles of Belief. However, al-Taftazanl says that in al-Nasaffs state- 
ment, "All prophets were narrators veracious and sincere, conveying in- 
formation from Allah," there is an allusion to the fact that prophets were 
preserved from falsehood in what is connected with the Law, the conveying of 
judgments, and the guidance of the people, either from errors committed in- 
tentionally or through inadvertence. Agreement is the basis for the first posi- 
tion and as for the second the majority agrees on it. 

He concludes his discussion by saying, "What is reported of prophets 
which marks them as false or disobedient is to be rejected. This is to be 
done if there are only individual traditions. However, if there are mutawatir 
traditions, it is to be changed from its literal meaning if possible. Other- 

* 9 Al-Fiqh ai-Akbar (II), pp. 22 f. 



INTRODUCTION xxxi 

wise it is possible to explain it as a case of the preferable of two actions, or as 
something that happened before his mission." 40 

This tenet of faith became so fixed in orthodox Islam that al-SanusI 
(d. 895 a.h.) deduced from the words of the creed, "Muhammad is the 
Messenger of Allah, ,, the necessity for the veracity of the apostles and the im- 
possibility of falsehood in them. Otherwise they would not be messengers 
faithful to our Lord who knows hidden things. "From this may also be 
deduced," he said, "the impossibility of their doing anything prohibited. For 
they were sent to teach men by their sayings, by their deeds, and by their 
silence. So it is necessary that in all of these there should be no deviation from 
the command of our Lord, who has chosen them above His whole creation 
and instructed them with his secret revelation." 41 

From this comparison of the points on which the two orthodox schools 
disagreed it is clear that originally there was a distinct difference in attitude. 
The harsh, unrelenting fatalism that has characterized much of Muslim 
thought has found sanction for its conclusions in the Ash'arite teaching. 
Although the Mu'tazilite position that Allah must do what is best for 
the creature was rejected by the people of the Approved Way, the attempts 
of Abu Hanlfa, al-Maturidl, and others to justify Allans treatment of his 
creatures and to make the creature share the responsibility of his destiny 
have not been in vain. Through them orthodoxy has an interpretation of the 
ever-present problem of free will and predestination that has solved the 
paradoxes of life for many a perplexed Muslim thinker. In fact this ex- 
planation has been taken over in part by Ash'arites such as al-Taftazanl as 
well. 

It is probably unwise to attempt a prediction of the future of theological 
thinking in the world of Islam and to prophesy concerning the influence 
which may yet be exercised by this creed of al-Nasafi and the commentary 
of al-Taftazani with its numerous supercommentaries. It is possible that 
scholasticism may be increasingly replaced by agnosticism as has happened 
in Turkey today or by a back-to-Muhammad movement fostered by a spirit 
of romanticism or by fundamentalism of the Wahhabite type. It is not un- 
likely that some strange and incongruous teachings may claim in the years 
to come that they are not incompatible with the basic message of Islam. We 
must not forget that some doctrines have been accepted by the Muslim 
community although they are not strictly in accord with the Qur'an and 

40 Sec below, p. 134. 41 Shark Vmm al-Barahin, pp. 173 fi. 



xxxii INTRODUCTION 

Traditions. The Agreement of Muslim thinkers may again furnish a basis 
for change. So far modernist movements in Islam have failed to supplant 
the dialectic of its religious schools with a complete and consistent scheme 
of theology. Conservatism will not surrender its entrenched position with- 
out a struggle. It may attempt to meet historical criticism and a new atomic 
age with radical adaptations of its ancient system to new ideas rather than 
yield its authority to some other power. In any case this commentary of 
al-Taftazanl on the articles of Islamic Belief as stated by al-Nasafi remains a 
record of what orthodox Islam has thought and taught for more than five 
hundred years. 

A Note on the Translation 

In this translation, use has been made of the Cairo text of a.h. 1335 with 
supercommentaries by Ibrahim b. Muhammad b. 'Arabshah al-Isfara'inl 
'Isam al-Dln and Ahmad b. Miisa al-Khayali. Further references to this work 
will be designated 'I.D. The numbers in square brackets in the translation 
indicate the pages in this edition. The Cairo text of a.h. 1329, which is an 
encyclopaedic work containing a number of the supercommentaries on al- 
Taftazanl and glosses on these, has also been used, especially the first volume, 
which contains the supercommentary by al-Khayali mentioned above and 
also one by Mulla Ahmad al Jundi, and his own glosses on this work. Ref- 
erences to this text will read AJ. The Constantinople text of a.h. 13 10, which 
contains a number of minor omissions and grammatical and typographical 
errors, has been consulted. It contains a supercommentary by Muslih al-Dln 
Mustafa al-Kastali, with an appendix containing that of al-Khayali men- 
tioned above and one of Ramadan b. *Abd al-Muhsin Bihishtl. 

The Curcton text (London, 1843) of al-Nasaffs short creed differs in 
some respects from that found in the three editions of al-Taftazanfs com- 
mentary which have been mentioned. Where these differences represent ad- 
ditions to the text as found in the commentary, attention will be called to 
them. 

There are no chapters or sections in the text and commentary as published 
in Arabic. The translator alone is responsible for the chapter divisions and 
headings as they appear in this translation. Al-Nasaffs creed is printed in 
bold-face type throughout, and as it is taken up by al-Taftazanl, sentence by 
sentence or phrase by phrase, it is separated from the commentary by a soli- 
dus. The portion of the creed presented thus in each chapter is also printed as 
a whole at the beginning of the chapter. 



Contents 



INTRODUCTION 

PREFACE BY AL-TAFTAZANI 

1. THE REAL ESSENCES OF THINGS 

2. THE CAUSES OF KNOWLEDGE 

3. THE WORLD 

4. THE ORIGINATOR OF THE WORLD 

5. SOME ATTRIBUTES OF ALLAH 

6. THE ATTRIBUTE OF SPEECH 

7. THE ATTRIBUTES OF CREATING AND WILLING 

8. THE BEATIFIC VISION OF ALLAH 

9. THE CREATOR AND THE ACTIONS OF HIS CREATURES 

10. THE CREATURE'S LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY AND ALLAH'S SUSTENANCE AND 

GUIDANCE 

11. SOME ESCHATOLOGICAL REALITIES 

12. SINS 

13. BELIEF 

14. THE MESSENGERS, ANGELS, AND BOOKS OF ALLAH 

15. THE ASCENSION OF THE PROPHET AND MIRACLES 
m THE KHALIFATE AND IMAMATE 

17. VARIOUS ARTICLES OF BELIEF CONCERNING WORSHIP, THE COMPAN- 

IONS OF THE PROPHET, THE WIPING ON THE INNER SHOES, AND 
NABIDH 

18. VARIOUS ARTICLES OF BELIEF CONCERNING THE RANK OF THE WALI, 

THE PEOPLE OF THE INNER MEANING, THE FEELING OF SECURITY 
AND DESPAIR, THE DIVINER, THE NON-EXISTENT, AND PRAYERS FOR 
THE DEAD 

19. VARIOUS ARTICLES OF BELIEF CONCERNING THE LAST HOUR, MUJTA- 

HIDS, AND THE COMPARATIVE EXCELLENCE OF MEN AND ANOELS 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
INDEX 



iA Commentary on the 
Creed of Islam 



Preface by al-Tapa%ant 



TO HIS COMMENTARY ON THE ARTICLES OF 
BELIEF 2 BY AL-NASAFI. 8 



In the name of Allah, the Merciful, Compassionate One (al-rahman). 

Praise be to Allah, who is unique in the majesty of His essence and the 
perfection of His attributes, and who is separated [4] from blemishes and 
marks of defect through the qualities that belong to His great Power. Bless- 
ings on His Prophet Muhammad, who has been aided by His forceful argu- 
ments and clear proofs, and on his family and his Companions, guides and 
protectors of the path of Reality. 

To continue: The basis of the science of laws and judgments and the 
foundation of the rules concerning the articles of Islamic Belief [5] is the 
science of the unity of the Deity and His attributes, entitled al-Kaldm, 
which is devoid of the darkness of doubts and the obscurities of fancies. 

The brief treatise known as the "Articles of Belief (al-'aqaid) is by the 
painstaking Imam, 'Umar al-Nasafi, the example of the learned of Islam and 
the star of our faith and religion. May Allah raise his rank in the abode of 
Peace. It includes under the headings of this branch of knowledge the most 
striking gems and pearls of great value [6] which are the fundamental stand- 
ards of our religion. Running through the text f of the creed] these [gems and 
pearls] are jewels and precious stones of certainty, yet at the same time the 

1 For the list of the writings of Sa'd al-Dln Mas'ud b. 'Umar al-Taftazanl (a.h. 722-791 ; 
a.d. 1322-1389) sec Brockelmann, Geschichte der arabischen Utteratur, II, 215 f. and 
also the Encyclopaedia of Islam, IV, 604 ff. 

2 A translation of al-NasafTs Creed is given in Macdonald's Development, pp. 308 rT. 
For the importance of such treatises see Enc. of Islam, I, 236 f.; Wensinck, The Muslim 
Creed, pp. 1 ff., 102 f. 

8 A list of the writings of Najm al-DIn Abu Hafs 'Umar b. Muhammad b. Ahmad 
al-Nasafi (a.h. 460-537; a.d. 1068-1142) is given in Brockelmann's Geschichte, I, 427 £. 



4 PREFACE BY AL-TAFTAZANI 

acme of conciseness and instruction and the last word in good order and 
arrangement. 

I have tried to explain the brief treatise so as to give the details of its 
general principles and clarify the intricacies of the subject, to straighten out 
the involved things and reveal those that are concealed, while at the same 
time keeping the record concise, clearly calling attention to its purpose. 
The verification of the problems is a result of the statement of them. The 
detailed application of the proofs is an effect of their presentation. The inter- 
pretation of the doctrines comes after proper introduction. The values of the 
work are manifold in spite of its conciseness. I achieved this end by ridding 
my commentary of tautology and wearisomcness, and by striking the happy 
medium between brevity and tediousness. Allah is the guide to the path of 
those who are led, and of Him we seek preservation from error and guidance 
to the goal. He is my sufficiency, and excellent is the Guardian. 



Qhapter i 



THE REAL ESSENCES OF THINGS 



T 

JLhc People of Reality say that the real essences of things exist in reality 
and that the knowledge of them is verifiable as real in contradiction to the 
Sophists. 

[7] Know that of the legal judgments 1 (al-ah\am al-shariya) there are 
some which are connected with practice and are called derived (fa/iya) and 
practical ('amaliya); and there are others which are connected with dogma 
and are called fundamental (asliya) and doctrinal (itiqadiya). The science 

1 Hu\m (a judgment) in Muslim technical use may be either legal (sha/i) or non- 
legal (ghayr-sha/i) as a logical judgment, an ordinance or decree, or a rule in grammar, 
Enc. of Islam, II, 332; IV, 320 ff.; Diet, of Tech. Terms, I, 372 ff. The legal judgment 
referred to here is an expression for the judgment of Allah which is related to legally 
responsible human beings (cf. al-Ta'rifdt, p. 97). The whole branch of law known as 
al-s/tar' or al-shari'a is the legal system of duties in Islam resting on an absolute basis. 
This was originally made up from the Qur'an and Tradition but Agreement (ijmd') 
and Analogy (qiyds) were added later making four bases for the law. It includes not 
only as does our criminal law what one should not do and the penalties for transgression 
but also what is incumbent on the Muslim, what is praiseworthy, and what is allowable, 
etc. Al-Sanusi in the commentary on his Umm al-Bardhin (pp. 34 f.) says that a legal 
judgment is by means of demand or permission or by the laying down of postulates for 
these two. Four things go to make up demand, (1) obligation (ijdb) which is the 
absolute demand that a thing be done, as for example belief in Allah and His Messengers 
and the five pillars of Islam, (2) recommendation (nadb) which is a demand, though 
not absolute, that a thing be done, like the prayer at dawn, (3) prohibition (tahrim) 
which is the absolute demand for the refraining from an act like ascribing a partner 
to Allah, adultery, etc., (4) disapproval (\ardha) which is a demand, though not absolute, 
for refraining from an act, like the recitation of the Qur'an during the bowings and 
prostrations. Between the first two and the last two of these four is permission (jawdz) 
which is the choice between the doing and omitting of a thing, such as marriage or trade. 
Cf. J. D. Luciani, Les Prolegomenes thSologiques de Senoussi (Algiers, 1908), pp. 14 f. 

All acts of Muslims come under one of these five headings, so when the term The 
Law (al-shar 1 ) is used by al-Taftazanl, this very broad usage must be kept in mind. 

The rational judgment {al-hu\m al-'aqlt) may be any one of three categories, necessity 
(wujub), impossibility (istihdla) and possibility {jawdz or imbjiri). See Wensinck, The 
Muslim Creed, pp. 273 ff.; Enc. of Islam, III, 260; al-Shahrastanl, Kitdb Nih&yatu 'l-lqdam, 
p. 15. 



6 



REAL ESSENCES OF THINGS 



connected with the first [8] is called the science of canon laws and judg- 
ments because these things are not comprehended except from the canon law 
(al-sha/), and it is only to these that the understanding turns when the 
[term] judgment is mentioned without further definition. And the science 
connected with the second is the science of the unity (al-tawhid) and attri- 
butes {al-sifdt) of the Deity, since this [subject of unity] is its most noted in- 
vestigation and its noblest object. 

[9] The earliest of the Companions 2 {al-sahaba) and their Followers 8 
(al-tabi'tn) — Allah be pleased with them all 4 — because the articles of their 
belief were pure through the blessing of their association with the Prophet — 
on him be peace; because the period in which they lived was near to his 
time; because there were few occasions of attack and disagreement and because 
they were able to go back to absolutely reliable authority; well, because of all 
these things they dispensed with putting down in writing the material of the 
two sciences and with dividing it into divisions and sections, and they also 
dispensed with the statement of their investigations in these two sciences 
both as to developments and fundamentals. 

This condition continued until controversies arose among the Muslims, 
pride prevailed among the leaders of the faith (al-din), and there appeared a 
clashing of opinions and a tendency to innovations (al-bida') 6 and to per- 
sonal desires {al-ahwa).* There was a multiplicity of legal decisions 
(al-fataun) and of occasions from which cases arose, and much referring to 
the Learned (al-ulama') in important matters. So they busied themselves 
with speculation and deduction, with attempting to arrive at a correct opinion 

2 A Companion (sahib or sahabt) is one who met the Prophet during his life, be- 
lieved on him, and died a Muslim. Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 807 £.; Enc. of Islam, I, 477 f. 

8 A Follower (tab? or tabUt) is one who though he personally did not know the 
Prophet knew one of his Companions. Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 166 f.; Enc. of Islam, 

IV, 583. 

4 The eulogia throughout the translation are as a rule omitted after the first occurrence. 
For the significance of these see Goldziher, "Uber die Eulogien der Muhammedaner," in 
Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenlandischen Gesellschaft, L (Leipzig, 1896), pp. 97 ff. 

8 Bid t a (plur. bida') is some view or practice which is an innovation and is not ac- 
cording to the established usage of Islam. Enc. of Islam, I, 712 f.; al-Tafrifdt, p. 44; Diet, 
of Tech. Terms, p. 133. 

6 There is a technical usage for the phrase ahl al-ahwa' (people of personal desires); 
however, the meaning of this term differs. Macdonald (Development, pp. 122, 299) calls 
them "people of wandering desires." They arc said to be people of erroneous opinions, 
whose belief is not that of ahl al-sunna, but who nevertheless have the same qibla. Cf. 
Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 1543; al-Tafrifat, p. 41; Enc. of Islam, I, 183. But al-Shahrastam 
in al-Milal wa 'l-Nihal, (pp. 24 and 201 f.) seems to think that properly speaking they 
should be put beyond the pale of the recognized religions. Al-Baghdadi (al-Farq bayn 
al-Viraq, p. 350 f.) calls them Unbelievers and says that it is not permissible to perform 
worship behind them or over their dead. 



REAL ESSENCES OF THINGS 



7 



and to elicit meaning from the texts, with the establishing of rules and 
fundamentals, with the arrangement of [the material related to them in] 
divisions and sections, with the multiplying of proofs to problems and stat- 
ing the matters in which there were ambiguities and their explanations, with 
determining the conventional usages and the technical terms, and with 
pointing out the [various] ways of proceeding and the differences. [10] 
They gave the name of al-fiqh to that which pertained to the science of the 
practical judgments derived from their detailed proofs, and "the funda- 
mentals of al-fiqh" to the science of the terms of the proofs taken together as a 
whole in proving the judgments; and the science of the articles of Belief as 
they come straight from their proofs they called d\alam? 

The reasons for this are (i) because the subject of its investigations was 
their saying, "The discourse (al-faldm) about such-and-such"; (2) because 
the problem of [the meaning of the term] Speech [predicated of Allah] was 
the most celebrated of its investigations, the most strongly disputed, and the 
subject of the most controversy, so much so that [//] some of the leaders 
killed many of these People of Reality (ahl al-haqq) 8 because they failed 
to admit the creation of the Qur'an; (3) because it imparts ability in speech 
in verifying legal matters and in compelling adversaries to submit just as 
logic (al-mantiq) imparts ability in philosophy; (4) because it is the first 
of the sciences which can be known and learned by speech only, so this 
term [speech] was applied to this science, and then it was exclusively used 
for it and not applied to any other science for sake of distinction; (5) be- 
cause it can be verified only by discussion and interchange of speech from 
two sides, whereas others are sometimes verified by meditation and the 
perusal of books; (6) because it is the most disputatious and controversial 
of the sciences, so speech was greatly needed for conversing with those of 
opposite view and for refuting them; (7) because of the cogency of its argu- 
ments it has become, so to speak, "the speech" (aU\aidfn) to the exclusion 
of all other sciences, just as is said of the stronger of two discourses, "This 

7 Sec Enc. of Islam, II, 670 ff., in which there is reference to these eight explanations 
of al-Taftazanl. Cf. also Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 22 ff.; T. J. de Boer, Philosophy in 
Islam, pp. 42 f.; Maimonides (Munk), Le Guide des cgarc's, I, 332 ff.; (Friedlander), The 
Guide for the Perplexed, pp. 107 ff. 

8 A1-Khayall ('I.D., p. 15) says that the evident meaning of this term throughout the 
book is the People of the Approved Way and the Community {ahl al-sunna wa I- jama* a). 
However, from al-Taftazani's explanation the term means not only that they alone were 
right and therefore orthodox as some translate the term, but also that they are peculiar in 
that they believe in the reality of things. Lest they be confused with those realists who 
believe only in the reality of ideas, the term "People of Reality" has been used. See 
also Enc. of Islam, II, 223. 



8 



REAL ESSENCES OF THINGS 



is 'the discourse' (8) and because it is based on decisive proofs (adilla 
qat'lyd), most of which arc supported by proofs to be believed on authority 
(al-sam'iya), 9 it is consequendy the strongest in its influence on and pene- 
tration into the heart. So it is called al-^aldtn as though derived from 
al-falm, that is, "the wound." This is the [understanding of the term] 
\aldm [in the mind] of the ancients {al-qudamd'). 

Most of the controversies about al-foldm occurred among the different 
Islamic sects, especially the Mu'tazilites (al-Mu'tazila), 10 because they were 
the first sect which laid the foundation for both that which contradicts [12] 
the plain teaching of the Approved Way {al-sunna) 11 and that which the 
Community {al-jamd'a) of the Companions {ai-sahdba) — the approval of 
Allah on them all — followed in the matter of the articles of Belief. That 
[beginning of the Mu'tazilites] happened when Wasil b. 'Ata', their leader, 

0 Theology is said to concern itself with three things, ildlnydt, nabawiydt, and sam'iyat, 
i.e., things relating to the Deity, to the prophets, and to those things which are only 
established by hearing. Under this third head there are included the matters concerning 
the Garden, the Fire, and the Resurrection, of which one can only learn from the Qur'an 
and Tradition. See al-Bayjurl in his commentary on Kifdyat al-Awdmm ft 'Urn al-Kaldm 
by al-Fadali, p. 75, and al-Ghazzali, Ihya' (with the commentary by Sayyid Murtacla), 
II, 213 If! 

10 The account which follows is the story told in most Muslim books regarding the 
origin of the Mu'tazilites. Cf. al -Baghdad!, al-Farq bayn al-Firaq, p. 98 f.; al-Shahrastani, 
al-Milal, p. 33; Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 1025; Enc. of Islam, III, 787 ff. The number of 
the sects of the Mu'tazilites is often given as twenty. Al-Baghdadi, al-Farq bayn al-Firaq, 
P- 93; al-Ijl, al-Mawdqif, p. 335. Different writers, however, make different groupings 
(cf. al-Shahrastanl, al-Milal, p. 3) and are not entirely agreed on those who are to be 
called Mu'tazilites. For example al-Shahrastanl finds many Mu'tazilite doctrines among 
the followers of al-Najjar (al-Milal, p. 61 ff.), whereas al-Baghdadi (al-Farq bayn al-Firaq, 
P« 195) puts him, as does al-Ash'arl (Maqaldt, pp. 283 ff.), under a separate heading, but 
he also considers his position on Belief as Murji'ite (Maqaldt, pp. 135 f.). The stress laid by 
the writers on enumerating these sects is undoubtedly due to a tradition of the Prophet 
that his people would be divided into seventy-three sects — some say seventy-two — only 
one of which would be in Paradise. Sec also al-Ijl, al-Mawdqif, p. 332; al-Baghdadi, al- 
Farq, pp. 4 f.; Ahmad b. Hanbal, Musnad, II, 332 f., Ill, 120, 145. 

11 Sunn a, a way, course, or manner of conduct, came to have many meanings in Islam: 
sec al-Ta'rifdt, pp. 127 f.; Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 703 ff.; Taj al-Arus, IX, 244; Lisan 
al-Arab, XVII, 89 f.; Lane, Lexicon, p. 1438. It sometimes means one of the four bases 
of Islam, that is, that which was the usage in speech or deed or the approved manner of 
conduct of the Prophet; the other three bases being the Qur'an, the Agreement (i/md') of 
the Muslim Community (]am3a)> and Analogy (qiyds). The term is also applied in wor- 
ship and other rites of Islam to those utterances and acts that are praiseworthy but not 
absolutely prescribed. Al-sunna also came to mean the theory and practice of the catholic 
Muslim community. Sec Enc. of Islam, IV, 555 f. The term ahl al-sunna wa '1-jamSa, 
which is implied here in the statement of al-Taftazani, means the people of whole ortho- 
dox communities who refrain from innovation and deviation from the beaten path. Al- 
Khayall ('I.D., p. 14) adds that they are the Ash'arites in Khurasan, Iraq, Syria, and most 
countries, but that in the lands beyond the river (Oxus) they are the Maturidites, the 
followers of Abu Mansur al-Maturldl. Cf. Sayyid Murtatfa's commentary on the Ihya' of 
al-Ghazzall, II, 6 f., where he quotes this statement of al-Khayali. 



REAL ESSENCES OF THINGS 9 

withdrew from the circle of al-Hasan al-Basrl— Allah have mercy on him— 
asserting that the one who committed a great sin was neither a Believer 
nor an Unbeliever and maintaining that he was in an intermediate posi- 
tion. Al-Hasan said, "He has withdrawn from us," so they were called 
al-Mu 'tazila (the Withdrawers). But they called themselves the Maintainers 
of Justice and the Divine Unity (ashab al-adl wa 'l-tawhid), because they 
said that the reward of the obedient and the punishment of the disobedient 
are incumbent on Allah, and they denied that He has eternal attributes, [/j] 
Subsequendy they went deep into the science of al-fyildm and added the 
fringes of the Philosophers to many of their principles. 

Their school of thought spread among the people until al-Shaykh Abu 
'l-Hasan al- Ash'ar 1 said to his teacher, Abu 'All al-Jubba'i, "What have you 
to say about three brothers, one of whom died obedient, another disobedient, 
and the third in infancy?" He answered, "The first will be rewarded with 
the Garden (al-janna), the second will be punished with the Fire (al~nar) 9 
and the third will neither be rewarded nor punished." Al-Ash'arl answered, 
"And what if the third should say, 'Lord, why didst Thou make me die in 
infancy, and not detain me until I grew up and believed on Thee, and 
obeyed and thus entered the Garden? 5 What would the Lord — the Exalted — 
say then?" He answered, "The Lord would say, 'I knew that if thou 
shouldst grow up thou wouldst disobey and enter the Fire, so it was better 
for thee to die in infancy.' " Al-Ash'ari said, "And if the second should say, 
'Lord, why didst Thou not cause me to die in infancy so that I should not 
disobey and enter the Fire?' What would the Lord say then?" Al-Jubba'I was 
confounded and al-Ash'ari abandoned his school of thought. He and his 
followers worked from that time at refuting the Mu'tazilite view and main- 
taining that which the Approved Way had handed down and that which 
[14] the community did. Hence they are called the People of the Approved 
Way and the Community (ahl al-sunna wa 'l-jamaa). 

Then when philosophy 12 was translated into Arabic and the followers of 
Islam plunged {\hada) into it, they attempted to refute the Philosophers on 
the points in which they differed from the canon law (al-shari'a). So they 
mixed up with \alam much of philosophy in order to understand thoroughly 
the goals of philosophy and so to be put into a position to show the unreality 

12 The philosophy (al-falsafa) referred to here and throughout the treatise is that 
system which had for its principal sources Aristotelian natural science and Neoplatonic 
speculation and which taught the eternity of the world, and that what some call creation 
was an emanation from the Deity. Cf. De Boer, Philosophy in Islam, pp. 11-30; line, 
of Islam, II, 48 ff.; Macdonald, Development, pp. 161 ff., and al-Shahrastani, al-Uilal, 
pp. 251 ff. 



10 



REAL ESSENCES OF THINGS 



of it. This went on until they included in \alam most of physics and meta- 
physics and plunged 18 into mathematics until theology was hardly to be 
distinguished from philosophy had it not been that it included "things to be 
believed on authority" (al-sarrilyat) . This is the \cdam of the Later 
Theologians (al-tnutt? a\hl{hirun ) . 

In general \alam is the most noble of the sciences, first, because it is the 
foundation of the legal judgments and the chief of the religious sciences; 
second, because its subject matter is the articles of Belief of Islam; third, 
because its aim is the attaining of the happiness of this life and the next; 
and fourth, because its proofs are the decisive arguments most of which are 
aided by evidences that are based on authority. 

As to what has been reported of the Fathers of the first generations 
(al-salaf) of Islam concerning their attack against \alam and their pro- 
hibition of it, that was only directed against the religious zealot and the one 
who had failed to attain certainty, and against the one who purposed to 
destroy the articles of Belief of the Muslims and the one who plunged need- 
lessly into the obscurities of those who claimed to be philosophers. Otherwise 
how can one conceive the prohibition of the foundation upon which our 
obligations rest and the basis of laws regarding practice? 

[/5I Furthermore the basis of \alam is that there is deduced from 
the existence of originated things {aUmuhdathat) the existence of the Maker 
(al-san? y ) y His unity, His attributes and His actions, and from these things 
all the rest of the things which are to be believed on authority. For this 
reason it was suitable to begin the treatise by calling attention to the 
existence of that which is observed of substances and accidents and to 
verify the knowledge concerning both of them, that thereby one might 
attain the understanding of that which is the most important goal of 
all. 

Therefore al-Nasafi said, 

The People of Reality (ahl al-haqq) say/Reality is the judgment which 
corresponds with the actual fact. It is applied in a general sense to proposi- 
tions, to articles of Belief, to religions, and to different schools of practice 
( al-madhdhib) with reference to their inclusion of reality. Its opposite 
is the unreal (al-batil). But as for the term truth (al-sidq), it is especially 
applied to propositions; its opposite is falsehood (cd~\adhib). The distinc- 
tion that may be made between these two pairs of contrast is that in the case 

18 'ID. reads bctd (some) for \hadu fi. 



REAL ESSENCES OF THINGS 



ii 



of reality (al-haqq) the correspondence [16] is seen from the standpoint 
of the actual fact, and in the case of truth (al-sidq), from the standpoint of 
judgment. And the meaning of the expression "the truth of a judgment" is 
the agreement of the judgment with the actual fact, and the meaning of 
the expression "the reality of a judgment" is the agreement of the actual fact 
with the judgment. 

that the real essences of things exist in reality/The real essence (al-haqiqa) 
of a thing and its quiddity (al-mahtya) arc that which constitutes the 
identity of a thing (ma bihi 7 shay' huwa huwd)> as is exemplified by the 
application of the term "rational (natiq) animal" to man in contrast to the 
application of the terms "laughing animal" and "writing animal"; [ly] in 
which case it is possible to conceive of man as not being described by the 
terms "laughing" and "writing," inasmuch as they [laughing and writing] 
are accidents. And it may be said further that that which constitutes the 
identity of a thing is, with respect to its being verified as having external 
reality, a real essence; and with respect to its being individualized, it is a 
certain particular thing (hutvtya), but without respect to either of these 
it is a quiddity. 

Thus in our opinion the term shay 14 (a thing) is identical with the term 
al-mawjud (that which exists); and the terms al-thubut (real existence), 
al-tahaqquq (being verified as having real existence), aUwujud (existence) 
and al-hawn 15 (coming-into-existence) are synonymous, and the meaning 
of them is immediately perceived (badihi al-tasawwur). 

14 Al-shay'. With the Ash'aritcs the shay' was the entity (mawjud) but with the 
Mu'tazilites it included the non-entity (ma'dum). The Basriya and al-Jahiz of the 
Mu'tazilites defined it as that which is known (ma'lum)\ al-Nashi Abu'l-'Abbas defined it 
as the eternal (qadim) and in the case of "that which is originated" it is used metaphori- 
cally; the Jahmiya said it is that which is originated; Hisham said it is the body. (Diet, 
of Tech. Terms, p. 729; 'I.D., p. 17.) 

16 Kawn, which is often translated "being," really has the significance of "coming into 
being" or "state of coming into being." The Diet, of Tech. Terms (p. 1274) quoting the 
Commentary on aUMawaqif says, "The Mutakallims, although they denied the rest of the 
categories, admitted that of place (al-ayn), and called it al-hfiwn. The majority of them said 
that the jaw liar [self-subsistent entity] itself was all that was required for obtaining the 
boundary (al-hayyiz) which marked existence, that is there was no quality subsisting in the 
jawhar itself. So there were two things, the jawhar itself and the obtaining of a boundary in 
existence, which they called kawn. But those of the Mutakallims who established the 
states (aUahwal) said that this obtaining a boundary on the part of a jawhar was 
caused by a quality which subsisted in it. So they called obtaining a boundary 'al-k&'ina' 
and the cause of this obtaining 'al-kawn.' There are then three things in the process, 
al- jawhar, a\-\a'ina, and al-kawn. There are four species of al-k^n: motion, rest, being 
separated into parts, and aggregation of the parts." See al-Taftazanl, 'I.D., p. 48; Macdonald, 
"Atomic Time," Isis, IX, 2, p. 329. 



iz REAL ESSENCES OF THINGS 

But if it is objected that such a logical statement as that the real essences 
of things exist in reality is tautological in the same way as our stating that 
really existent things exist in reality, [18] to this we answer that what is 
meant thereby is that what we believe to be the real essences of things and 
designate by certain terms such as "man," "horse," "sky," and "earth" is 
something existing in the things themselves. It is analogous to the statement 
that the necessarily existent being {wdjib al-wujud) is existent. This state- 
ment conveys some useful information; in fact it may have to be demon- 
strated by argument. It is not like the statement that the really existent 
things exist in reality, nor is it like the statement [/o] that I am Abu '1-Najm 
and my poetry is my poetry, in which case the statement is self-evident [and 
hence conveys no useful information]. 

And the verification of this is to be found in the fact that a thing may 
have different aspects, in consequence of which when something is pred- 
icated of it the judgment may be useful when the thing is seen in one 
aspect, and useless when it is seen in another. In the case of man, for in- 
stance, when taken with respect to his being a body of some sort, to predicate 
of him animality conveys useful information, but, when taken with respect 
to his being a rational animal, then to predicate animality of him is tautologi- 
cal. 

and that the knowledge of them/that is, of the real essences, both of that 
which they are perceived to be {tasawwur) and of that which is affirmed of 
them or of their modes 

is verifiable as real/Some say that what this statement refers to is un- 
doubtedly the knowledge of the reality of the existence of the essences, 
for to know the essences themselves as a whole is impossible. [20 J In reply 
to this it may be said that the reference here is to the genus, in refutation of 
those who say that there is no real existence to any of the essences and also 
of those who say that there can be no knowledge of the fact whether an es- 
sence has real existence or has no real existence. 

in contradiction to the Sophists 10 {al-sufastatya) /For some of them deny 
the real essences of things and maintain that they are fancies (awhdm) and 

10 The origin of this word is plainly the Greek aorptareia (sophistry). These three 
schools are defined in al-Tctrifat in almost the same words, pp. 163 f., 200. They are 
more fully explained in the Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 665 f. Cf. Ibn Hazm, Kitdb al-Fisal, 
I, 8 f.; Wensinck, The Muslim Creed, pp. 251 f.; al-Sa'adya, Kitdb al-Amdndt, pp. 65 ff. 



REAL ESSENCES OF THINGS 13 

vain imaginations (fyayaldt). 17 These are the Obstinate (al-inadiya). Others 
deny the real existence of essences, maintaining that essences only follow 
from what one happens to believe, so that if we believe a thing to be a sub- 
stance (jawhar) 18 it is a substance, but if we believe it to be an accident it is 
an accident; or if we believe a thing to be eternal {qadim) it is eternal, 
but if we believe it to be originated (hadith) 19 it is originated. These are 
the Opinioners (al-indiya). Still others deny that there can be any knowl- 
edge of whether a thing has real existence or not. They assert that they are 
in doubt and that they are in doubt even of their doubt, and so on. [21] 
These are the Agnostics (al-la-adriya). 

As for us, however, to prove our point of view we first convince ourselves, 
either by sense perception or by demonstration, of the necessity of establish- 
ing that certain things have real existence. Then from this premise we argue 
that if the negation of those things is not proven, then the real existence of 
those things has been established. But if, on the other hand, the negation 
has been proven, then, inasmuch as that negation by virtue of its being a 
species of judgment is one of the real essences it necessarily follows, again, 
that something of real essence has been established and that it is not proper 
to negate it absolutely. It is evident that this argument applies to the 
Obstinate only. 

[As for the Opinioners and the Agnostics], they say, with regard to those 
types of knowledge described as necessary (al-daruriyat) that (a) some of 
them are sense perceptions {aUhissiyat) , [22] but that sense perception may 
sometimes err, as in the case of the squint-eyed who sees one to be two, and of 
the bilious who finds the sweet bitter, and (b) some of them are immediate 
perceptions (al-badlhiyat) but that these are subject to differences of opinion 
and are open to ambiguities for the solving of which there is need of subtle 
speculation, (c) Another type of necessary knowledge [they say] is that 
arrived at by means of syllogistic speculations {al-nazartydt) [from major 
premises which are either sense perceptions or immediate perceptions] ; but as 

17 Wahm and hjtayal. See Macdonald, "Wahm and Its Cognates," Journal of the Royal 
Asiatic Society (1922), 506 ff., and Wolfson, "The Internal Senses in Latin, Arabic and 
Hebrew Philosophic Texts," Harvard Theological Review, XXVIII (1935) » 90 **• 

18 lawhar is the sclf-subsistent entity or substance as opposed to the accident {'arad). 
The Early Theologians said it was that of which other things were compounded. But with 
the Atomists it means "atom," especially when the term al-jawhar al-fard is used. See Enc. 
of Islam, I, 1027; Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 203 ff.; Macdonald, "Atomic Time," Isis, IX, 
2, p. 328; Pines, Beitrage, pp. 3 r?.; Maimonides (Munk), Le Guide des SgarSs, I, 385 ff.; 
(Friedlander), pp. 123 f. 

19 See Ibn SIna, al-Najat, pp. 355 ff.; al-Tafrifat, pp. 85, 179; Diet, of Tech. Terms, 
p. 1212. 



14 REAL ESSENCES OF THINGS 

for these [they argue J with the unsoundness of these major premises, there 
necessarily follows the unsoundness of the conclusions. And it is for this 
reason [they add] that thinking human beings have many differences of 
opinion [concerning conclusions arrived at by syllogistic speculations]. 
To these we reply: 

(a) The error that may occur in sense perception by reason of par- 
ticular causes in certain instances does not negate the validity of the sense 
perception in other instances where the particular causes of the error are not 
present. 

(b) The differences of opinion that may occur with respect to immediate 
perceptions by reason of one's lack of acquaintance with the subject or of 
one's difficulty in forming a clear notion of the subject on account of its 
abstruseness do not destroy the possibility of forming immediate percep- 
tions. 

(c) The many differences of opinion that may occur in conclusions ar- 
rived at by syllogistic speculation as a result of the unsoundness which may 
sometimes occur in the act of speculation do not destroy in other instances 
the validity of conclusions arrived at by syllogistic speculation. 

But the truth is that there is no way to enter into discussion with them, 
especially the Agnostics, because they do not admit anything known by 
which [2j] an unknown is to be established. Rather the only way is to 
punish them with the Fire, that they may either confess or be consumed in 
the Fire. 

Sufastd is a name given to falsified wisdom and specious knowledge, be- 
cause siifd means knowledge and wisdom, and asta means the specious and 
false. And from this is derived alsafsata, just as falsafa is derived from 
fayldsufd (philosopher), which means "the lover of wisdom." 



Chapter 2 



THE CAUSES OF KNOWLEDGE 

T 

Xhe causes of knowledge for all creation are three: the sound senses, true 
narrative, and Reason. The senses are five, namely, hearing, seeing, smelling, 
taste, and touch, and by each of these senses one is informed concerning that 
for which it was appointed. 

True narrative is of two kinds: one of them is the mutawatir narrative, and 
it is the narrative established by the tongues of people of whom it is incon- 
ceivable that they would agree together on a falsehood. It brings about neces- 
sary knowledge such as the knowledge of former kings in past times and of 
distant countries. The second kind is the narrative of the Messenger aided 
by an evidentiary miracle, and it brings about deductive knowledge, and the 
knowledge established by it resembles the knowledge established by neces- 
sity in certainty and in fixity. 

Then as for Reason: it is a cause of knowledge also; and whatever of it is 
established by immediate perception is necessary, just as the knowledge that 
the whole of a thing is greater than the part of it; and whatever is established 
by deduction is acquired. 

Illumination is not one of the causes of the cognition of the soundness of a 
thing with the People of Reality. 

The causes of knowledge yKnowledge is an attribute of the knowing sub- 
ject by means of which any object referred to becomes revealed (yatajalla) 
to him; that is to say, it becomes clear and evident and capable of being 
described by words, and this regardless of whether that object is something 
existing {mawjiid) or something non-existing (ma'dilm). Knowledge in- 
cludes both the comprehension (al-idra1() by the senses and the compre- 
hension by Reason (al-'aql)> and this again both of things conceived 

1 Cf. Wcnsinck, The Muslim Creed, pp. 248 ff ., for a discussion of the roots of. knowl- 
edge. 



i6 



CAUSES OF KNOWLEDGE 



(dl-tasawwurai) and of things asserted (al-tasdiqdt) 9 the latter of which may 
be both certainties (al-yaqiniya) 2 and non-certainties (ghayr aUyaqimyd). 

This is in opposition to the view of the Sophists that knowledge is an at- 
tribute [of the knowing subject by means of] which [he] makes an affirma- 
tive judgment of which the contradictory (al-naqid) cannot be admitted. 
This definition of theirs, although it includes the comprehension of the 
senses, provided only that the thing to be perceived is not inaccessible to the 
senses; [24] and although it also includes the things conceived [by Reason] 
provided only, as they claim, that the things to be conceived do not have 
contradictories; yet it does not include the non-certainties of things asserted. 
So much for their view. Accordingly the revelation of an object to the 
knower must be taken to mean a complete unveiling (al-inkjsha] al-tamm) 8 
[which has been identified with knowledge] and therefore precludes opinion 
(al-zann) 4 so that knowledge with them is to be contrasted with opinion. 

for all creation (al-kjhalq) 5 /that is, for all created beings, whether angels, men 
or jinn, in contrast to the knowledge of the Creator — who is exalted in and 
through Himself — for knowledge belongs to His essence and is not due 
to any cause whatsoever [25] 

are three: the sound senses {al-hawass al-salima), true narrative {al-hjiabar 
al-$adiq)> and Reason (al-'aql) 6 /This is by way of enumerating the 
particulars {al-istiqra) ? From the standpoint of classification, if the cause 
of the knowledge is some other person outside the knower, then it is 
true narration; [but if the cause of knowledge is within the knower 

2 Cf. Al-Rtsala aUShamsiya, pp. 33 ff.; Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 1537, and Macdonald, 
"Wahm and its Cognates," Jour. Roy. As. Soc, 1922, pp. 507 ff.; al-Ghazzali, Mi'yar al- 
'Urn, pp. 125 ff., 159 

8 Cf. Enc. of Islam, II, 787; Hortcn, Die speculative und positive Theologie des Islam, 
p. 237; Macdonald, Development, pp. 120, 172 f. 

4 Al-zann is that faculty which produces opinion or belief with the admission that the 
contrary may be the case. See al-Ta'rijdt, p. 149; Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 939 f.; Wolf- 
son, "Internal Senses," Harvard Theological Review, XXVIII (1935), 93 ff.; Ibn SIna, 
al-Najat, pp. 99 f.; al-Ghazzali, Mi'yar aU'llm, pp. 128 ff. 

5 Al'khalq. This use of the verbal noun for the passive participle goes back to the 
Qur'an. Sec Qur. 31:10 (al-Bayo'awI, Anwar al-Tanzil, II, 112); Qur. 36:79 {Anwar al- 
Tanzil, II, 165 f.), etc. 

6 See al-Sa'adya, Kitab al-Amanat wa l-Vtiqadat, p. 12 ff. This threefold classification 
of the kinds of knowledge is common to Muslim, Christian, and Jew. Wolfson, The Philos- 
ophy of Spinoza, II, 133. 

7 AUistiqra* is the judgment concerning a universal based on particulars. See Diet, of 
Tech. Terms, p. 1229; al-Ta'rifat, p. 18; al-Risala al-Shamsiya, p. ^3; Ibn SIna, al-Najat, 
p. 90; al-Ghazzali, Mi'yar al-'llm, pp. 102 ff. 



CAUSES OF KNOWLEDGE 17 

himself ] then, if there is an organ distinct from the perceptive faculty (*/- 
mudrik), it is sense perception; otherwise, it is Reason. 

Objection may be raised that the efficient cause (al-sabab al-mu aththir) in 
all kinds of knowledge is Allah, since they all exist through His creation and 
His bringing them into existence without any impression (ta'thir) being 
made by the sensory faculty, true narration, and Reason. Reason only ap- 
pears to be a cause, as for instance fire in the case of burning; and as for the 
senses and narration, the former are only instruments and the latter a method 
of comprehension. 

Further objection may be raised that the ultimate cause {al-sabab aUmujdi) 
— taken as a whole wherein Allah creates within us knowledge according 
to the customary way (jary al-ada) 8 in order to include the percipient 
{al-mudrilO such as Reason, the instrument such as the sensory faculty, and 
the method such as narration — is not confined to three things, but there are 
other things such as sensibility (al-wijdan), 9 surmise (al-hads), 10 experience 
(al-tajriba), 11 and the speculation (al-nazar) of the Reason, meaning the 
arrangement of principles and premises (muqaddimat). 

[26] To this we reply that this [threefold division given] is according to 
the method of the Early Theologians, who limited themselves to the aims 
pursued and shunned the minute precisions of the Philosophers. When 
these theologians discerned that some of the things perceived came as the 
result of the use of the external senses, about which there is no doubt, 
whether in rational beings or non-rational beings, they, therefore, made the 
senses one of the causes; and since most of the things known about religion 
are derived from true narrative, they made it another cause. Since they were 
not positive about the internal senses {aUhawdss al-batina)? 2 which are 
called the common sense (al-hiss al-mushtara^) 13 or the estimative faculty 
{al-wahm) or something else; and because they did not attach much im- 

8 fary al-'dda. This term is one of the key phrases of the Atomistic theologians. Mac- 
donald, "Atomic Time," Isis, IX, 2, p. 332. Cf. Maimonides (Munk), Le Guide des egarte, 
I, 388 fT.; (Friedlander), The Guide for the Perplexed, pp. 124 ff.; Pines, Beitrdge, 
pp. 26 rT. 

9 See Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 1455. 

10 See al-Risala al-Shamstya, p. 34; al-Ta'rifat, p. 86; Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 300 f. 

11 See al-Risala al-Shamsiya, p. 34; Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 189 f.; Ibn Sina, al-Najat, 
pp. 94 f . 

12 See Wolfson, "Internal Senses," Harp. Theol. Rev., XXVIII (1935)1 69 Ibn Sina, 
al-Najat, pp. 264 rT.; al-Ghazzali, Uaqasid al-Faldsifa, III, 46 ft. 

18 See Macdonald, "Wahm and its Cognates," Jour. Roy. As. Soc, 1922, pp. 512 f.; 
Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 304; Wolfson, "Internal Senses," Hart/. Theol. Rev., XXVIII 
(i935)> 100 ff.; al-Ghatzali, Uaqasid al-Fal&sifa, III, 46 if. 



1 8 CAUSES OF KNOWLEDGE 

portance to the details of surmises (al-hadsiyat), experiences (al-tajribiyat), 
immediate perceptions (al-badihiyai) and speculations (aLnazariyat), and 
because all these go back to Reason, they made Reason a third cause which 
ultimately arrives at knowledge by merely giving attention to or by drawing 
to itself a surmise or an experience or the arrangement of premises. So they 
made Reason the cause of knowledge in that we have hunger and thirst, 
that the whole is greater than the part, that the light of the moon is derived 
from the sun, that scammony is a laxative, and that the world is originated, 
although in some matters Reason is aided by sense perception. 

The senses (al-hawass) /The word is the plural of a sense (hdssa), meaning 
the sensory faculty. 

are five/meaning that of necessity Reason determines their existence. But 
the proofs for the internal senses, which the Philosophers maintain, are in- 
complete according to the fundamentals of Islam. 

namely, hearing (al-sam) /It is a faculty (quwa) placed in the nerves spread 
out in the cavity of the ear hole, by which sounds are perceived. This is by 
way of connecting with the ear hole the air which has assumed the quality of 
the sounds, meaning that [27] Allah then creates perception in the soul 
(al-nafs). 

seeing (al-basar) /It is a faculty placed in the two hollow nerves which 
meet each other in the brain, thence they separate and go to the two eyes; 
by this faculty are perceived rays of light, colors, shapes, measures, motions, 
the beautiful and the ugly, and other things, the perception of which Allah 
creates in the soul whenever the creature uses this faculty. 

smelling {aUshamm)/\t is a faculty placed in the two protruding lumps 
on the front of the brain, which are like the two nipples of the breasts; by 
this faculty odors are perceived by way of connecting with the cartilage of 
the nose the air which has assumed the quality of the odors. 

taste {(d-dhawq) /It is a faculty spread out in the nerves situated on the 
organ of the tongue; by this faculty flavors are perceived through the mixing 
of the saliva which is in the mouth with the thing tasted, and through its 
reaching to the nerves. 



CAUSES OF KNOWLEDGE 19 

and touch (al-lams)/ It is a faculty spread out into all the body by which 
heat and cold, moisture and dryness, and the like are perceived at the time of 
touching and contact 

[28] and by each of these senses/that is, the five senses 
one is informed/that is, is given knowledge 

concerning that for which it was appointed/that is, that particular sense. This 
means that Allah has created each one of these senses to perceive certain 
things peculiar to it, such as hearing for sounds, taste for that which is 
flavored, and smelling for odors. Nothing is perceived by one sense which is 
perceived by another sense, but as to whether that is possible or not there is a 
difference of opinion. However, the correct position is that it is possible, 
because it is by a purely creative act of Allah without any impression on the 
part of the senses. So it is not impossible that Allah create after the loss of 
sight an added perception of sounds, for example. If the question is raised 
whether the sweetness and heat of a thing are not both together perceived by 
the tasting faculty, we reply in the negative; rather the sweetness is per- 
ceived by taste and the heat by the sense of touch which is present in the 
mouth and the tongue. 

True narrative/that is, that which is in agreement with the fact, for narrative 
is [a form of] speech in relation to which there is something external with 
which the relationship agrees, so it is true; or the relationship docs not 
agree with it, and it is then false. So truth and falsehood are descriptives of 
narrative. They therefore may be used with the sense of giving information 
about a thing according to what is or what is not. This means [that narration 
is] the making [of something] known by a complete relationship which 
agrees [29] or does not agree with the fact, so truth and falsehood are among 
the attributes applied to the narrator. And for this reason in some books the 
term "the true" is used as an attribute of "narrative" (al-\habar al-sadiq), 
and in others it is placed in annexation, "the narrative of the truthful one" 
(\habar al-sddiq). 

is of two kinds: one of them is the mutawdtir 14 narrative/It is so called 
because it does not occur just once, but in sequence and continuity. 

14 In the science of Muslim traditions the mutawdtir (verbal noun, tawatur) is the 
most trustworthy from the standpoint of the number who attest it For the technical terms 



20 



CAUSES OF KNOWLEDGE 



and it it the narrative established by the tongues of people of whom it is in- 
conceivable that they would agree together/that is, Reason does not permit 
their concurring together 

on a falsehood/The thing that proves it is that knowledge takes place 
without any doubt. 

It/of necessity 

brings about necessary knowledge such as the knowledge of former kings in 
past times and of distant countries/The latter phrase "distant countries" may 
be joined to "the kings" or to "the times"; the former, namely "the kings," 
is more likely although further away in position in the sentence. 

Here then are two matters to be noted; one of them is that the mutawatir 
narrative brings about [jo] knowledge and that of necessity, for we come of 
ourselves to the knowledge of the existence of Mecca and Baghdad and that 
such facts are only gained through narratives. The other matter is that the 
knowledge derived from such mutawatir narrative is necessary, and that is 
because it may be obtained by one who is capable of making a deduction and 
by others as well, even by children who have not yet been brought up 
to the right way, by the method of the acquisition of knowledge and of 
arranging the necessary premises. But as for the narrative of the Christians 
{al-Nasara) concerning the killing of Jesus, 15 on whom be peace, and that 
of the Jews (al-Yahiid) concerning the perpetuity of the religion of Moses, 
on whom be peace — well, such mutawatir narrative is absurd. 

Objection may be raised that the narrative of each individual only gives an 
opinion (zann)> and heaping opinion upon opinion does not bring about 
certainty, and also that the possibility of each individual's falsehood brings 
about the possibility of the whole group's falsehood, for it is made up of the 
same individuals. 16 To this we reply that it often happens that in the 
grouping together of individual cases there is something in them collectively 

used in classifying the content and authorities, etc., of traditions see Guillaume, The Tra- 
ditions of Islam, pp. 85 ff. and 181 f.; S. de Sacy, in Notices et extraits des manuscrits, X 
(Paris, 1 818), 481 ff. 

15 The denial by the Muslims of the killing of Jesus rests on the interpretation of a 
verse in the Qur'an (4:156). They take it to mean that someone was crucified in his 
place. The other references (Qur. 3:37, 48; 5:117; 19*34) to his departure are often 
interpreted in such a way as to deny his crucifixion and death. See al-Bay<iawi, al-Rlzl, 
and al-Jabari in their commentaries on these verses. 

ie A. J. adds, "so the mutawatir narrative docs not give knowledge." 



CAUSES OF KNOWLEDGE 



21 



that was not in them separately, as for instance in the strength of a rope made 
of hairs. 

It may be objected that in the case of necessary types of knowledge there 
is no irregularity or contradiction; still, we do find in the case of such 
knowledge that the knowledge that one is half of two is stronger than the 
affirmation of the existence of Alexander. Furthermore, some of those people 
who employ Reason in their investigations, such as al-Sumanlya 17 and the 
Brahmins (al-Bardhima) , 18 deny that mutawatir narrative produces knowl- 
edge. [3*] This argument is inapplicable as an objection, for it is to be 
admitted that various kinds of necessary knowledge sometimes differ from 
one another by difference in usage, custom, and practice, and in the occurring 
to one's mind and conceiving the terms of judgments (atrdf al-ahfyim). And 
there may be a contradiction about mutawatir narrative because of pride and 
obstinacy just as the Sophists exhibit in contradicting all types of necessary 
knowledge. 

The second kind is the narrative of the Messenger {al-rasul) aided/that is to 

say, whose message is established 

by an evidentiary miracle (al-mu'jiza)/A Messenger is a man sent by Allah 
to creatures in order to convey His judgments; and the bringing of a book 
may be stipulated of him, in contrast to a prophet (al-nabi)> for "prophet" 
[52] is a more general term. 19 An evidentiary miracle 20 is something that 
annuls the customary way of things (\hariq lil-'ada), the purpose of which 
is to demonstrate the truthfulness of the one making the claim to be the 
Messenger of Allah. 

17 Al-Sumanlya were responsible for spreading the knowledge of Indian skepticism in 
Persia. See Enc. of Islam, II, 48; Horten, Die philosophischen Ansichten von Razi und 
Tusi, pp. 14 if.; and Phil. Systeme der spe\. Theologen im Islam, pp. 93 ff.; Wensinck, 
The Muslim Creed, p. 256; Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 702, 1390; 'I.D., p. 30; A.J., p. 53. 

18 See below, Chap. 14, and also al-Shahrastanl, al-Milal, pp. 444ft.; Horten, Phil. 
Systeme der spef(. Theologen im Islam, pp. 90 ft.; Enc. of Islam, I, 653. 

19 The Mu'tazilites held that there was no distinction between rasiil (messenger) and 
nabl (prophet). Al-Ta'rifat, p. 115. Sec also Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 584, and al-Khayali 
in 'I.D., p. 31; A.J., p. 54, and below, Chap. 14. 

20 Seven stipulations have been laid down regarding the evidentiary miracle. It must 
(1) be from Allah, (2) annul the customary way of things, (3) be impossible for those 
who contend with Allah's Messenger, (4) appear at the hands of him who claims the 
prophetic office, (5) be in accordance with that claim, (6) substantiate his veracity, and 
(7) not happen before the claim to the prophetic office is made. Sec Diet, of Tech. Terms, 
pp. 975 ff. Cf. al-Iji, al-Mawaqif, pp. 169 ff. Cf. Lane, Lexicon, p. 1961; al-Tdrifdt, p. 234; 
A.J., pp. 54 f.; 'I.D. (see also the gloss of al-Khayali), p. 32, and below, Chap. 14. 



22 



CAUSES OF KNOWLEDGE 



and it/that is, the narrative of the Messenger 

brings about deductive {istidldli) knowledge/that is, that which is arrived 
at by deduction {al-istidlal) , which is by consideration of proof (dalil). De- 
duction is (i) that thing by the sound consideration of which one is enabled 
to attain the knowledge of any subject that has been transmitted by narra- 
tive. (2) It has also been said to be a [minor] proposition, composed of 
judgments, which necessarily demands a [major] proposition. 

[33] So according to the first definition the proof of the existence of the 
Maker is the world, and according to the second definition it is our saying 
that the world is originated and that everything originated has a maker. 
But their statement that proof is that thing from the knowledge of which the 
knowledge of something else follows is more suitable to the second definition. 
But as for its bringing about knowledge, that is because it is absolutely cer- 
tain that he through whom Allah performs an evidentiary miracle for the 
purpose of asserting his claim to the office of Messenger is truthful in the 
judgments which he brings. If he is truthful, then the knowledge concern- 
ing the contents of his message absolutely follows. 

And as for its being deductive, that is because it depends upon deduction 
[34] and because it brings to the mind the fact that it is the narrative of the 
one whose office of Messenger is established by evidentiary miracles. Every 
narrative of this kind is truthful and its contents are according to fact. 

and the knowledge established by it/that is, by the narrative of the Mes- 
senger 

resembles/that is, is like 

the knowledge established by necessity/ [this means] like the things per- 
ceived by the senses, those immediately perceived, and the mutawatir narra- 
tives. 

in certainty /that is, in the impossibility of predicating the contradictory 

and in fixity /that is, in the impossibility of predicating the discontinuance of 
this knowledge by that which is ambiguous {tash\t\ aUmusha\\i\). 21 And 

21 See Diet, of Tech, Terms, p. 780; al-Risala al-Shamsiya, pp. 5I, and Wolfson, 
"Amphibolous Terms," Harvard Theological Review, XXXI (1938), 151 



CAUSES OF KNOWLEDGE 23 

it is a kind of knowledge that means the absolute established conviction 
(ftiqad) which agrees with the fact, else otherwise this knowledge would be 
a matter of ignorance, or of opinion, or of following tradition (taqlid). 22 

If it is objected that this explanation is applicable to the mutawatir only, 
and therefore goes back to the first section [of true narrative], we reply that 
the statement is about that narrative which is known to be [35] of the Mes- 
senger because it has been heard from his mouth or because that or some- 
thing else possible has been transmitted of him by tawatur. The individual 
narrative is not useful for knowledge because there may be some doubt of its 
being the narrative of the Messenger. 

An objection may also be made that since the statement is mutawatir or 
heard from the lips of the Messenger of Allah, the knowledge which results 
is then necessary and consequendy not deductive, just as in the case of the 
rest of knowledge obtained by tawatur and sense perception. To this we 
reply (1) that the necessary knowledge, in the case of the mutawatir narra- 
tive which is from the Messenger, is the knowledge that the narrative is the 
narrative of the Messenger of Allah — may blessing and peace be upon him — 
because this means "that by which the giving of the narrative has become 
mutawatir . n (2) In regard to that which is heard from the mouth of the 
Messenger — may Allah bless him and give him peace — the necessary knowl- 
edge [in this case] is the perception of the verbal expressions and that they 
are the speech of the Messenger. (3) But the deductive knowledge [in this 
case] is the knowledge as to its content and the establishing of that which it 
proved. For example, the statement of the Messenger, "It is incumbent on 
the claimant to produce proof, and the defendant must take an oath/' 23 is 
known by tawatur to be the statement of the Messenger. This knowledge is 
necessary. Further it is known from this statement [of the Messenger] that 
proof devolves on the claimant. [The knowledge of] this [fact] is deductive. 

Further objection may be raised that truthful narrative which gives useful 
knowledge is not confined to these two kinds, but may be narrative coming 
from Allah or from the Angel or the People of Agreement (al4jma)> or nar- 
rative coupled with that which removes the possibility of falsehood, like the 
news of the arrival of Zayd as indicated by his people rushing to his house. 

22 Some say that taqlid, the acceptance of a religion without argument or proof, is 
sufficient to make a man a Believer, others deny this holding that the muqallid is an Un- 
believer. Macdonald, Development, p. 316. Cf. Enc. of Islam, IV, 630; Diet, of Tech. 
Terms, p. 1 178; al-Babu 'l~Hddi 'Ashar, pp. 5 ff.; al-Fadall, Kifayat al-Awamm, pp. 15 ff.; 
al-SanusI, Umm al-Bardhin, pp. 55 ff.; Wensinck, The Muslim Creed, pp. 136, 242, 265. 

28 See al-Tirmidhl, Sahih, "A^klm/' b. 12; al-Bukharl, al~$ahih, II, 116. 



24 CAUSES OF KNOWLEDGE 

To this wc answer that what is meant by narrative is a narrative which is a 
means of knowledge to all creatures by merely being a kind of narrative 
without regard at all to the contexts [36] which give certainty by the evi- 
dence of Reason. 

So the narrative coming from Allah or from the Angel is able to impart 
knowledge in relation to all creation only when it comes to them by way 
of the Messenger. The same judgment applies to the narrative of the Mes- 
senger and to that of the People of Agreement in the case of a mutawatir 
judgment. Answer may be made that it has no meaning by itself alone but 
rather by consideration of the proofs which indicate that Agreement is an 
argument. We then say that likewise the narrative of the Messenger is of the 
same class and for that reason was classified as deductive. 

Then as for Reason {al-'aql) 24 /which is a faculty of the soul (al-najs), 2 * by 
which it is prepared for the reception of things to be known and perceived. 
That is the meaning of their saying, "It is an innate property (ghariza) 
which, whenever the instruments of perception are sound, is followed by the 
necessary types of knowledge." [37] Some people define it as the substance 
(al-jawhar) by which the things not perceived by the senses are perceived 
through means, and by which sense perceptions are perceived through ob- 
servation. 

it is a cause of knowledge also/He made this clear because there is a disagree- 
ment about it among the heretics (al-Malahida) and the Sumaniya in regard 
to all types of speculation, and among some Philosophers in regard to meta- 
physical speculations, on the basis of numerous differences and the contradic- 
tion of opinions. The reply that this is due to the unsoundness of specu- 
lation does not preclude the fact that sound speculation on the part of 
Reason is useful for giving knowledge, although the very thing you men- 
tioned is a deduction by the speculation of Reason. Thus it establishes that 
which you have denied, so it is contradictory to itself. And if they assert that 
this means the opposing of the unsound with the unsound, we answer that 
either it means something [38] and therefore is not unsound, or it does not 

24 Al-'aql is the translation by the Arabic writers on philosophy of the Greek vov$. See 
Macdonald, ReL Attitude and Life, pp. 230 f.; Diet, of Tech. Terms, II, 1027 ft.; Ibn Sina, 
Rasd'il fi 'l-Hikjna wa 'l-TabTiyat, pp. 79 f.; al-Ghazzali, Ihyd', VII, 201 ft. 

25 Al-nafs is "the animal psyche" or "the appetitive soul." See Macdonald, Rel. Attitude 
and Life, pp. 228 ft.; and "Wahm and its Cognates," four. Roy. As. Soc., 1922, p. 509; 
Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 1398; Ibn Sina, Rasd'il, pp. 81 f.; al-Ghazz51I, Ihya' , VII, 201 ft.; 
Enc. of Islam, III, 827 ft. 



CAUSES OF KNOWLEDGE 2$ 

mean anything at all and therefore there is no opposing [of the unsound 
with the unsound]. 

Some may say, "Let us grant that speculation is useful for giving knowl- 
edge. Well then, if this knowledge is necessary there is no contradiction 
about it, for it is just as though we said, 'One is half of two'; and if it is 
speculative, then it is necessary to establish speculation by speculation and 
that is circular proof (al-dawr)" To this we reply that sometimes there may 
be a contradiction about necessary knowledge because of obstinacy or the 
limitation of perception. The people who use Reason are agreed that the 
reasoning faculties of men are distinctly different according to the nature 
created (al-fitra) in them. [This position is reached] by deduction from 
precedents (al-athar) and by the testimony of narratives (al-a^hbdr) [from 
the Prophet]. 26 The speculative type (al-nazari) of knowledge itself may be 
established by a special speculation which is not expressed in terms of a 
[general] speculation. An example of this is our saying, "The world is chang- 
ing, and everything changing is originated." Of necessity that is useful for 
giving the knowledge that the world was originated. [39] This [necessity] 
does not rest upon the special character of the speculation, but because it is 
sound and accompanied by [that which meets] its conditions. So every 
sound speculation accompanied by that which meets its conditions has a 
meaning, and in verifying the answer to this objection there is more detail 
than is fitting to this book, 

and whatever of it is established/that is, of knowledge established by Reason 

by immediate perception (al-badi ha) /that is, at the first glance without the 
necessity of thought 

is necessary, just as the knowledge that the whole of a thing is greater than 
the part of it/For after conceiving the meaning of "all" and "p art " and 
"greater" it is seen that this [proposition J does not rest on anything; and 
whoever hesitates about it — so that he asserts that a part of a man, like the 
hand for example, may sometimes be greater than {40] the whole — docs not 
conceive the meaning of "whole" and "p art *" 

26 Al-Ghazzall gives the name \habar (plur. ahjxbar) to a tradition that goes back to 
Muhammad himself, while he distinguishes those that can only be traced back to the 
Companions as athar. Sec Enc. of Islam, II, 859, also al-Ghazzall's use of the terms in 
Ihyd'. However, this usage is not universal for some use athar also for traditions that go 
back to Muhammad. Cf. Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 65; Lane, Lexicon, p. 19. 



26 



CAUSES OF KNOWLEDGE 



and whatever is established by deduction (aMstidldl) /that is, by considera- 
tion of proof, whether by deduction from cause to effect, as whenever one sees 
fire and so knows that it has smoke; or from effect to cause, as whenever one 
sees smoke and so knows that fire is there. The first process may be specified 
as "assigning the cause" and the second as "deduction." 

is acquired (iktisabi) /that is to say, obtained by acquisition {al-kasb). This 
is [done by] immediate causality (mubasharat al-asbdb) through choice, as in 
the application of Reason and in speculation on the matters which per- 
tain to deduction, and by inclining the ear, turning about the pupil of the 
eye, and so forth, in matters which pertain to the senses. So we see that 
"acquired" is a more general term than "deductive" because deductive 
knowledge is that which is obtained by consideration of the proof. Everything 
deductive then is acquired, but not everything acquired is deductive, as for 
example the use of the faculty of sight which results from purpose and 
choice. 

As for necessary knowledge: it is sometimes contrasted with acquired 
knowledge and it is then explained as that the obtaining of which is not 
within the power (maqdur) of [choice apportioned by Allah to] the creature; 
and sometimes necessary knowledge is contrasted with deductive knowledge 
and explained as that which results without thought or speculation regard- 
ing proof. And so some termed the knowledge resulting from the use of the 
senses "acquired," that is, resulting from immediate causality through 
choice; and others termed it "necessary," that is, resulting without the use 
of deduction. 

[4/] There does not seem to be a contradiction in the statement of the 
author of al-Biddya 21 when he says that originated (al-hddith) knowledge 
is of two kinds: (1) necessary, which Allah originated in the soul of the 
creature without his acquisition and choice, like the knowledge of his 
existence and the change of his states (ahwdl); and (2) acquired, which Al- 
lah originates in the creature by means of his acquisition, and this is by im- 
mediate causality in respect to knowledge, its causes being three: sound 
senses, truthful narrative, and the speculation of Reason. Then he went on 
to say that from the speculation of Reason there result two kinds of knowl- 
edge: (1) necessary, which comes at the very beginning of speculation 

27 This is evidently the book by Nur al-DIn Ahmad b. Mahmud b. Abu Bakr al-§abunl 
al-Bukhari (d. a.d. 1184) referred to in Brockelmann, Geschichtc, I, 375, and Wilhelm 
Ahlwardt, Verzcichniss der arabischen Handschriften der kpniglichen Bibliothe\ zu 
Berlin (Berlin, 1887-99), No. 1737. 



CAUSES OF KNOWLEDGE z 7 

without any cogitation (tafa^ur) y such as the knowledge that the whole is 
greater than the part; and (2) deductive, in which a kind of cogitation is 
necessary, as the knowledge of the presence of fire on seeing the smoke. 

Illumination (aUilhdm) /It it that which is explained as the casting of an 
idea into the intellect (al-qalb) by means of overflowing (al-fayd). 

is not one of the causes of the cognition (al-ma'rifa) of the soundness of a 
thing with the People of Reality/This statement was made to answer the 
objection to confining the causes of knowledge to the above-mentioned three 
things only. It would have been better if al-Nasafi had said, "One of the 
causes of the knowledge (al-'ilm) of a thing," unless it was that he tried to 
call attention to the fact that for us knowledge and cognition are the 
same, not, as some do, making a technical distinction between them by 
confining knowledge to compounds (al-murafyabat) or to universals 
(al-t(ulliydt) f and cognition to simple things (al-basait) or to particulars 
(al-juz'iyat); otherwise there was no use of his particularizing the statement 
by saying "the soundness of a thing" [instead of "a thing"]. 

Then it is clear that he meant that Illumination is not a cause by which 
knowledge results to creatures in general nor by which it is right for one to 
force knowledge on another; otherwise there is no doubt that knowledge does 
result from Illumination. [42] There have been reported statements regard- 
ing Illumination in the tradition of the Prophet such as, "My Lord illumined 
me." 28 And this has been said of many of the Fathers (al-salaf) also. 

As for the narrative of a single unprejudiced person and the following 
of the tradition (taqlid) of one who attempts a legal opinion (al-mujtahid), 20 
they are sometimes useful for opinion and sometimes for strong conviction 
which is enduring. It appears that al-Nasafi meant by knowledge (al-'ilm) 
that which does not include these two things mentioned; otherwise there is 
no reason for confining the causes of knowledge to the three [causes men- 
tioned]. 

28 A. J., who is careful to mention the sources of traditions, gives no reference to this 
saying. 

29 This is a technical term which applies to the one learned in the Qur'an and its mean- 
ings and the Sunna who exerts himself to the utmost in forming an opinion on something 
connected with legal judgments. Enc. of Islam, II, 448 f.; Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 198; Ibn 
Khaldun, al-Muqaddima, III, 6. 



Chapter 3 



THE WORLD 



.urther, the world in the totality of its parts is a thing originated, since 
it consists of substances and accidents. A substance is that which has self- 
subsistence, and it is either a thing compounded, that is, a body; or not com- 
pounded, like the atom, which is the part that is not further divided. And the 
accident is something that does not subsist in itself but is originated in bodies 
and' atoms, such as colors, states of coming into being, tastes, and odors. 



Further, the world (al-dlatn)/ that is, everything except Allah — of the 
existent things (al-mawjiidat) by which the Maker is known, is called the 
world of bodies (al-ajsdm), the world of accidents (al-a'rad), the plant world 
(al-nabat), the animal world (al-hayawan), and so on. The attributes of Al- 
lah are excluded [from the things making up the world] because they are 
not other than His essence, just as they are not the essence itself. 

in the totality of its parts/that is, of the heavens and what is in them and the 
earth and what is on it 

is a thing originated (muhdath) 1 /This means it is something brought from 
non-existence into existence, [43] meaning that it was once non-existent 
(ma'dum) and then it existed. This is in opposition to the Philosophers, inso- 

1 At the beginning of Chapter 7 according to our division of the commentary al~ 
Taftazani gives a number of synonyms for creating {al-takwiri) . Takjurin is sometimes de- 
fined as meaning that a thing comes into material existence, while ihddth (origination) 
means that a thing comes into temporal existence. See Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 134. Httdiith 
is the opposite of qidam (eternity). In order to express the further distinction in meaning 
muhdath has been translated "originated" and muhdith as "originator" rather than 
"created" and "creator" which have been used for other words. See below, Chap. 7. For 
the contrast between the Philosophers and the Atomistic Theologians in theory as to 
the composition and working process of the universe see Maimonidcs (Munk), Le Guide 
des igarts, I, 313 ff. and 344 ff.; (Friedlander), The Guide for the Perplexed, pp. 102 ff. 
and 109 fT.; Macdonald, "Atomic Time," Isis, IX, 2, 334. 



THE WORLD 29 

far as they held to the position of the eternity (qidam) of the heavens, 2 
including their respective matters (mawddd), forms (suwar), and shapes 
(ash\dl) 9 and the eternity of the sub-lunar elements (al-anasir) including 
their respective matters and forms, but these forms are only specific forms, 
inasmuch as the elements were never without form. Strictly speaking, the 
Philosophers used the term "being originated" with reference to that which 
is not Allah, but they used it in the sense of being dependent on something 
else, not in the sense of being preceded by non-existence. 

Then al-Nasafl pointed out the proof for the origin (hud tit h) of the world 
by his statement: 

since it/that is, the world 

consists of substances (a'ydn) 3 and accidents (a'rad) /because whatever of 
it is self-subsistent (qaim bi dhdtihi) is a substance, and whatever is not is an 
accident. Both of them are originated, as we shall show. And the author — 
Allah have mercy on him — did not deal with this, because the discussion 
of it would be very long and inappropriate to this brief treatise of his, see- 
ing that it is confined to problems without their proofs. 

A substance is that which/that is, any possible thing 

has self-subsistence (qiydm bi dhdtihi) /By context this is inferred from 
their being a part of the world. [44] The meaning of self-subsistence with 
the Mutakallims is that substance is bounded by itself (yatahayyaz bi nafsiht) ; 
its being bounded does not follow from the fact that some other thing is 
bounded, in contrast to the accident, in which case its being bounded follows 
from the fact that the atom (al-jawhar) is bounded, for the atom is the subject 
(al-mawdu") or the locus (al-mahall) which gives subsistence to the accident. 

The meaning of the existence of the accident in the subject is that its very 
existence is its existence in the subject, and for that reason it cannot be trans- 
ferred from the subject. This is in contrast to the existence of a body within 
a boundary (al-hayyiz), for its very existence and its existence in a boundary 
are two different things. For that reason a body may be transferred from a 

2 Cf. Plato's Timaeus, Dialogues of Plato, ed. Jowett (1874), II, 544, 560. 

8 In scholastic theology 'ayn is the term used for "substance." The philosophers used 
jawhar as contrasted with "accident" ( f arad) and with "idea" (ma f nd). Diet, of Tech. 
Terms, p. 1073; Lane, Lexicon, pp. 2214 ff.; Enc. of Islam, Supplement, pp. 13, 16; al- 
Ghazzali, Maqdsid aUFaldsifa, II, 7 f. 



3 o THE WORLD 

boundary. According to the Philosophers the meaning of the subsistence 
of a thing in its essence is its being independent of the locus in which it 
subsists, and the meaning of its subsistence in something else is its being 
specified by it, so that the first becomes something descriptive (na'i) and the 
second something described (manut), whether having boundaries, as in the 
case of the blackness of a body, or not [having boundaries], as in the case of 
the attributes (sifat) of Allah and the absolutes. 4 

and it/whatever of the world is self-subsistent 

is either a thing compounded (mura\kab)/oi two [45] or more parts, ac- 
cording to us. 

that is, a body (jism) 5 /Some say that there must be three parts so that the 
three dimensions, length, breadth, and depth may be realized; and others say 
eight parts, in order that the intersecting of the dimensions at vertical angles 
may be realized. This is not a dispute over verbal expressions to be used, 
referring to some technicality [in the matter] that can be settled by saying 
that each may explain the term technically as he wishes. It is a dispute as to 
whether or not the conventional idea thus given to body is sufficient if it is 
compounded of two parts only. The Primitive Theologians (al-awwalun) 
argued that if one of two bodies exceeds the other by one part, then it is 
bulkier [ajsam, that is, more of body] than the other. And if the mere com- 
pounding [of parts] were not sufficient to constitute corporeality, then the 
body would not increase in corporeality by the mere addition of a part. 
This is a matter for consideration, for the form afal from the noun al-jasama 
[that is, ajsam as used above] has the meaning of bulk and greatness of 
amount. It is said that a thing becomes bulky (jasuma), that is, it becomes 
great, so it is said to be bulky (jastm) and corpulent (jusam). We speak 
here of body as a name (ism) not as an attribute (sifa). 

or not compounded, like the atom (ja tvhar) /that is, the substance which is 
not divisible, neither actually, nor in fancy, nor by supposition (fard) 6 

which is the part that is not further divided/He did not say, "it is the 

atom," but "like the atom," guarding against introducing a restriction; for 

4 Al-mujarradat, the absolute souls, i.e., stripped of all materiality. 
6 For the different definitions of jism see al-Ash'arl, Maqdlat, pp. 301 rT.; Diet, of Tech. 
Terms, p. 258, also al-Ghazzali, Maqasid al-Falasifa, II, 10 ff. 
6 A.J., p. 72, says "rational supposition.*' 



THE WORLD 31 

that which is not compounded is not confined according to Reason to the 
atom, meaning "the indivisible part" (al-juz all ad hi la yatajazza) [46] 
since it would have been necessary to abolish primary matter (hayuli) 7 form 
(sura), Intelligences ('uqul), and the absolute souls (al-nufus al-mujarrada) 8 
in order to complete the restriction of the indivisibles to the atom. 

According to the Philosophers there is no such thing as the pure atom 
(al-jawhar al-jard), that is, the indivisible atom. As for the compounding 
together of the body, they say that it is composed of primary matter 
(ahhayuli) and form (al-sura) only. 

The best proof for establishing the [indivisible] part is that were a real 
sphere to be placed on a real plane it would make a contact at one indivisible 
point only, since if it should make a contact with it at two points, there 
would actually be on the sphere a line, so it would not be a real sphere on a 
real plane. 

The most noted proof [of the pure atom] according to the Early Theolo- 
gians has two aspects. The first is that if every substance were infinitely 
divisible the mustard seed would not be smaller than the mountain, since 
each is made up of infinite parts. But hugeness and smallness consist only in 
the multiplicity and paucity of parts, but that fact is only conceivable in the 
finite. The second proof is that the combination (al-ijtima") of the parts of the 
body into a whole is not due to its own essence, for were that the case the 
body would not be capable of being separated into parts (al-iftiraq). It is 
because of this that Allah has the power to create in that body the possi- 
bility of being separated into parts which cannot be further divided. Now 
with reference to this ultimate part, the indivisibility of which is under dis- 
cussion, if it is possible for it to be further separated into parts it follows that 
the power of Allah would have to bring it about in order to eliminate the 
assumption that Allah is powerless [47], but if it is impossible [for it to be 
further separated] then the contention as to the existence of an absolute 
atom is established. 

All [of these three proofs] are weak. The first is weak because it only points 
to the existence of the geometrical point, and that does not necessitate the 
existence of the indivisible part, for the fact that a geometrical point is said 
to have position (al-hulul fi mahall) does not mean that it occupies place 

7 Hayuli (Greek 0Xi|), is primary matter, matter as capable of receiving form. For the 
different meanings applied to the word in Arabic see Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 1534; al- 
GhazzalT, Maqasid al-Faldsifa, II, 19 fT.; Pines, Beitrage, pp. 40 rT. 

8 A.J., p. 73, adds m 'tn al-abdan, "of bodies." 



32 THE WORLD 

{hulul al-saraydn) 9 and consequently it does not mean that the indivisibility 
of the place follows from the indivisibility of the geometrical point. 

The second and third are weak because the Philosophers do not say that 
the body is actually composed of parts that are infinite; but they say that the 
body admits of an infinite number of divisions and that there is no combina- 
tion (ijtima) of the parts in it at all. Greatness and smallness are only ac- 
cording to the quantity which subsists in a body. And it is possible for the 
parts to be separated (ijtirdq) to infinity, so the pure atom is not to be 
postulated. 10 The proofs for denying this are also somewhat weak. For this 
reason al-Imam al-Razi inclined to be noncommittal on the subject. 

If the question is raised whether there is any benefit resulting from this 
position which is different [from that of the Philosophers], we reply that 
there is. In establishing the pure atom we escape many of the obscurities of 
the Philosophers, such as the positing of primary matter (hayuli) and form 
(sura) which leads to the eternity of the world, the denial of the resurrection 
of the body, and many of the fundamental laws of measurement (al-handasa) y 
upon which obscurities rests the continual motion of the heavenly spheres; 
and also the denial of the rending (al-kjiarq) of them and their being 
coalesced together again (al-ilti'am). 

And the accident is something that does not subsist in itself/but it subsists in 
something else by being incident (tab?) to it in having its boundaries 
(tahayyuz), or by being specialized by it, just as something descriptive is 
specialized by the thing described, as has already been said. This does not 
mean that it cannot be thought of apart from the locus as has been fancied by 
some, for that only applies to some of the accidents. 

but is originated in bodies and atoms/ [48] Some say that this is added to 
give an exact definition and to avoid including the attributes of Allah. 

such as colors/The original colors are said to be black and white; others 
have said that they are red, green and yellow, the rest being compounded 
from them. 

0 The root sard means "to travel by night, to creep along, to be contagious," and in mod- 
ern Arabic "to circulate" (of the blood). For its technical use see Horten, Die spc\. und pos. 
Theologie des Islam, pp. 154, 178; Lane, Lexicon, p. 1355; Dozy, Supplement, I, 651. 
Al-hulul ft mahall reflects the expression used by Aristotle in the definition of a point. 
See Metaphysics, V, 6, 1016b, 26. 

10 Cf. Maimonides (Friedlander) , The Guide for the Perplexed, p. 134. 



THE WORLD 33 

states of coming into being (a\wan) /which are: combination (al-ijtima'), 
being separated into parts (al-iftirdq), motion (al-hara^a) and rest (ai-su \un) 

tastes (tf/-/«'wm)/There are nine species of them: bitterness, pungency, 
saltiness, astringency, acidity, puckeriness, sweetness, greasiness, and in- 
sipidity. Through combinations of these there are innumerable species of 
tastes. 

and odors (al-rawa'ih) /These are of many species without special names. 
And it is most evident that all accidents except the states of coming into 
being occur only in bodies. If it is established that the world is made up of 
substances and accidents, and the substances are bodies and atoms, we then 
may say that everything is originated. 

Some of the accidents are known by observation, as motion following rest, 
light following darkness, [49] and blackness following whiteness. And 
others are known by proof, such as the occurrence (taraydn) 11 of non- 
existence, as seen from its contraries. For eternity is inconsistent with non- 
existence because if the eternal is necessarily existent in itself, then it is clear 
that eternity is inconsistent with non-existence; otherwise eternity must be 
ascribed to the eternal simply by way of affirmation, since that which pro- 
ceeds from a thing by purpose and choice is of necessity originated, but an 
eflect which is joined to a necessary eternal cause is itself eternal because 
it is impossible for a necessary eflect to lag behind its cause. 12 

As for substances (al-a'yan), [they are among the originated things] 
because they are not free (la takjilu) from originated things, and whatever 
is not free from originated things is itself originated. The first premise [that 
substances are not free from originated things] is so, because they are not 
free of motion and rest, which are originated. This not being free of motion 
and rest is due to the fact that the body and the atom are not free from re- 
siding within some boundary (hayyiz). If the substance is preceded by 
another \awn (state of coming into being) in that very same boundary, 
then it is at rest; and if it is not so preceded by another ^aum in the very 
same boundary, then it is in motion. This is what they mean when they say, 
"Motion is two \awn\ at two times (ft anayn) in two places (ft ma\anayn) y 
and rest is two \awri§ at two times in one place." 

[50] If objection is made that it is possible that there was not at all 

11 Cf. Hortcn, Die speJ(. und pos. Theologie des Islam, pp. 198 f. 

12 A.J., p. 77, adds aUtdmma, "complete." 



34 THE WORLD 

another \awn preceding this \\awn which has been assumed], as for example 
at the time of its being originated, so [there was a time that] it was neither in 
motion nor at rest, we reply that this objection does not impair our argument, 
since it admits the claim that this statement has been made about bodies 
in which there were a number of pawn's [one after the other] and in which 
there was a renewing of seasons and times. 

As for our belief that motion and rest are originated, that is based upon 
the fact that they belong among accidents, which are not continuous. 
Furthermore the very quiddity of motion is that there is in it a transition 
from one state {hal) to another, which logically requires that something else 
preceded motion; this would be inconsistent with eternity of motion. More- 
over every motion may come to an end and is without permanency, and 
every rest may cease to exist, inasmuch as every body is subject of necessity to 
motion. But as you know, whatever may cease to exist cannot be eternal. 

The second premise [that whatever is not free of originated things is itself 
originated] is true, for if that which is not free of originated things were 
established to be from eternity, then it would be inseparably connected with 
the establishment from eternity of that which is originated, and that is im- 
possible. 

Here then are the investigations [to be made of the objections concerning 
substances]. The first objection is that there is no proof for confining the 
[use of the term] "substances'' to atoms and bodies, and that this [narrow 
definition] denies the existence of a self-subsistent possible thing which does 
not have boundaries at all, such as the Intelligences and the absolute souls [5/] 
of which the Philosophers speak. And the answer to this is that the thing 
which is asserted to be originated is that possible thing the existence of 
which is established by proof. And this possible thing consists of the sub- 
stances which have boundaries and accidents. The proofs for the existence 
of the absolute beings [such as Intelligences and absolute souls] are incom- 
plete, as has been shown in larger treatises. 

The second objection is that what has been said does not prove the origin 
of all accidents, since the origin of some of them is not perceived by observa- 
tion, nor is the origin of that which is contrary to them such as the accidents 
which subsist in the heavenly spheres, namely shapes (ashl^al), extensions 
(imtidaddt), and lights {adwd'). The answer is that this does not thwart 
the purpose of the argument, for the origin of the substances demands of 
necessity the origin of the accidents since they only subsist in these sub- 
stances. 



THE WORLD 35 

The third objection is that eternity (al-azal) does not express a special 
state, so that the existence in that state of originated things is inseparably con- 
nected with the existence of the body in that state, but eternity is an ex- 
pression for non-beginning or for the continuance of existence in times which 
are reckoned as unending in the past. The meaning of the eternity of 
originated motions is that there is no motion which did not have another 
motion preceding it, and so on without a beginning. This is the position of the 
Philosophers, who although they admit that no particular motion is eternal, 
yet make this statement rather of absolute motion (al-hara%a al-mutlaqa). 
The answer to this is that the absolute does not have existence except in the 
particular, so, since each particular is originated, the eternity of the absolute 
is inconceivable. 

The fourth objection is that if each body were in a boundary, that would 
necessitate the non-limitation of bodies, inasmuch as the boundary (al- 
hayyiz) 18 is the inner surface of a container which touches the outer surface 
of the thing contained. The answer to this is that the boundary according 
to the Mutakallims is the imaginary space (al-faragh) [52] which the body 
occupies and in which it extends to its dimensions. And when the fact is 
established that the world is originated — it being known that anything 
originated must have an originator (muhdith) — it is then established that 
the world has an originator, for of necessity it is impossible that there be a pre- 
ponderance (al-tarajjuh) in favor of one of the two alternatives of some- 
thing possible without there being "a determinant to bring about the pre- 
ponderance" ( m urajjih ) . 

18 Sec Lane, Lexicon, p. 668; al-Ta'rijat, p. 99; Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 298 ff.: al- 
Razi, Muhassal, pp. 65 £.; A.J., p. 82. 



Chapter 4 



THE ORIGINATOR OF THE WORLD 

T 

JLhc Originator of the world is Allah, the One, the Eternal, the Living, 
the Powerful, the Knowing, the Hearing, the Seeing, the Desiring, and the 
Willing. He is not an accident, nor a body, nor an atom; nor is He something 
formed, nor a thing limited, nor a thing numbered, nor a thing portioned 
or divided, nor a thing compounded; nor does He come to an end in Him- 
self. He is not described by quiddity, nor by quality, nor is He placed in 
place. Time does not affect Him and nothing resembles Him, and nothing 
is outside of His Knowledge and Power. 

The Originator (muhdith) of the world is Allah/He is the necessarily 
existent essence (al-dhat al-wdjib al-wujud) whose existence is of His 
essence. He does not need anything at all, since were His existence only pos- 
sible He would be a part of the world and not suited to be the Originator of it 
and the one who caused its beginning, even though "world" ('alam) is a 
name applied to all that is properly a sign ('alam) for the existence of the 
one who caused its beginning. [55] Closely allied to this is the statement 
that the cause of the beginning of all possible things must be necessarily 
existent, since were He a possible only, He would be one of the many pos- 
sible things and not the cause of their beginning. 

It is sometimes fancied that this is a proof for the existence of the Maker 
without necessarily abolishing the endless chain (al-tasalsul) . l But this is not 
the case. It is rather a reference to one of the proofs for the unsoundness of 
the endless chain. And this proof is that if a chain of possibles were ar- 
ranged to infinity, this chain would still need an [efficient] cause, which 
must not be the thing itself nor a part of it, because it is impossible for a 
thing to be the [efficient] cause of itself or of its own causes. But it must be 

1 Cf. al-Babu '\~Hadt 'Ashar, pp. 13 f.; Macdonald, "Atomic Time,'* Uis, IX, 2, 336; 
Development, pp. 322 f.; al-Fa^all, Kifayat al-Awdmm, pp. 32 £.; and Diet, of Tech. Terms, 
pp. 690 ff. 



ORIGINATOR OF THE WORLD 37 

outside the cause, so the efficient cause would then be necessary and the end- 
less chain would be broken. 

[54] Of the noted kinds of proof there is the one of tallying (al-tattnq). 
This consists in supposing a series [of effects] from the last effect (ma'lul) to 
infinity and another series, for example, of just one short of this last effect to 
infinity. Then we apply the two series so that we make the first of the first 
series correspond with the first of the second series; the second with the sec- 
ond, and so on. Thus, if there is a unit of the second series for every unit of the 
first series, then the less is like that which is more than it, and that is im- 
possible. Otherwise there is something in the first series without something 
to correspond to it in the second, so the second is broken off and comes to an 
end. This necessitates the finiteness of the first series since it only exceeds the 
second series by a finite amount; and that which exceeds the finite by 
a finite amount is of necessity finite. This proof of tallying can only be 
used of that which comes under the category of existence and not with that 
which has only to do with the estimative faculty (wahtrii mahd), for it breaks 
down with the breaking down of the estimative faculty. 

This argument is not to be refuted by the arranging of series of numbers, 
in which two series are applied to each other, [55] one of them from one to 
infinity and the second from two to infinity, nor by things pertaining to the 
Knowledge of Allah and things pertaining to the Power of Allah, for in 
spite of the fact that they are both infinite, the things pertaining to the 
Knowledge of Allah are more than the things pertaining to His Power. This is 
so, since infinity, when applied to numbers and things pertaining to the 
Knowledge and the Power of Allah, means that they do not end in one 
definite limit beyond which no other limit can be conceived. This does not 
mean that whatever possesses infinity comes under the category of existence, 
inasmuch as that is impossible. 

the One/that is to say, the Maker of the World is one. The idea of the 
Necessarily Existent cannot be true except of one essence. The most noted 
of the proofs for the unity of Allah among the Mutakallims is that of 
mutual hindrance (al-tamdnu'), 2 which is referred to in the saying of Allah, 
"If there were in the two of them [that is, the heavens and the earth] gods 
other than Allah, these two would have been corrupted (fasadata)" (Qur'an 

2 Ct. Maimonides (Munk), he Guide des Sgarts, I, 440 If.; (Friedlander), The Guide 
for (he Perplexed, pp. 139 ff.; Miillcr, Philosophic pp. 47 f. See also al-RazI, MafatiJt al- 
Ghayb, VI, 105 ff.; Macdonald, Development, pp. 326 f.; al-Fatfali, Kifayat al-'Awamm, 
pp. 40 ff.; al-BaydawI, Anwar al-Tanztl, II, 11. 



38 ORIGINATOR OF THE WORLD 

21:22). The explanation of this is that if two gods were possible, [56] mutual 
hindrance of each other would be possible. One of them would will that 
Zayd move and the other that he remain at rest, since each of the two things 
is possible in itself. In like manner the connection of the Will with each of 
them fis possible], since there is no mutual opposition between the two 
wills, but only [a mutual opposition] between the two things willed. So either 
the two things occur and the opposites unite 3 [which is impossible], or [if 
only one of the two things occurs] it follows that one of the two gods is 
powerless. This powerlessness is an indication of being originated and of 
possibility, because in it there is the defect of being in need of something. 

So plurality necessitates the possibility of mutual hindrance, which [in 
turn] necessitates the impossible, so it is impossible. [57 J This is the detailed 
explanation of the statement that if one of two is not able to oppose the 
other, it then follows that he is powerless. And if he is able [to oppose the 
other], then the other is powerless. What we have just mentioned refutes the 
proposition that it is possible for the two to agree without mutual hindrance, 
or that hindering and opposing [in the case of two gods] are impossible be- 
cause hindering and opposing necessitate the impossible, or that the agree- 
ment together of the two wills, as though one should will that Zayd move and 
remain at rest at the same time, is impossible. 

Know that the statement of Allah, "If there were in the two of them gods 
other than Allah, they would have been corrupted'' (Qur'an 21:22) is a 
convincing argument (hujja iqnctiya). The necessary consequence {muld- 
zama) [of such a statement is the acceptance of the conclusion as] is cus- 
tomary in the case of statements which conform to rhetorical syllogisms 
(al-\hitablyat) . 4 For it is customary when there are many exercising the 
office of governor, that there is mutual hindrance of one another and that 
one gets the upper hand, as is indicated in the statement of Allah, "Some 
of them gained the mastery over the others" (Qur'an 23:93). [Otherwise 
the argument is incomplete.] Then if actual corruption is meant — that is, 
the passing away from the present visible order [of the heavens and the 
earth] — a mere plurality [of gods] does not necessitate that, for it is possible 
that there be an agreement [by the gods] on the present visible order. If 
the possibility of corruption is meant, there is nothing to indicate the denial 

8 A.J. (p. 87) reads after "and the opposites unite," "or they do not, so the lack of 
power on the part of both follows, or one attains and it follows that one of them is power- 
less." 

4 Cf. Macdonald, Development, p. 259; idem, "The Life of al-Ghazzall," Journal of the 
American Oriental Society, XX, 128; and Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 404 f. 



ORIGINATOR OF THE WORLD 39 

of this, since the statutes bear witness to the folding up of the heavens 
and the removal of the present order. So it is undoubtedly possible. 

One does not say that the necessary consequence of such a statement is so 
absolute that the meaning of the corruption of the heavens and the earth 
is that they were not created, on the ground that, if two makers were as- 
sumed, a mutual hindering of one another in performing acts would be 
possible, so that one of them would not be a maker nor would anything be 
made. For we say that the possibility of there being mutual hindrance of 
one another only requires that there be but one maker and not the negation 
of that which is made, [58] although it does come to mean the impossibility 
of the necessary consequence, if non-creation is meant by the act; and it 
comes to mean the impossibility of the negation of the necessary if by possi- 
bility non-creation is meant. 

It may be objected that [in the Qur'an quotation above] the force of the 
word "if" {law) is the negation in past time of the second statement through 
the negation of the first, so it only indicates the denial of corruption in the 
past because of the denial of the plurality [of gods]. In answer to this we 
reply that this is grammatically true, but "if" {law) may be used to indicate 
the negation of the apodosis following the negation of the protasis irrespective 
of time, just as in the statement, "If the world were eternal from the begin- 
ning it would be unchangeable." The verse quoted above is of this kind. One 
of these uses may seem equivocal to the other according to some minds, and 
hence the confusion. 

the Eternal {al-qadtm) /This is in explanation as a necessary consequence 
of what we already know, [59] inasmuch as the Necessarily Existent 0 can not 
be other than eternal, that is to say, there is no beginning to His existence. If 
He were something originated preceded by non-existence, His existence 
would then of necessity be contingent on something else. For this reason some 
have made the statement that the Necessarily Existent and the Eternal are 
synonymous terms. But for the sake of accuracy in differentiating these two 
terms, that is not quite right. A statement about their being co-extensive 
terms depends on what is true regarding them. Some say that the term 
"eternal" is more general [than "necessarily existent"] because it is true of the 
attributes of the Necessarily Existent that they are eternal in contrast to the 
term "necessarily existent," which is not true of the attributes. It is not impos- 

5 This is the abbreviated form for the Necessarily Existent in His essence (wajib al~ 
wujud li dhatihi), that is, the Necessarily Existent. See Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 1444; 
al-Razi, Muhassal, pp. 44 ff., 108 ft.; Wolfson, The Philosophy of Spinoza, I, 67. 



40 



ORIGINATOR OF THE WORLD 



sible to say that there is a plurality of eternal attributes, but it is impossible to 
say that there is a plurality of eternal essences. Some of the later Mutakallims 
like al-Imam Hamld al-Dln al-Darir 6 and his followers explain the point by 
saying that the Necessarily Existent One in His essence is Allah and His 
attributes. From the idea that everything which is eternal is necessarily 
existent in its essence they made their deduction that if the Eternal were 
not necessarily existent, non-existence would have been possible for Him, and 
He would have needed a determining principle (mu\hassis) 7 [to have 
specified existence in His case]. Thus He would have been originated 
(muhdath), since we only mean by originated that thing the existence of 
which is connected with the fact that something else brings it into existence. 

Furthermore, those [who say that "eternal" is a more general term than 
necessarily existcntj objected that the attributes, were they necessarily 
existent in their essence, would be continuous (baqiya). Continuance 
(al-baqa) 8 is an Idea {ma no) itself, so the existence of a real Idea then 
subsists in another Idea. [6o] Reply was made to this that each attribute con- 
tinues by means of a continuance which is that very attribute itself. This is an 
extremely difficult concept, for the assertion that the Necessarily Existent 
in His essence is a plurality is inconsistent with the unity of the Deity, while 
the assertion that the attributes are only possible [and not necessary] is incon- 
sistent with the statement of those who say that every possible being is origi- 
nated. 

If they assert that the attributes are eternal in time, meaning that there 
was no time when non-existence preceded them; and that this is not incon- 
sistent with their essential origin, in the sense that they need the essence 
of the Necessarily Existent, then their position is that of the Philosophers, 
who divided both Eternity and Being-originated into essential (dhati) and 
temporal (zarnani). In this position there is a denial of many foundations of 
the faith, so a further verifying of this matter will come later. 

•Imam Hamld al-DIn al-Darir (d. a.h. 666; a.d. 1267). See Brockelmann, Geschichte, 
1,296. 

7 Cf. Macdonald, Development, p. 325; al-Fa^ali, Kifayat al-'Awamm, p. 36; al-Sanusi, 
Umm al-Bardhin, pp. 86 fT.; al-Shahrastam, Nihayatu l-lqdam, p. 12. 

8 A1-Imam al-Haramayn and al-Qa^I Abu Bakr (al-Baqillanl), who were among the 
earlier Ash'arites, said that Allah continues by His essence not by the attribute of con- 
tinuance. This was contrary to the position of al-Ash'ari, who said that He continues by 
this attribute of continuance which is an eternal attribute subsisting in His essence; just 
as He knows, decrees, and so on by attributes of Knowledge and Power and the like. 
Al-Rawda al-Bahiya, p. 66; al-RazI, Muhasfal, p. 126. Later Ash'arites held that Continu- 
ance is an attribute; al-Sanusi, Umm al-Bardhtn, pp. 79 f.; al-Fa^all, Kifayat al-'Awdmm, 
PP. 33 f • 



ORIGINATOR OF THE WORLD 41 

the Living (al-hayy), the Powerful (al-qadir)> the Knowing (al-alim), the 
Hearing (al-sam?), the Seeing (al-basir), the Desiring (al-shal), and the 
Willing (al-murid) 9 /The proof for this is by a decisive immediate inference 
of logical reasoning, inasmuch as Allah is the Originator of the world ac- 
cording to a definite original plan and preconceived order, as is evidenced 
by the fact that the world comprises [His] well-ordered works and excellent 
handicrafts. He is not devoid of those attributes, for the contraries of these 
attributes signify defects from which Allah is necessarily far removed. 

Furthermore these attributes have come down to us in the Law (al-sha/) 
[6/], but inasmuch as some of them arc those upon which the establish- 
ment of the Law is not based, it is proper in a case of this kind of attribute 
to rely upon the Law itself, as for instance the attribute of the unity of the 
Deity in contradistinction to the attribute of the existence of the Maker and 
His Speech, and similar attributes upon which the establishment of the Law 
is based. 

He is not an accident/because an accident does not subsist in itself, but 
needs a locus (mahalV) to give it subsistence. So the accident is a possible. 
And [again He is not an accident] because the continuance [of an accident] 
is impossible. Otherwise continuance would be an Idea that subsists in the 
accident, and that would necessitate the subsistence of an Idea in an Idea, 
which is impossible. For the subsistence of an accident in a thing means that 
its having boundaries (tahayyuz) follows upon (tab?) the fact that the 
thing has boundaries. The accident has no boundaries of itself, in the sense 
that something else may be said to have boundaries by following upon the 
accident. This is based on the fact that the continuance of a thing is an 
Idea which is superadded to its existence, and on the fact that the meaning 
of subsistence [of one thing in something else] is [the thing's] following 
upon the other thing in having boundaries. 

The right position [regarding this] is as follows: First, continuance is the 
perpetuity of existence and the absence of passing out of existence. Its real 
essence is its existence with respect to another time. The meaning of our 
saying, "It existed but did not continue," is that it was originated but its 
existence did not persevere nor was it established [in reality] for the second 

9 These epithets applied to the Deity are usually classed by theologians as attributes of 
Allah. The abstract ideas such as Power, Willing, Knowledge, etc., are called essential 
attributes or those consisting of ideas (sijdt al-mcfant), but these which arc given here, 
the Living, the Knowing, the Willing, etc., are called attributes derived from ideas {fifat 
ma'nawiya). See al-Ijl, al-Mawaqif, pp. 56 f.; al-SanusT, Uznm aUBarah'm, pp. 96 ff., 118 f.; 
al-Fatfali, Kijayat al-Awdmm, pp. 55 ff.; Wensinck, The Muslim Creed, p. 275; Macdonald, 
Development, pp. 336 f. 



42 ORIGINATOR OF THE WORLD 

time. Second, subsistence is the specializing which describes the thing de- 
scribed just as in the case of the terms predicated of the Creator (al-bari). 
Third, bodies cease to exist at every moment of time (// kull an), and what 
we observe of continuance in them by way of renewal of similars is no less 
credible than what occurs in accidents. Surely [62] it is incorrect for them to 
maintain that an accident subsists in an accident, as in the case of the swift- 
ness and slowness of motion. There are not two things here — one, motion; 
and the other, swiftness and slowness — but we have a certain definite motion 
which in relation to some other motions is called swift and to others slow. 
This clearly shows that swiftness and slowness are not two different species 
of motion, for real species in the true sense of the term do not distinctly dif- 
fer from one another even though there is a difference in their respective rela- 
tions to something else. 

nor a body (jism) /lot the body is something compounded and having 
boundaries, which is a mark of being originated 

nor an atom (jawhar) /[This is true] from our standpoint, for we say that 
jawhar is the name for a part (ahjuz) that cannot be further divided, having 
boundaries and being a part of a body. Allah is far exalted above such a 
definition; 10 and fit is true also] from the standpoint of the Philosophers, 
because they make jawhar one of the divisions of the possibles, although 
they make it to be the name of an existing thing — however, not in a sub- 
ject — whether absolute or having boundaries. They mean by jawhar the pos- 
sible quiddity which whenever it does exist is not in a subject. But if by 
body (jism) and atom (jawhar) is meant the self-subsistent and existing 
thing which is not in a subject, then these terms must not be applied to the 
Maker, for they are not mentioned in the Law, along with the fact that the 
understanding jumps at the conclusion that these terms mean "compounded" 
and "that which has boundaries." The Corporealizers (aUMujassima) 11 and 
the Christians (al-Nasara) 12 took the position that jism and jawhar may be 
applied to Him, giving a conception of Allah from which He is necessarily 
far removed. 

10 Cf. the statement of Maimonides giving the argument of the Mutakallims for the 
incorporeal ity of Allah. (Munk), Le Guide des egares, I, 450 ff.; (Friedlander), The 
Guide for the Perplexed, pp. 141 ff. 

11 The Karramites were considered as Corporealizers. Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 261; 
al-Shahrastani, al-Milal, pp. 79 ff., 171 ff.; al-Baghdadl, al-Varq hayn al-Viraq, pp. 202 f. 

12 The Christians, according to Islam, believe that Allah may have a body. See Diet, 
of Tech. Terms, p. 1385; al-Shahrastani, al-Milal, pp. 171 ff. 



ORIGINATOR OF THE WORLD 43 

If it is objected that terms like "the existing being," "the necessarily 
existent," and "the eternal'' cannot properly be applied to Allah since they 
do not occur in the Law, we reply that the basis is by Agreement (al-ijma), 
which is one of the canonical bases. It is sometimes suggested that Allah, the 
Necessarily Existent, and the Eternal are synonymous terms, and that the 
term "existent" is inseparable from the Necessarily Existent, so if the Law 
applies one term of a language [to Him] that fact makes it permissible to 
apply a synonym of that term or whatever approximates it in that or any 
other language. [63] But this is a matter for consideration. 18 

nor is He something formed (musawwar) /Formed means having a form 
(sura) or a shape (sha\l) like the form of a man or of a horse. Form is one 
of the special characteristics of bodies. It occurs in them by means of quanti- 
ties (^ammtyai) 14 and qualities (f^ayftydt) 15 and by setting limits and ends. 

nor a thing limited (tnahdud) /Limited means having a limit or an end. 

nor a thing numbered (ma' dud) /Numbered means having number and 
multiplicity; that is, He is not the locus of quantities, either continuous 
(muttasila) like magnitudes (maqadir), or discrete (tnunfasila) like things 
counted. This is quite evident. 

nor a thing portioned or divided/This means possessing portions and 
parts. 

nor a thing compounded/of these, since they all have that need [for some- 
thing else] which is inconsistent with necessary existence. That which has 
parts is called "compounded" when they are in composition together, and 
"portioned" and "divided" when they are separated. 

nor does He come to an end in Himself /because this is one of the characteris- 
tics of magnitudes and numbers. 

33 A.J. (p. 07) adds "from two standpoints; one is the being synonymous, the other 
is the combination of the two judgments of the two synonymous terms in being applied 
to Allah." 

14 See al-Ghazzali, Mi'yar al-'llm, pp. 203 f.; Macdonald, Development, p. 325; al- 
Fa^lali, Kijdyat al-'Awdmm (also commentary of al-Bayjuri on al-Fadall), pp. 38 f.; 
al-Ta'rjfdt, p. 196. 

15 Al-fayfiydt. See al-Ghazzall, Mtyar al-llm, pp. 204 f.; Diet, of Tech. Terms, 
p. 1257; al-Ta'rifdt, p. 198; Horten, Die speJ(. und pos. Theologie des Islam, p. 347. 



44 ORIGINATOR OF THE WORLD 

He is not described by quiddity (al-maiya) /That means He does not share 
the same genus with other things; for when we say [quiddity, or] "What is 
it?" we mean, "Of what genus [64] is it?" But sharing the same genus 
(al-mujanasa) requires that the things which share the same genus differ 
from one another by means of certain divisions which are set up, and that 
necessitates the existence of composition. 

nor by quality (al-fayfiya) /that is, of color, taste, odor, heat, cold, dampness, 
dryness, or any other thing predicated of bodies or things which follow upon 
mixture or composition 

nor is He placed in place (ma\an)/tor being placed (al-tama^un) is an 
expression for the penetration of one dimension {bu'd) into another, whether 
real or imagined. This is called place. Dimension is an expression for an 
extension (imtidad) subsisting in a body, or in itself according to those who 
assert the existence of the vacuum (al-l^hala). 1 * Allah is far removed from 
extension and magnitude, because this requires His being divided into 
parts. 

Objection may be raised [to this argument] that [65] the pure atom 
(al-jawhar al-fard) has boundaries and yet does not have dimension; for 
otherwise it could be divided [and thus it would not be a pure atom]. To 
this we reply that "being placed" is a more special term than "having 
boundaries," because the boundary (al-hayyiz) is the imaginary empty 
space which any thing occupies whether it has extension or not. That which 
has been mentioned above is a proof of His not being placed in place. 

But the proof of His not having boundaries is that if He were bounded, He 
would either be bounded from eternity — and this would necessitate the 
eternity of the boundary — or He would not be bounded from eternity, so He 
would be a locus for originated things. He is also either co-extensive with 
the boundary or is less than it and so [in either case] is finite; or He is more 
than it and therefore divisible. If He is not in place, He does not extend in 
any direction of place, being neither upward nor downward nor in any of 
the other directions, inasmuch as directions are the limits or extremities of 
places [by which a thing is surrounded], or they are the places themselves 
with reference to their relationship to the thing [surrounded by the places]. 

16 According to Scholastic Theologians al-khala' is that void which separates bodies and 
atoms, and thus permits their separation and combination. See Macdonald, "Atomic 
Time," Isis, IX, 2, p. 329; aUTa'rifat, p. 105; Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 458 f. 



ORIGINATOR OF THE WORLD 4$ 

Time (d-zaman) 17 does not affect Him/With us time is an expression for 
something renewed by which something else renewed is measured. With the 
Philosophers it is the measure of motion. Allah is far removed from that. 
Know then [66] that the mention by al-Nasafi of some of the things from 
which Allah is far removed makes unnecessary the mention of others of 
them. However, he attempted here to go into detail and to explain clearly 
the matter of Allah's being far removed [from created things] in order to 
give all that the subject of the Necessarily Existent deserves and to answer in 
the most complete and emphatic way the Comparers (al-Mushabbiha) 18 and 
the Corporealizers (al-Mujassima) and all the other parties of error and 
perverseness. It was of no consequence to the author that [in doing so] he 
had to repeat synonymous terms and explain that which is well known. 
This remoteness of Allah [from created things] which I have mentioned is 
based on the fact that these terms [i.e., of the Comparers, Corporealizers, and 
so on] are inconsistent with the term Necessary Existence, since in them there 
is that defect which comes from their implying that He is originated and pos- 
sible, as we have pointed out. 

This is not the way which the Early Theologians took [to explain this] 
for they said that the meaning of accident (al-arad) according to etymology 
is that which cannot continue; that the meaning of atom (al-jawhar) is that 
from which other things are composed; and that the meaning of body 
(al-jism) is that which is composed of other things, as is indicated in their 
saying, "This is bulkier (ajsam) than that." And they said that if the Neces- 
sarily Existent were compounded, then the parts of which He is composed 
would be described by attributes of perfection (al-\amdl), and that would 
require a plurality of necessarily existents; or the parts would not have these 
attributes and would therefore be lacking in something and have been 
originated. 

Also the Necessarily Existent [according to them either] must be of all 
forms, shapes, qualities and magnitudes — but if this were the case it would 
have to follow that He would unite in Himself things contradictory to each 
other — or else He must be of only some of these forms, shapes, qualities, and 
magnitudes; and these will have to be of the same order both in conveying 
equally the idea of either praise or blame, and in the absence of any evidence 

17 Cf. Enc. of Islam, IV, 1207; Diet, of Tech, Terms, p. 619; al-Ta'rifat, p. 119; al- 
RazT, Muhassal, p. 61; Ibn Sma, al-Najat, pp. 186 ff.; Pines, Beitrage, pp. 49 ff. 

18 See al-Baghdadi, al-Varq bayn al-Firaq, pp. 214 £.; al-Shahrastani, al-Milal, pp. 75 ff.; 
al-Ijl, al-Mawaqif, pp. 362 ff. 



46 ORIGINATOR OF THE WORLD 

that originated things apply to Allah. But if this were the case, then 
Allah would need a determining principle (mu^hassis) [to make a se- 
lection among the things which are assumed not to convey any idea of 
either praise or blame], and thus He would come under the power of some- 
thing outside Himself and consequently would be originated. Furthermore 
[if there were no evidence in originated things that these attributes apply to 
Allah, then] He would be in contrast to such attributes, for example, as 
Knowledge and Power, which are attributes of perfection and concerning 
which there is evidence in originated things that they do apply to Allah; but 
the opposites of these attributes of perfection are those attributes of imper- 
fection {al-nuqsari) concerning which there is no evidence in originated 
things that they apply to Allah. 

These opinions of the Early Theologians rest on weak foundations, which 
cause damage to the beliefs of those who seek after truth, and give cur- 
rency to the effusions of the vilifiers of religion, who in their arguments try 
to show that all these lofty problems of theology are based on nothing but 
frail ambiguities like these. 

[67] The one who disagrees with this position [regarding Allah's being 
far removed from created things] 19 cites the statutes (al-nusus) 20 that 
plainly teach, regarding Allah, that He extends in a direction, has a body, 
form, and bodily members. He says further that each of two existing things 
is by supposition either continuous and contiguous to the other, or is dis- 
crete and cut off from the other in some direction. Now Allah is neither 
residing [in the world] nor a locus for the world, so He is cut off from it in 
some direction. He therefore has boundaries and is a body or a part of a body, 
formed and finite. 

The answer to this is that here is a case of pure fancy (wahm) and a judg- 
ment concerning objects not perceived by the senses according to judgments 
that apply to objects perceived by the senses. The decisive proofs rest on such 
matters as remove Allah far from any such thing. So the science [dealing 
with the interpretation] of the statutes must be committed to Allah according 
to the custom of the Fathers (al-salaf), who [committed such things to Allah 
because they] preferred to follow the safer method. Or the statutes may be 
interpreted, as the Later Theologians {al-muta a\hJ{hirun) chose to do, by 
sound interpretations {tawllat sahiha) in order to refute the thrusts of the 

19 See al-Iji. al-Mawdqif, pp. 12 ff.; Miillcr, Philosophic, pp. 58 ff.; al-RazI, Muhassal, 
pp. in ff.; Wensinck, The Muslim Creed, pp. 207 ff. 

20 See Chapter 18, where the reference is to the Qur'an and the Sunna. Cf. Diet, of 
Tech. Terms, p. 1406. 



ORIGINATOR OF THE WORLD 47 

ignorant, to incline [towards the truth] the disposition of those who are 
immature, and to follow the wiser path. 

and nothing resembles Him/that is to say, nothing is like Him. If it is 
understood that by similarity [to something] there is a being united [to it] 
in reality, it is clear that He is not like anything. And if similarity means that 
one of two things may take the place of the other — that is, each is good for 
what the other is — then no existing thing can take His place in any of the 
things predicated of Him, for what is predicated of Him in the way of 
Knowledge, Power, and so on is so much more majestic and exalted than 
what is found in creatures that there is no basis for comparison between 
Allah and His creatures. 

The author of al-Biddya 21 said that the knowledge which we [creatures] 
have is something existing, an accident, originated, possible of existence, and 
renewed every [moment of] time. So if we establish knowledge as an attri- 
bute of Allah, it is something existing, an attribute, eternal (qadim), neces- 
sarily existent, everlasting from eternity (al-azal) to eternity (al-abad). Thus 
the knowledge of creatures is not in any respect similar to His knowledge. 
[68 J This is the statement of the author of al-Biddya; when he explained that 
the similarity of two things to each other according to our view is estab- 
lished by their sharing together all things predicated of them, so that if the 
two differ in one thing predicated the similarity breaks down. 

Al-Shaykh Abu '1-Mu'In said in al-Tabsira 22 that the lexicographers do not 
preclude the statement that Zayd is similar to 'Amr in knowing fiqh, if he 
equals him in it and can take his place in this matter, although there may be 
many points of difference between them. The statement of the Ash'arites 
that similarity does not exist except in equality in all respects is unsound, for 
the Prophet said, "Wheat for wheat, like for like." 23 He meant by this equal- 
ity in measure only, for wheat differs as well in weight, in number of grains 
[to a measure], and in hardness and tenderness. It is clear that there is no dis- 
agreement between the two positions, for al-Ash'ari meant equality in all 
respects where there is a similarity, as in measure, for example. Therefore 
it is not necessary that the statement in al-Biddya be understood as meaning 
complete equality; otherwise when two things have in common all things 

21 See above, Chapter 2, note 27. 

22 Abu M-Mu'in Maymun b. Muhammad al-Nasa£i (d. a.h. 508; a.d. 1114) was the au- 
thor of Kitab Tabsirat al-Adilla and other books on scholastic theology. Brockelmann, 
Geschichte, I, 426. 

23 See Muslim, cX-§ahlh, I, 632; Musnad, II, 232. 



48 ORIGINATOR OF THE WORLD 



predicated of them and are equal in all respects, that prevents there being 
a plurality of things, for how is similarity conceivable [if they are exacdy 
alike]? 

and nothing is outside of His Knowledge and Power/This is true, for 
ignorance or inability in a part is a lack and a need which call for a deter- 
mining principle, whereas the decisive statutes speak of universal Knowl- 
edge and all-embracing Power. So then He is Omniscient and Omnipotent. 
This is unlike the position of the Philosophers, who assert that Allah does not 
know particulars and that there is only in Him power to do one thing, [since 
they make Allah's will to do the act necessary] there is no possible choice 
on His part between doing and abstaining from the act; and unlike the 
Dahrites (al-dahriya)? A who claim that Allah does not know His essence; 
and unlike al-Nazzam, 25 who asserted that He is unable to create ignorance 
and the vile thing; [69] and unlike al-Balkhi, 2Q who asserted that He is 
unable to do anything similar to that which is in the power of the creature 
[to do] ; and unlike the Mu'tazilites in general, who asserted that He is unable 
to do that which is in the power of the creature to do. 

24 Cf. Enc. of Islam, I, 894; Horten, Die phil. Systeme der spe\. Theologen im Islam, 
see Index; Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 480; De Boer, History of Philosophy in Islam, p. 80. 

25 Al-Nazzam (d. a.h. 231; a.d. 847) was a Mu'tazilite who is credited with having 
been a student of the doctrines of Greek philosophy. He held that Allah could only do 
that which is just and for the creature's good. Macdonald, Development, pp. 140 ff.; Hor- 
ten, Die phil. Systeme der spek.> Thcologen im Islam, see Index; al-Shahrastani, al-Milal, 
pp. 37 ff.; al-Baghdadi, al-Farq bayn al-Firaq, pp. 113 ff.; al-Ijl, al-Mawdqif, p. 337; 
al-Ash'arl, Maqdlat, p. 486 f. 

26 A.J. (p. 104) says that he is Abu '1-Qasim al-Balkhi, who is known as al-Ka'bl, ac- 
cording to the commentary on al-Maqdsid. However, in the commentary on al-Mawdqif 
and in Ab\dr al-Afkdr the two names seem to apply to different persons. Horten {Die 
phil. Systeme der spc%. Thcologen im Islam, p. 637) considers them as one individual. 
For al-Ka'bi (d. a.d. 929) sec 'I.D. pp. 77, 109; Enc. of Islam, II, 48; al-Ijl, al-Mawdqif, 
p. 342; al-Baghdadi, al-Farq bayn al-Firaq, pp. 165 fT. 



Chapter j 



SOME ATTRIBUTES OF ALLAH 

H e has attributes from all eternity subsistent in His essence. They are 
not He nor are they other than He. And they are Knowledge and Power and 
Life and Might and Hearing and Seeing and Willing and Desiring and Do- 
ing and Creating and Sustaining. 

He has attributes/inasmuch as it has been established that He is Knowing, 
Living, Powerful, and so on. It is known that each of these attributes points 
to. an Idea superadded to what is understood by the term "the Necessarily 
Existent," nor are these attributes to be taken as synonymous terms. Further- 
more if a derivative term can be properly predicated of a thing, that thing 
necessarily possesses the source from which that term is derived. And thus it 
has been established that Allah possesses the attributes of Knowledge, Power, 
Life, and so on. 1 This is unlike the view of the Mu'tazilites, who assert that 
Fie is Knowing without possessing Knowledge; He is Powerful without pos- 
sessing Power, and so on. 2 But this view of theirs is self-evidently impossible, 
for it is analogous to our saying, "A thing is black but there is no blackness 
in it." And furthermore it has already been established in the statutes 
(al-nusus) that Allah possesses Knowledge, Power, and other attributes. 
Finally the procession from Allah of acts of which He has perfect under- 
standing points to the existence of Knowledge and Power in Him, not 
merely to the fact that He can be described as Knowing and Powerful. 3 

1 Cf. al-Razi, Muhassal, pp. 130 ff.; al-Iji, al-Mawdqif, pp. 29 f.; al-Fadali, Kifdyat al- 
'Awdmm, pp. 43 ff.; al-Sanusi, Vmm al-Bardhin, pp. 96 ff. 

2 The Shi'ites also maintain that Allah is Powerful by His essence and deny to him 
attributes that consist of ideas (ma'dni) and states of being {ahwdl). Cf. al-Bdbu 'l-Hadi 
'Ashar, pp. 38 f.; al-Iji, al-Mawaqif, p. 30. 

3 Neither al-Nasafi in his creed nor al-Taftazam in his commentary gives the minute 
classification of the attributes of Allah that is to be found in the works of al-Sanusi or 
al-Fadali for example, or even of al-lji in al-Mawaqif. 

Al-Sanusi (see his Vmm al-Bardhtn, pp. 72 ff. and Wensinck, The Muslim Creed, 
p. 275) classifies the attributes as follows: there are twenty that are necessary; twenty that 



yo ATTRIBUTES OF ALLAH 

The question at issue is not regarding that [transient kind of] knowledge 
and power which is generally included under the qualities {al^ayfiyai) and 
habits (al-mala\ai)f for our Early Theologians have explicidy stated that 
just as Allah is Living and has Life from eternity, which is not an accident, 
nor is it impossible that it continue forever, so [also in the case of Knowl- 
edge] they say that Allah is Knowing, that His Knowledge is from eternity, 
that it is all-embracing, that it is not an accident, that it can continue forever, 
and that it is not necessitated nor acquired. And they affirm the same of the 
remainder of the attributes. 

[yo] The question at issue is rather regarding that [eternal] Knowledge of 
the Maker of the World — and in like manner all the other attributes — 
whether it is an attribute from eternity subsisting in Him, something super- 
added to Him, and is analogous to that [transient] knowledge of any one of 
us who knows, which knowledge is an accident, subsisting in him, some- 
thing superadded to him and originated. 

The Philosophers and the Mu'tazilites denied this and asserted that the 
attributes are the very essence itself. This means that His essence with respect 
to its connection with things known (al-ma* lumat) is described by the term 
"Knowing" and with respect to things over which He has Power (al- 
maqdurdt) is described by the term "Powerful/' and so on. This, they say, 
does not imply any plurality in the essence [of Allah] nor does it imply the 
existence of numerous eternal and necessarily existent beings. The answer 
to this is to be found in what has already been said, namely, that [even ac- 
cording to us] the existence of numerous eternal essences [outside of Allah] 

are impossible, which are the opposites of the first twenty; and one that is possible, namely, 
the doing or not doing of possible things. Of the necessary attributes the first is existence, 
which is a personal attribute (sifa nafstya). Then there are five called the privative attri- 
butes (ft fat salbiya) y namely, Eternity, Continuance, Difference from originated beings, 
Self-Subsistence, and Unity. Following these arc seven essential attributes of those consist- 
ing of Ideas (fifdt al-ma'ani) which are Power, Will, Knowledge, Life, Hearing, Sight 
and Speech. There are then seven other attributes which are inseparable from these. They 
are called attributes derived from ideas (fifdt ma'nawiya). They are Allah's being the 
one who is Powerful, Willing, Knowing, Living, Hearing, Seeing, and Speaking. Again, 
the attributes were divided by writers before al-Sanusi into positive (thubutlya) and priva- 
tive (salbiya) attributes; the former being subdivided into personal (nafstya) and those 
connected with ideas (ma'nawiya) which include both the classes above concerned with 
ideas. Cf. al-Fatfatt, Kifayat al-Awamm, pp. 24 ff.; Macdonald, Development, pp. 318 ff.; 
Miiiler, Philosophic pp. 51, 56. 

Yet the Shi'ites who use the term "positive" and "privative" do not posit attributes 
consisting of ideas. Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 1490 f.; al-Bdbu 'l-Hddi 'Ashar, pp. 15-39; 
al-Razi, Muhassal, pp. 111 ff. Al-Iji (see al-Mawdqif, pp. 29 ff.) seems to use the term 
wujudiya in the sense of thubutlya. 

4 See Wolfson, "Aristotelian Predicables," Essays and Studies in Memory of Linda R. 
Miller, pp. 219 f.; Enc. of Islam, II, 227; Ibn Khaldun, Muqaddima, III, 32. 



ATTRIBUTES OF ALLAH j* 

is an impossibility. Furthermore, their contention [that our belief in the 
existence of eternal attributes within Allah implies a belief in the existence 
of eternal essences outside of Allah] docs not follow. Finally, the Mu'tazilite 
view would lead to the absurd conclusion, namely, that Knowledge, for in- 
stance, would be identical with Power and Life, and that it also would be 
identical with the Knowing One, the Living One, and the Powerful One; 
and furthermore it would also lead to the conclusion that He who is of neces- 
sary existence would not subsist in His own essence; and so on to many other 
similar absurdities. 

from all eternity (azaliya) /This is unlike the Karramites, who assert that 
Allah has attributes but that those attributes must be originated, inasmuch 
as it is impossible for things which are originated to subsist in His essence. 

subsistent in His essence/Of necessity nothing can be said to be an attribute of 
something unless it subsists in that something. This is unlike the Mu'tazilites, 
who assert that Allah speaks with a kind of Speech which subsists in some- 
thing outside Himself. The purpose of this statement of theirs is to deny 
the existence of Speech as an attribute of Allah, and not to affirm that Speech 
does exist as an attribute of Him but without subsistence in His essence. The 
Mu'tazilites maintained the position that establishing the attributes destroyed 
the unity of Allah, inasmuch as they are eternally existent and distinctly dif- 
ferent from the essence of Allah, so it follows that something other than Al- 
lah is eternal and that there are numerous eternal beings, nay rather, there 
are numerous necessarily existent beings, as seen in references which appear 
in the statements of the Earlier Theologians (al-rnutaqaddimun). The clear 
explicit statement of the position that the one who is Necessarily Existent 
in His essence is Allah and His attributes came from the Later Theologians 
{aUmutaa\h\hirun). The Christians (al-Nasdra) have become Unbelievers 
[so say the Mu'tazilites ] in establishing three eternal beings, so what is to be 
said of one who establishes eight or more? 

Al-Nasafi referred to the answer to this question by saying, 

They are not He nor are they other than He/that is, [7/] the attributes of 
Allah are not His essence itself nor are they other than it. This implies 
neither the eternity of that which is other than He nor the plurality of 
eternals. Although the Christians do not expressly state that there are dis- 
tincdy different eternal beings, yet this position compelled them to posit the 



ji ATTRIBUTES OF ALLAH 

three persons of the Godhead (aqdnim),* namely Existence, Knowledge, and 
Life, 6 calling them the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit (ruh al-qudus). 
They claim that the person (uqnum) of Knowledge transferred himself into 
the body of Jesus — on him be peace — so they permit the separation and 
transference of the persons, inasmuch as they arc distinctly different es- 
sences. 

Some say that it is impossible to make plurality and multiplicity depend 
upon distinct entities being made (al-taghayur), 7 this term meaning that it 
is possible to separate them absolutely so that series of numbers from one, 
two, three and so on are many and numerous, [72] yet some are a part of 
others and the part is not distinctly different from the whole. 

It is also inconceivable that there be a dispute among the People of the 
Approved Way and the Community on the question of the multiplicity and 
plurality of the attributes of the Deity as to whether they are distinctly 
separate or not. However, it is preferable to say that the plurality of eternal 
essences but not the plurality of an essence and attributes is impossible. It is 
also better not to say boldly that the attributes are necessarily existent in 
themselves but rather [to say] that they are not necessarily existent in any- 
thing else but in that which is not themselves nor other than themselves; I 
mean by that the Essence of Allah — Exalted of Himself and Extolled. 

This is what one means when he says that the Necessarily Existent in His 
essence is Allah and His attributes, the idea being that these are neces- 
sarily existent in the essence of the Necessarily Existent. But in themselves 
they are possibles. There is no absurdity in the eternity of the possible if 
this eternity subsists in the essence of the Eternal, is necessarily existent in 
Him, and is not separated (mun fasti) from Him. Not every eternal is a 
god, so the existence of a number of gods is not to be implied from the 
existence of eternals. We must rather say that Allah taken with His 
attributes (bi stfdtihi) is eternal. The term "eternals" should not be used 
lest the estimative faculty (al-wahm) go so far as to think that each of the 
eternals subsists in itself and that divine attributes are predicated of it. 

5 J. G. Hava, in Arabic-English Dictionary (Beirut, 1921), p. 907, gives the origin of 
this as from the Greek yp&ny, a means of knowing, the mind, a judgment, but see 
R. Payne Smith, Thesaurus Syriacus (Oxford, 1879-1901), p. 3667: qnttma, hypostasis, 
substance. 

6 These terms, Existence, Knowledge, and Life, as applied to the persons of the Trinity 
are also given in al-Shahrastanl, al-Milal, p. 172; Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 1225; Muller, 
Philosophic, p. 56, and by A. J., p. 108, who quotes the Sharh al-Maqasid. 

7 Cf . Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 1093; Horten, Die spef{> und pos. Theologie des Islam, 



ATTRIBUTES OF ALLAH $3 

Because of the difficulty of this question the Mu'tazilites and the Philosophers 
denied the attributes, the Karramitcs 8 denied their eternity, and the 
Ash'arites 9 denied both that the attributes are other than He and that 
they are His essence. 

Objection may be made that this, which appears to be a denial, takes away 
the force of the two contradictories and is in reality a uniting of them; for the 
explicit denial that the attributes are other than He, for example, establishes 
inclusively their identity with Him; and the establishing of them as other 
than He along with an explicit denial of their identity with Him is a uniting 
of the two contradictories. So also the explicit denial of identity is a uniting 
of them for that which is understood by [y^\ a thing; if it is not that which is 
understood by any other thing — that is, other than the first thing — then it is 
identical with the first thing, and there is no third intermediate thing con- 
ceivable between the two. 

We reply to all this that they have interpreted "otherness" (al-ghayriyd) to 
be the state of coming-into-being on the part of two existent things so that 
the existence of one is determined and conceived along with the non- 
existence of the other; that is to say, it is possible to separate them from 
one another. They have interpreted "identity" {al-aynlya) to be the uniting 
together of that which is understood in such a way that there is no dis- 
tinction of difference at all, and thus there are not two things contradictory 
to each other. But an intermediate thing is conceivable to the extent that 
what is understood by one thing is not that which is understood by the 
other. Yet it does not exist without the other thing, as the part along with 
the whole, the attribute along with the essence, and some of the attributes 
along with other attributes. This is true, for the essence and attributes of 
Allah are eternal from the beginning, and the non-existence of such an 
eternal is impossible. 

It is impossible for one as a part of ten to continue without the ten, and 
for ten to continue without the one, inasmuch as one is a part of ten. The 
non-existence of the ten means the non-existence of the one, and the existence 

8 The Karramites were the followers of Abu 'Abd Allah Muhammad b. Karram (d. a.h. 
256) who was a litcralist holding that Allah had a body with flesh, blood, and limbs. 
See Macdonald, Development, pp. 170 ff.; Enc. of Islam, II, 773; al-Shahrastani, al-Mtlal, 
pp. 79 ff.; al-Baghdadi, al-Farq bayn al-Firaq, pp. 202 fT.; Horten, Die. phil. Systeme der 
spe\. Theologen im Islam, pp. 340 ff.; 'I.D., pp. 70, 72, 90, 128, 147; al-Babu 'l-Hadi 
'Ashar, p. 35. 

9 This is the position o£ the earlier Ash'arites, the later ones maintaining that the attri- 
butes were other than the essence, and that they were possible, and yet absolutely denying 
the multiplicity of Eternals and that possibility requires origination (A.J., p. 109). 



54 ATTRIBUTES OF ALLAH 

of the ten means the existence of the one. This, however, is distinctly unlike 
the originated attributes, for it is conceivable that the essence subsist [in 
itself] without these attributes which are originated, so they are other than 
His essence. Thus did the Early Theologians argue. 

But this calls for consideration, for if they mean that from the standpoint 
of each of the two entities a real separation in existence is valid, this is to be 
contradicted in the case of the world, which must be taken along with its 
Maker, and the accident, which follows its locus, inasmuch as the existence of 
the world is inconceivable if the Maker of the world were non-existent, be- 
cause His non-existence is impossible; nor is the existence of an accident — 
such as blackness, for example — conceivable without its locus. All this is quite 
evident; besides, it is certain that there must be a distinct difference [between 
the two entities] in order that they may be made to agree. And if they consider 
the matter from one standpoint only, nevertheless there must be a distinct 
difference between the part and the whole, [74] and so also between the es- 
sence and the attribute; so that it is really possible for a part to exist without 
the whole and for the essence to exist without the attribute. 

What the Early Theologians have said about the impossibility of the one 
[of ten] continuing without the ten appears to be unsound. One must not 
say that this means that it is possible then to conceive of the existence of each 
of them along with the non-existence of the other, even as a mere supposi- 
tion. Even if it is impossible, the world may be conceived of as existing, and 
then later the establishing by proof of a Maker is to be sought for. This is 
different from the question of the part and the whole; for just as the 
existence of ten is impossible without a unit, so the existence of a unit of 
ten is impossible without the ten, since were it to exist alone it would not be 
one of the ten. The result is that some consideration must be given to this 
explanation of the relationship [between the two entities]; and it is quite 
evident that the complete separation [of essence and attributes] is im- 
possible. 

For we say that the Early Theologians have clearly stated that the attri- 
butes are not distinctly different from one another on the basis that their 
non-existence is inconceivable because they are from eternity. Yet it is cer- 
tain that we may conceive the existence of some of them like Knowledge, 
for example, and then establish the existence of others by proof. It is known 
that they did not have this idea in mind even though it does not apply to the 
example of an accident and its locus. If consideration were to be given to 
explaining the relationship between the two entities, there would be no dis- 



ATTRIBUTES OF ALLAH 55 

tinct difference between the things related, as between father and son, or be- 
tween two brothers, or as between cause and effect; rather there would be 
no distinct difference between two different things {ghayrayn), for ghayr is 
a term for showing relationship. But no one holds this. 

It may be suggested that it is possible that the idea of the Early Theologians 
was that the attributes are not He according to what is usually understood, 
nor are they other than He as far as existence is concerned, as is the case of all 
predicates in relation to their subjects; for there must be some stipulation of 
unity between them insofar as existence is concerned, in order that a 
predication may be valid; and there must be a distinct difference insofar as 
there is something to be understood about them so that the predication may 
mean something. This is just as we say, "Man is a writer" and not "Man is a 
stone,** which is unsound, or "Man is a man,** which means nothing. 

We say that this suggested argument is sound in the case of the attri- 
butes "Knowing" and "Powerful" in relation to the essence [of Allah], 
but not sound in the case of the attributes "Knowledge" and "Power,** even 
though the statement regarding these latter attributes refers to Him. Nor 
does the argument apply to parts which are other than those which are 
predicated, such as a unit of ten or the hand of Zayd. In al-Tabsira there is 
mention of the argument that a unit of ten is something other than ten and 
that the hand of Zayd is something other than Zayd. None of the Mutakal- 
lims said this except Ja'far b. Harith. 10 In this he differed from all the 
Mu tazilites. This was reckoned a bit of ignorance on his part, because ten is 
the term which is applied to all the individual units [75] and which includes 
each individual of the units along with the others. So if one were other 
than ten, it would be other than itself, for it is one of ten, although ten is 
formed from something else besides. So also if the hand of Zayd were other 
than Zayd, then the hand of Zayd would be other than itself. This is what 
Ja'far says, and what it implies is evident. 

And they/that is, the attributes from all eternity 

are Knowledge (al-ilm)/ which is an attribute from eternity. The things 
that have to do with Knowledge are unveiled when connected with this 
attribute. 

10 This is possibly the Ja'far b. Harb spoken of by al -Baghdad! (al-Farq bayn al-Firaq, 
pp. 153 fT.) where his position regarding the part o£ the whole as different from the whole 
is mentioned. 



54 ATTRIBUTES OF ALLAH 

of the ten means the existence of the one. This, however, is distinctly unlike 
the originated attributes, for it is conceivable that the essence subsist [in 
itself] without these attributes which are originated, so they are other than 
His essence. Thus did the Early Theologians argue. 

But this calls for consideration, for if they mean that from the standpoint 
of each of the two entities a real separation in existence is valid, this is to be 
contradicted in the case of the world, which must be taken along with its 
Maker, and the accident, which follows its locus, inasmuch as the existence of 
the world is inconceivable if the Maker of the world were non-existent, be- 
cause His non-existence is impossible; nor is the existence of an accident — 
such as blackness, for example — conceivable without its locus. All this is quite 
evident; besides, it is certain that there must be a distinct difference [between 
the two entities] in order that they may be made to agree. And if they consider 
the matter from one standpoint only, nevertheless there must be a distinct 
difference between the part and the whole, [74] and so also between the es- 
sence and the attribute; so that it is really possible for a part to exist without 
the whole and for the essence to exist without the attribute. 

What the Early Theologians have said about the impossibility of the one 
[of ten] continuing without the ten appears to be unsound. One must not 
say that this means that it is possible then to conceive of the existence of each 
of them along with the non-existence of the other, even as a mere supposi- 
tion. Even if it is impossible, the world may be conceived of as existing, and 
then later the establishing by proof of a Maker is to be sought for. This is 
different from the question of the part and the whole; for just as the 
existence of ten is impossible without a unit, so the existence of a unit of 
ten is impossible without the ten, since were it to exist alone it would not be 
one of the ten. The result is that some consideration must be given to this 
explanation of the relationship [between the two entities]; and it is quite 
evident that the complete separation [of essence and attributes] is im- 
possible. 

For we say that the Early Theologians have clearly stated that the attri- 
butes are not distinctly different from one another on the basis that their 
non-existence is inconceivable because they are from eternity. Yet it is cer- 
tain that we may conceive the existence of some of them like Knowledge, 
for example, and then establish the existence of others by proof. It is known 
that they did not have this idea in mind even though it does not apply to the 
example of an accident and its locus. If consideration were to be given to 
explaining the relationship between the two entities, there would be no dis- 



ATTRIBUTES OF ALLAH 5 j 

tinct difference between the things related, as between father and son, or be- 
tween two brothers, or as between cause and effect; rather there would be 
no distinct difference between two different things (ghayrayn), for ghayr is 
a term for showing relationship. But no one holds this. 

It may be suggested that it is possible that the idea of the Early Theologians 
was that the attributes are not He according to what is usually understood, 
nor are they other than He as far as existence is concerned, as is the case of all 
predicates in relation to their subjects; for there must be some stipulation of 
unity between them insofar as existence is concerned, in order that a 
predication may be valid; and there must be a distinct difference insofar as 
there is something to be understood about them so that the predication may 
mean something. This is just as we say, "Man is a writer" and not "Man is a 
stone," which is unsound, or "Man is a man," which means nothing. 

We say that this suggested argument is sound in the case of the attri- 
butes "Knowing" and "Powerful" in relation to the essence [of Allah], 
but not sound in the case of the attributes "Knowledge" and "Power," even 
though the statement regarding these latter attributes refers to Him. Nor 
does the argument apply to parts which are other than those which are 
predicated, such as a unit of ten or the hand of Zayd. In al-Tabsira there is 
mention of the argument that a unit of ten is something other than ten and 
that the hand of Zayd is something other than Zayd. None of the Mutakal- 
lims said this except Ja'far b. Harith. 10 In this he differed from all the 
Mu'tazilites. This was reckoned a bit of ignorance on his part, because ten is 
the term which is applied to all the individual units [75] and which includes 
each individual of the units along with the others. So if one were other 
than ten, it would be other than itself, for it is one of ten, although ten is 
formed from something else besides. So also if the hand of Zayd were other 
than Zayd, then the hand of Zayd would be other than itself. This is what 
Ja'far says, and what it implies is evident. 

And they/that is, the attributes from all eternity 

are Knowledge {al-'ilm) /which is an attribute from eternity. The things 
that have to do with Knowledge are unveiled when connected with this 
attribute. 

10 This is possibly the Ja'far b. Harb spoken of by al-Baghdadl (aUFarq bayn aUFiraq, 
pp. 153 If.) where his position regarding the part of the whole as different from the whole 
is mentioned. 



$6 ATTRIBUTES OF ALLAH 

and Power (al-qudra) /which is an attribute from eternity. It makes an im- 
pression on things over which He has power on their being connected with 
it. 

and Life {al-haydt)/ which is an attribute from eternity bringing about the 
validity of Knowledge 

[76] and Might (al-qiiwa) /which has the meaning of Power 

and Hearing {aLsarri) /which is an attribute connected with things heard 

and Seeing (al-basar) /which is an attribute connected with things seen. It 
comprehends completely 11 neither by the use of the imagination (al~ta\hay- 
yul) nor of the estimative faculty (al-tawahhum) nor by an impression 
being made on some sense organ and a current of air reaching it. The eternity 
of these two attributes of Hearing and Seeing does not require the eternity 
of the things heard and seen, just as the eternity of Knowledge and Power 
does not require the eternity of the things which are known and in His 
Power, because they are all eternal attributes, and connections with originated 
things are originated for them. 

and Willing (al-irada) and Desiring {al-mash'ia) /These terms are ex- 
pressions for an attribute in the Living One [77] which brings it about that 
one of two alternatives among the things over which He has power is 
specified and actually comes into being at a certain time, even though His 
Power maintains an equal relationship to each of them and even though the 
connection of Knowledge with it is a consequence of its actually coming into 
being. In this statement attention is drawn to the answer made in refuting the 
one who asserts that Desiring is eternal and that Willing is originated and 
subsistent in the essence of Allah, and also in refuting the one who asserts 
that the meaning of Allah's Willing His own action is that He is not com- 
pelled nor heedless nor overcome, and that the meaning of His Willing the 
action of others is that He commands them. How can this be the meaning of 
it, when He has commanded every legally responsible person (tnu^allaf) 12 
to believe and perform all the rest of the duties? Had He desired that, it 
would have happened. 

11 A.J., p. 116, reads "there is comprehended completely by both of them." 

12 See Errc. of Islam, I, 239; Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 1255; al-Bdbu 'l-Hadt 'Ashar, 
pp. 3 ff., 46 ff., and 82 ff.; also below Chapter 10. 



ATTRIBUTES OF ALLAH 57 

and Doing {al-fil) and Creating (al-ta\htiq) 13 /Thcse arc expressions for 
an attribute existing from eternity which is called aUta\win (bringing-into- 
being). Its verification comes later. Al-NasafI avoided using the word al- 
\halq (the creation) inasmuch as it is often used in place of al-ma\hluq (the 
thing created). 

and Sustaining (al-tarzJq) /It is a special kind of bringing-into-being which 
al-Nasafl explained thus in order to point out that things like creating, sus- 
taining, forming, bringing to life and death, and other things as well which 
are ascribed to Allah are traced back to a real attribute existing from eternity 
and subsistent in the essence of Allah which is bringing-into-being (#/- 
ta\win). This is unlike the position of al-Ash'arl, for he asserted that these 
things are relationships (idafdt) and attributes of actions. 



13 See below, Chaps. 7, 9, and 10. 



Chapter 6 



THE ATTRIBUTE OF SPEECH 



ad Speech. 

He speaks with a kind of Speech which is one of His attributes, from all 
eternity, not of the genus of letters and sounds. It is an attribute incompatible 
with silence and defect Allah speaks with this attribute, commanding, pro- 
hibiting, and narrating. The Qur'an, the Speech of Allah, is uncreated and it 
is written in our volumes, preserved in our hearts, recited by our tongues, 
heard by our ears, [yet] is not a thing residing in them. 



And Speech (falam) /It is an attribute from eternity which is an expression 
for that context composed of letters called the Qur'an. [j8\ [This is similar 
to] any one of us [who] whenever he commands, prohibits, and narrates 
finds of himself an idea and then indicates it by an expression or by writing 
or by a gesture. This attribute is something other than the attribute of 
Knowledge, since a man may narrate something which he knows not [to be a 
fact], but rather knows the contrary to it. This attribute is an attribute dif- 
ferent from Willing, for one may command something he does not will, 
like the person who commands his slave to do something in order to reveal 
his disobedience and insubordination. This kind of speech is called "speech 
of the mind" (\alam nafsi). 1 Al-Akhtal 2 referred to this kind of speech in 
saying, 

Verily speech is in the heart, 

And the tongue has been made only as a guide to the heart. 

1 Kaldm nafsi, or hadlth nafsi, is the ideas of the mind which do not need letters or 
words to express them. Enc. of Islam, II, 671; Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 1270; al-Fa^ali, 
Kifayat al-Awamm, p. 54; al-Iji, al-Mawaqif, pp. 63 ff.; A.J., pp. 120 f. 

2 Al-Akhtal, an Arabian Christian poet, born about a.d. 640. A eulogy of the Umayyad 
regime, under which he flourished, is considered his masterpiece. He is remembered espe- 
cially for his refusal of the khalifa's offer that he become a Muslim, and for the golden 
cross which he wore about his neck after the manner of the Arabian Christians. Enc. of 
Islam, I, 234 ff.; Nicholson, A Literary History of the Arabs, pp. 240 ff.; Brockelmann, 
Geschichte, I, 49 ff. 



SPEECH j9 

And 'Umar — may Allah be well pleased with him — said, "Verily, I made 
a saying right and sound in myself." And often you say to your friend, 
"Verily there is speech within me, which I wish to relate to you." The proof 
for the establishment of the attribute of Speech is the Agreement (ijma') 
of the Muslim people [79] and mutawatir traditions from the prophets, which 
assert that Allah is a Speaker since it is certain that speaking is impossible 
without the attribute of Speech being established. It has been established that 
Allah has eight 8 attributes: Knowledge, Power, Life, Hearing, Seeing, Will- 
ing, Creating, and Speech. And since the last three are more open to dispute 
and more obscure, he again referred to their being established as sure and 
eternal and went into some detail in his statement of the fact that they are 
firmly established. 
So al-Nasaf 1 said, 

He/that is, Allah 

speaks with a kind of Speech which is one of His attributes/Of necessity it is 
impossible to affirm the derivative of any thing without affirming the sub- 
sistence in that thing of the source of its derivation. In this way al-Nasafl re- 
futed the Mu'tazilites, 4 inasmuch as they took the position that Allah is a 
Speaker of Speech which subsists in something other than Himself, and is 
not one of His attributes. 

from all eternity/Of necessity it is impossible that originated things subsist 
in His essence. 

not of the genus of letters and sounds/Of necessity letters and sounds are 
originated accidents, the occurrence of some of which is conditioned on the 
fact that others have been finished. By immediate perception we know 
that it is impossible to pronounce the second letter [of a word J without 
finishing off the first letter. This is a refutation of the Hanbalites 6 and the 
Karramites, who say that the Speech of Allah is an accident of the genus of 
sounds and letters, and yet in spite of that it is eternal. 

3 This is the Maturiditc position, since the Ash'arites omit Creating (ta^win). See al- 
RazI, Muhassal, pp. 135 ft.; al-Iji, al-Mawdqif, pp. 71 ft. 

4 This position of the Mu'tazilites regarding the Speech of Allah is also that of the 
Shi'ites. The Kharijites like the Mu'tazilites said that the Qur'an was created. The 
Murji'ites differed among themselves in the matter. Al-Ash'arl, Maqdldt, pp. 124, 153; 
al-Bdbu 'l-Hddi 'Ashar, pp. 25 ft. 

6 Cf. Enc. of Islam, I, 188 ft., II, 670ft.; Ibn Khallikan, Biographical Dictionary, I, 
44 ft.; Macdonald, Development, pp. 157 f. 



6o 



SPEECH 



It/that is, Speech 

is an attribute/that is, an idea subsistent in the essence 

incompatible with silence/which is the leaving off of speech while yet having 
the power to speak 

and defect/This is the lack of fitness in the organs of speech either because 
of the nature created within one, as in the case of dumbness, [80] or because 
of weakness and immaturity, as in infancy. Objection may be made that this 
definition applies to uttered speech only, in contrast to speech of the mind, 
since silence and dumbness are incompatible with verbal utterance only. 
To this we answer that the meaning here is internal silence and internal 
defect, so that one neither desires utterance within himself nor is capable 
of it. So just as Speech is of both kinds, uttered and in the mind, so also is its 
contrary; I mean by that silence and dumbness. 

Allah speaks with this attribute, commanding, prohibiting, and narrating/ 
This means that Speech is a single attribute 6 with a variety of forms for 
commanding, prohibiting, and narrating that differ according to the matters 
with which Speech is connected. 7 In this, Speech is analogous to Knowl- 
edge, Power, and the rest of the attributes. Each of them is a single eternal 
attribute, but variety and origination occur only in making connections and 
adding relationships, inasmuch as that is more fitting to the perfection of the 
unity of Allah. And there is no proof that each attribute has variety within 
itself. Objection may be raised that these things [such as commanding, pro- 
hibiting, and narrating] are divisions of Speech, without which it is un- 
reasonable to think of the existence of Speech. We reply that this is impos- 
sible, nay rather, that Speech becomes one of these divisions only when the 

6 This is the orthodox position, which denies that speech should be divided into a 
variety of attributes corresponding to the various kinds of speech. See al-Razi, Muhassal, 
p. 134; al-Ijl, al'Mawaqif, p. 68; 'I.D., p. 80. 

7 These are the connections which according to the Mutakallims are the relationships 
between the Knower and the thing known, the Decreeing One and the thing decreed, etc. 
Because of the difficulty of explaining the real nature of the connection between Allah, 
the Eternal and Infinite One, and the originated things which exist through his Power 
and Will the Scholastic Theologians went more and more into great detail. Al-Fadall, for 
example, enumerates seven distinct varieties of connections for the attribute of Power, 
and al-Bayjurl in his commentary says that al-Fadall omitted one and there should be 
eight connections for this one attribute. Al-Fadall, Kifdyat al- Awamm, p. 44; Diet, of 
Tech. Terms, pp. 1014, 1061 f.; See Wensinck, The Muslim Creed, pp. 127, 189. Al- 
Ash'ari, al-lbana, pp. 23 f. (Klein, al-Al'ari's Al-lbdnah, pp. 66 ff.). 



SPEECH 61 

connections [with originated things] are made. This is true of Speech which 
does not pass away, but in the beginning from all eternity there was no 
division whatsoever. 

[81] And some took the position that from all eternity Speech was narra- 
tive (\habar) and that all other kinds of Speech go back to it. They say that 
the result of the command is to give the information (al-i^hbdr) that per- 
forming the act deserves reward and failure to do it deserves punishment; and 
that prohibition is just the opposite of this; and the result of asking for in- 
formation (al-istifybar) is the narrative which comes from seeking to be 
instructed; and the result of summoning is the narrative which comes from 
seeking a response. Answer may be made that of necessity we know there are 
differences in these meanings, and the fact that some of them require the 
others does not demand their being united into one. 

Objection may be raised that command and prohibition without someone 
who is commanded or who is prohibited is a bit of foolishness and unreality, 
and that to say that from eternity there is on the part of Allah narration 
which assumes the past time is a pure falsehood from which Allah must be 
far removed. To this we reply that no difficulty results if His Speech is not 
made from eternity to be command, prohibition, and narrative. If we do 
make His Speech to be command, prohibition, and narrative, then the com- 
mand from eternity is to compel the one commanded thereby to obtain it at 
the time he comes into existence and to make him fit to obtain it. It is suf- 
ficient then that there be in the knowledge of the one commanding the 
existence of the one to be commanded, which is analogous to a man's taking it 
for granted that he had a son, and then commanding him to do something 
after he should come into existence. Narration that refers to eternity is not 
described by any time at all, since with Allah there is no past, future, nor 
present, because He is far removed from all time, just as His Knowledge is 
eternal and is unchanged by the changing of times. 

And when al-Nasafl spoke explicitly of Speech as being from eternity, he 
wanted to call our attention to the fact that this term "al-Qur'an" is some- 
times applied to the eternal Speech of the mind just as it is applied to the 
originated context (al-nazm) which is read, so he said, 

The Qur'an, the Speech of Allah, is uncreated (ghayr ma\hluq) /He fol- 
lowed the term "al-Qur'an" with the words "the speech of Allah" because 
of what the Early Theologians had stated saying that the Qur'an is the un- 
created Speech of Allah and not that the Qur'an is said to be uncreated. 



6z 



SPEECH 



[82] This distinction is made lest the mind jump to the conclusion that the 
thing composed of sounds and letters is eternal. This is just the position that 
the Hanbalites took out of ignorance and obstinacy. And al-Nasafi used 
"uncreated" instead of "unoriginated" in order, first, to call attention to 
their oneness in meaning; second, to make his statement agree with the tradi- 
tion in which the Prophet — may Allah bless and give him peace — said, "The 
Qur'an is the uncreated Speech of Allah, and whoever says that it is created 
is not a Believer in Allah the Majestic One," and, third, to take into account 
the dispute between the two parties on the well-known subject of whether 
the Qur'an is created or uncreated. 8 So the whole question is to be inter- 
preted as the question of the creation of the Qur'an. The verifying of this 
matter on which they and we differ goes back to whether or not the Speech 
of the mind can be established. However, we do not say that the verbal 
expressions (al-alfaz) and letters are eternal, and they do not say that the 
Speech of the mind is originated. 

The proof for our position has already been stated, namely, that it is 
established by Agreement and mutawatir tradition of the prophets — may the 
blessing of Allah be on them — that Allah is a Speaker, the only meaning of 
which is that He has the attribute of Speech and that, since the subsistence in 
the essence of Allah of the verbal Speech which is described as originated is 
impossible, the Speech which is described as eternal and in the mind is 
designated as the attribute of Allah. 

The Mu'tazilites have inferred that the Qur'an is to be described by attri- 
butes which pertain to a created being and by marks which show its origina- 
tion: that is, such things as its composition and arrangement, its having been 
brought down as a whole and then revealed bit by bit, 9 its being in the 
Arabic language, its being heard by the ear of man, and its being rhetorical 
and inimitable and so on. All this only raises an argument against the posi- 
tion of the Hanbalites and not against us, for we admit that the arrangement 
of the Qur'an is originated. Our statement [about the Quran being un- 
created] has only to do with the Eternal Idea. 

8 For the history of the conflict over the significance of the non-creation of the Speech 
of Allah, see Enc. of Islam, II, 670 ft".; Macdonald, Development, pp. 146 ff.; Wensinck, 
The Muslim Creed, pp. 149 ff.; Ibn Khaldun, Muqaddima, III, 50 ff.; Ibn Hazm, Kitab 
aUFisal, III, 4 ff. 

9 Inzal, tanzil, verbal nouns of the IV and II stems of nazala: the former means "sending 
down at one time or in general," the latter is used for "sending down by degrees, or in 
actuality." The former is probably, says A. J. (p. 124), the sending down of the Qur'an 
from the Preserved Tablet (sec note 10) to the lowest heaven, the latter from there to the 
Prophet. Cf. Enc. of Islam, II, 1064 ff.; al-Kastall (Constantinople text), p. 92; al-Ta'rifat, 
p. 72; al-Baydawi, Anwar al-Tanzil, I, 17 f. 



SPEECH tf 3 

Since the Mu'tazilites were unable to deny that Allah speaks, they held that 
when He speaks it means that He brings into existence the sounds and 
letters in their places or He brings into existence the written characters of the 
Preserved Tablet (al-lawh al~mahfuz) y 10 which may or may not be read. 
They differed about this last point. You are well aware that the one who is 
moved is the one in whom the motion subsists and not the one who brings 
the motion into existence. Otherwise it would be sound for the Creator to be 
described with accidents which are created of Him. And Allah is far exalted 
above anything like that. 

[83] One of the greatest ambiguities [regarding the Quran] according to 
the Mu'tazilites is stated by them as follows. You [orthodox people] are 
agreed that the Qur'an is the name for that which has been transmitted to us 
between the two covers of the volumes by tawatur. Believing this requires that 
the Qur'an be written in the volumes, recited by the tongues of men, and 
heard by their ears. All these things are of necessity marks which indicate 
that the Qur'an was originated. So al-Nasafi pointed out the answer to this 
by saying, 

and it/that is, the Qur'an, which is the speech of Allah 

is written in our volumes/that is, with written characters and with forms of 
letters which indicate it 

preserved in our hearts/that is, by verbal expressions which are imagined 
recited by our tongues/with letters which are pronounced and heard 
heard by our ears/and with these also 

[yet] is not a diing residing (hall) in them/He means to say that in spite 
of all this the Qur'an, the Speech of Allah, does not reside in the volumes, 
nor in the hearts, nor in the tongues, nor in the ears; but it is an Eternal 
Idea subsisting in the essence of Allah. This Idea is expressed and heard 

10 The Preserved Tablet, according to the Multitude of the People of the Law, is a 
body (jism) above the seventh heaven in which is written all that has been and will be 
until the Day of Resurrection. With the Wise Men it is the Active Intelligence and with 
the Philosophers it is the Universal Soul; and with the Sufis it is the Divine Light. The 
Tablet is very often identified, however, with the original copy of the Qur'an and is 
dien identical with umm aU\itab. Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 1291; Enc. of Islam, III, 19; 
T. P. Hughes, The Dictionary of Islam, p. 285; al-Bayo'Iwi, Anwar al-Tanzil, II, 396. 



64 SPEECH 

by means of the context which indicates it, and preserved by the context 
which is imagined in the mind and is written by marks, by forms, and by 
characters which are used conventionally for the letters that indicate the 
Qur an. This is analogous to our saying that fire is a burning substance, which 
is recalled to mind by a verbal expression and is written down with a pen, 
but it does not follow that the real essence of fire is a sound and a letter. 

The verifying of this fact is that a thing has a kind of existence in sub- 
stances (al-a'ydn), another kind of existence in minds (al-adhhdn), another in 
an expression (al-ibdra) 9 and still another in writing (al-J(itdba) . The writing 
indicates the expression, the expression indicates what is in the mind, and 
it in turn indicates what is in the substance. So whenever the Qur'an is 
described as one of the things inseparably connected (lawdzim) with the 
Eternal, as when we say that the Qur'an is uncreated, the meaning is its true 
existential essence in external reality. Whenever it is described as that which 
is inseparably connected with things created and originated, the verbal ex- 
pressions which arc spoken and heard are meant, as when we say, "I have 
recited half the Qur'an," or the expression imagined in the mind as when 
we say, [84] "I have memorized the Qur'an," or the characters that are 
written down are meant as when we say, "It is unlawful for one who is defiled 
to touch the Qur'an." 

And since that which is indicated in the legal judgments by the term 
"Qur'an" is the verbal utterance (al4afz) and not the Eternal Idea, the 
Imams in fundamental matters of dogma defined it as that which is written 
in the volumes and transmitted by tawdtur. And they applied the name 
[Qur'an] both to the context and the Idea; that is, they applied it not only to 
the Idea, but to the context as well, in so far as it indicates the Idea. In re- 
gard to the Eternal Speech which is an attribute of Allah, al-Ash'ari took the 
position that it was possible for it to be heard; and al-Ustadh Abu Ishaq 
al-Isfara'inl 11 denied it. Abu Mansur [al-Maturldi] 12 also chose this [latter] 
position. The meaning of the saying of Allah, "Until he hear the speech of 
Allah" (Qur'an 9:6) is that he heard that which indicates it, which is 

11 Sec Enc. of Islam, II, 48; Hortcn, Die phil. Systemc der spe\. Theologen im Islam, 
pp. 556 f. 

12 Abu Man$Cir Muhammad b. Mahmud al-Maturldi, who came from a village in 
Samarqand called Maturid, was the leader of a reform in theology in the lands of the 
Trans-Oxus. Dying in a.h. 333 (a.d. 944), he was a contemporary of al-Ash'ari, who died 
in a.h. 324 (a.d. 935). Brockelmann, Geschichte, I, 195; 4 I.D., p. 14. The differences 
between his position in dogmatic theology and that of al-Ash'ari have been well sum- 
marized in the book al-Rawda al-Bahiya (see Brockelmann, Geschichte, I, 195), in Horten, 
Die phil. Systeme der spek- Theologen im Islam, pp. 531 ff., and also in Sayyid Murtacla's 
commentary on the Ihya' of al-Ghazzall, II, 86 rT.; Enc. of Islam, I, 309, and III, 414 f. 



SPEECH 65 

analogous to one's saying, "I hear the knowledge of So-and-so." So Moses 18 
heard a sound which indicated the Speech of Allah, but since it was without 
the means of a book or an angel, Moses was given the special name of 
"interlocutor" (al-faltm). 1 * 

Objection may be raised that were the Speech of Allah really in an 
Eternal Idea and metaphorically in a constructed context, then it would be 
sound to deny Speech of Allah, by saying that the inimitable (al-mu'jiz) 
context which was sent down from above bit by bit and divided into suras 
and verses is not the Speech of Allah. But the Agreement [of the Muslim 
people] opposes this last statement. Also it may be objected that if the 
inimitable thing which was an object of contention 13 in recitation were in 
reality the Speech of Allah, it would be positively certain that this can only 
be conceived of the context which was composed and divided into suras, 
since there would have been no meaning to their opposing the Eternal attri- 
bute of Speech. To this we reply that the verifying of this is to be found 
in the fact that the Speech of Allah is a name common to two things. In 
the first place it applies to the Eternal Speech of the mind — the idea conveyed 
by the relationship here in the phrase "Speech of Allah" is that it is an 
attribute of Allah — and in the second place it applies to the Speech which is 
originated and to verbal utterance, composed of suras and verses — the idea 
conveyed by the relationship [of Speech to Allah] here is that it is created 
by Allah and not one of the compositions of His creatures. So denial of the 
Eternal Speech as suggested above is not at all sound. That which is inimitable 
and over which they contended can only be the Speech of Allah. 

The claim made by some of the Early Theologians that this expression 
is metaphorical does not mean that it is the conventional usage applied to the 
context which has been composed, but rather it means that in being verified 
as a reality and in essence the Speech is the name of the Idea [85] which 
subsists in the mind. Giving the verbal utterance the name ["Speech of 
Allah"] and making it the conventional usage for this Idea are only re- 
sults of its indicating the Idea. So there is no dispute with them about the 
conventional usage of the word and giving it this name. 

Some of the Verifiers (aLmuhaqqiqun) 16 maintained that the Early 
Theologians used the term "the Speech of Allah" as an eternal Idea. It was 

33 See Qur. 4:162; al-Baydawi, Anwar aUTanzil, I, 130, 241; al-Tabarl, Annates, I, 
463 ft".; al-Tha'labi, Qisas aUAnbtya! ', pp. 174 ff.; Macdonald, Development, p. 149. 

14 Cf. Enc. of Islam, II, 699; Fleischer, Kleinere Schriften, II, 772. 

15 See Qur. 2:21; al-Baydawi, Anwar al-Tanzll, I, 36. 

18 A "verifier" was a term sometimes applied to many of the later Scholastic Theologians 
like al-RazT, al-TusT, al-Ijl, and al-Taftazani himself. Cf. Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 336. 



66 



SPEECH 



not something that was contrasted with the verbal utterance so that it meant 
that which is indicated and understood by the verbal utterance, but it was 
something in contrast to the substance itself. The meaning of the term was: 
that which does not subsist in itself like the rest of the attributes. They meant 
that the Qur'an, being eternal, is the name which is used for both the verbal 
utterance and the Idea and includes them both. This is not the position held 
by the Hanbalites, who maintained that the context 17 which was composed 
and arranged in parts is eternal. We know by immediate perception that it 
is positively impossible for one to pronounce the "s" (sin) of bism 'illahi with- 
out first pronouncing the "b" (ba). But they mean that the verbal expression 
which subsists in the mind is not arranged in parts [one after the other] in 
His mind like that which subsists in the mind of the one who has memorized 
it, without any arrangement of parts and without some of it preceding other 
parts. The arrangement takes place only when one gives expression to it in 
utterance or when one reads without using the organ [of speech]. This is the 
explanation of their statement, "That which is read is eternal, but the reading 
is originated." But that Speech which subsists in the essence of Allah has no 
arrangement of parts, so that whoever hears His Speech hears it without 
any arrangement of parts, for He needs no organ [of speech]. 

This is the conclusion to be reached from the statement of the Verifiers. It is 
well for one then to conceive the Speech of Allah as verbal expression, sub- 
sistent in the mind, not composed of letters either uttered or imagined, since 
it is stipulated of these that the presence of some precludes the presence of 
others; nor is it composed of the characters which are arranged in order and 
which indicate it. And we do not conceive the speech which subsists in the 
mind of the one who has memorized it except as forms of letters which are 
stored up and inscribed in his imagination (f^haydl), so that if he turns to 
them, it becomes speech constructed of verbal expressions which are 
imagined, or of marks which are so arranged that whenever he gives ut- 
terance to them they become [86] speech which is heard. 

17 A.J. (p. 128) reads lafz, "verbal expression," instead of nazm. 



Chapter 7 



THE ATTRIBUTES OF CREATING AND 
WILLING 



JL JuJid Creating is an attribute of Allah from all eternity. And it is Allah's 
creating the world and every one of its parts, not in eternity, but rather at the 
time of its becoming existent, according to His Knowledge and Willing. And 
it [that is, the attribute of Creating] is not the thing created, according to our 
opinion. 

And Willing is an attribute of Allah from all eternity, subsistent in His 
essence. 

And Creating (al-taf^win) 1 /It is the idea expressed by such words as al-ftl 
(doing), al~\halq (creation), al-takhltq (producing), al-ijad (bringing-into- 
existence), al-ihdath (originating), and al-ikjitirct (inventing). It is explained 
as the bringing of the non-existent (al-ma'duni) from non-existence into 
existence. 

is an attribute of Allah/because both Reason and Tradition agree that 
He is the Producer (al^hdliq) and the Creator (al-mu\awwin) of the world, 
and because it is impossible to apply a derivative term to a thing without the 
source of the derivative being a descriptive of it and subsistent in it. 

from all eternity {azallya) /because of certain reasons. The first is that 
originated things cannot subsist in Allah, as we have seen. The second is that 
Allah in His Speech, which is from eternity, described His essence by the 
term aUJ(kaliq t so were He not from all eternity Creator, that would either 
necessitate falsehood [on His part] or a resorting to metaphorical language, 

1 Ta\wln is used here in the special sense of creatio ex nihilo so it has been translated 
"creating," and mukawwin, "Creator," rather than by the more elaborate and cumber- 
some terminology "causing to come into being" and "the one who causes the coming 
into being" which the terms really signify. Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 1276. 




68 CREATING AND WILLING 

by interpreting it to mean that He is the Creator in the future or that He is 
able to create without difficulty. The real fact is that were it permissible to ap- 
ply the term "the Creator" to Allah as meaning "the One who is able to 
create," it would then be permissible to apply to Him all of the terms having 
to do with the accidents over which He has power. The third reason is that 
were He originated (hddith), there would be two alternative absurdities. 

(a) If He were originated by another creation, that would necessitate the 
Endless Chain, which is impossible. It would necessarily follow then that it 
is impossible for the world to be created, in spite of the fact that we see that it 
is. (b) Or if He were originated He would be so without another creation, 
and thus that which is originated dispenses both with the originator and the 
act of origination. This statement does away with the Maker [of the world 
although the fact of His existence has already been proved]. The fourth 
reason is that were He originated, He would have been originated: (a) 
either in His essence and therefore He would be the locus of things originated; 

(b) or in something else, [8y] just as Abu al-Hudhayl 2 maintained, saying 
that the creating of each body (jism) is something subsistent in it, so each 
body is the producer and creator of itself. Clearly this is impossible. 

These [four] proofs are based on the fact that Creating is a real attribute 8 
like Knowledge and Power. But the Verifiers among the Mutakallims say 
that Creating is one of the relationships (aUiddfdt) and rational expressions 
{al-i 4 tibdrdt al-aqliya), like the statement, for example, that the Maker is be- 
fore everything and with everything and after everything; His name is on 
our tongues. He is the object of our homage, He causes us to die and to live, 
and so on. The conclusion to be drawn from this is that from eternity He 
is the beginning of the acts of producing and sustaining, the giving of life 
and of death, and so on. 

There is no proof for the position that Creating is another attribute in ad- 
dition to Power and Willing, for although Power has a relationship equal 
to the existence or non-existence of a thing created, it is only when Willing 

2 Muhammad b. al-Hudhayl, al-'Abdi al-'AUaf (a.h. 135-226; a.d. 752-841), one of 
the outstanding Mu'tazilitcs, taught that the attributes of Allah were his essence. For the 
remainder of his doctrines sec al-Shahrastanl, al-Milal, pp. 35 ff.; al -Baghdad!, al-Varq bayn 
al-Firaq, pp. 102 ff.; Macdonald, Development, pp. 136 ff.; Horten, Die phil. Systeme der 
spek. Theologen im Islam, pp. 246 ff.; Enc. of Islam, I, 93. 

8 This is one of the points of difference between the Ash'arites and the Maturidites 
(those from beyond the River Oxus) the former denying that tahjvtn was an attribute 
of Allah, the latter asserting that it was. Cf. al-Rawda al-Bahiya, pp. 39 ff.; al-RazT, 
Muhassal, p. 135; al -Facial!, Kifayat al-Awamm, pp. 57 ff.; Macdonald, Development, 
PP- 337 f«; al-Tjl, al-Mawaqif, pp. 77 f. 



CREATING AND WILLING 6 9 

embraces one of the two potentialities that this one is specified [and becomes 
actual]* 

Those who assert that Creating is originated make the deduction that we 
can not conceive of it without there being that which is created, just as the 
act of striking is inconceivable without there being the one who is struck. So 
were Creating eternal, the eternity of things created must be posited; but 
that is impossible. 

Al-Nasafl pointed out the answer to them by saying, 

And it/that is, Creating 

is Allah's creating the world and every one of its parts, not in eternity, but 
rather at the time of its becoming existent, according to His Knowledge and 
Willing/ 

So Creating continues from eternity to eternity (azalan wa abadan) [88] 
and the thing created is originated by the origination of the connection 
[between Creating and that which is created], just as in the case of Knowl- 
edge and Power and other eternal attributes, the eternity of whose connec- 
tions does not follow from their own eternity, inasmuch as their connections 
are originated. In this there is the verifying, first, of the proposition that if 
the existence of the world is not connected with the essence of Allah or with 
one of His attributes, then it follows that the Maker [of the world] has 
been deprived of His function and also that there is no need for verifying the 
fact that originated things come from one who brings them into existence, 
but these conclusions are impossible [so the existence of the world must be 
connected with the essence of Allah or one of His attributes]; and, second, of 
the proposition that if the existence of the world is connected with the es- 
sence of Allah then this (a) either requires the eternity of that with which 
its existence is connected, and that necessitates the eternity of the world, 
which is unsound, or (b) it does not necessitate it; so Creating then is 
eternal also, even though the thing created which is connected with Creating 
is originated. In this there is also the verifying of what is to be said of the 
proposition that the connection of the existence of the thing created with 
Creating is just as much as saying that it is originated, inasmuch as "the 
Eternal" is defined as that the existence of which is not connected with any- 
thing else, and "the originated" is defined as that the existence of which is 
connected with something else. 

This is a matter for consideration, inasmuch as this is the meaning of 



7 o CREATING AND WILLING 

"eternal" and of "originated" according to what the Philosophers say. But 
"the originated" is defined by the Mutakallims as that thing the existence of 
which had a beginning, meaning that its existence was preceded by non- 
existence; and "the eternal" is the contrary of this. The mere connection of 
the originated thing with something else does not require, according to this 
meaning, that it be originated, but mere connection permits it to be in need of 
something else, proceeding from it and lasting as long as it lasts, which is 
just what the Philosophers held in claiming that its eternity is one of the 
possibles, just like primary matter (al-hayuli), for example. Certainly when- 
ever we establish, by means of a proof that does not rest on the origination 
of the world, that the world proceeded from the Maker by [His] choice 
rather than of necessity, then the proposition that its existence is connected 
with the Creating of Allah is a proposition that it is originated. And from 
this one may go on to say that it applies to every part of the world, thereby 
answering the one who asserts that some parts, like primary matter, are 
eternal. Or the Philosophers maintain that some parts are eternal, meaning 
that they were not preceded by non-existence, which, however, does not 
mean [89] that the world was not created by something outside itself. 

The conclusion to be drawn from this is that we do not admit that Creat- 
ing is inconceivable without the existence of the created thing, and that Creat- 
ing has the same relation to the thing created as the act of striking has to the 
one struck. Striking is an attribute showing relationship which is inconceiv- 
able without the two things related, namely, the striker and the one struck, but 
Creating is a real attribute that is the basis for the relationship, which is the 
bringing of the non-existent out from non-existence into existence, but not 
the relationship itself. Yet even were it the relationship itself, according to the 
terminology used by the Early Theologians, then the proposition, which veri- 
fies this relationship as true without there being a thing which was actually 
created, would be a contention and a denial of that which is necessary. And 
this [proposition that Creating bears the relation to the thing created that 
striking does to the thing struck] is not to be rejected by saying that strik- 
ing is an accident the continuance of which is impossible; for [even if it is an 
accident] it must be connected with the thing acted upon, and pain must 
pass on to the thing acted upon, inasmuch as it exists at the same time 
as the action, since were it delayed [until another time] it would become 
non-existent. This is unlike the action of the Creator. His action is from 
eternity and of necessity endures, continuing until the time of the existence of 
the thing acted upon. 



CREATING AND WILLING 71 

And it [that is, the attribute of Creating] is not the thing created (al-mul(aw- 
wan), according to our opinion/This is true because of necessity the action is 
distinctly different from the thing acted upon, just as striking differs from 
the one struck and eating from the thing eaten; and also because certain 
absurd things would follow were Creating the thing which is itself created. 
First, the created thing would of necessity be a thing created and pro- 
duced by itself, since it is created by a creating which is the thing itself, so 
it would be eternal and independent of the Maker. This is impossible. 
Second, the Creator would of necessity have no connection with the world, 
except that He is before it in eternity and exercises His power over it, yet 
without having made it or without making an impression on it, this being 
a necessary consequence of its being created by itself. This does not require 
Him to be a Creator nor the world to be created by Him, consequently it is 
not valid to say that He is the Creator and the Maker of the world. This is 
false. Third, it would require that Allah not be a creator [90] of things, 
since of necessity the only idea that the Creator conveys is that He is the one 
in whom Creating subsists. But whenever creating is identical with the 
thing created then it is not subsistent in the essence of Allah. Fourth, it 
would require one to admit the validity of such a proposition as that the 
creator of blackness in a given rock, for example, is black, and that the rock 
is the creator of the blackness, inasmuch as the only meaning of creator and 
blackness is the one in whom creating and blackness subsists. They are one 
and the same thing, and their locus is one and the same. 

All of this calls attention to the fact that it is necessary to make a clear 
distinction between the deed and the thing done. However, the one who 
uses Reason must ponder such investigations as these and not ascribe to the 
well grounded among those learned in the principles of the faith something 
which is known by immediate perception to be impossible by anyone who 
has the least discernment. Rather let him seek valid ground for the state- 
ment which they make which serves as a basis for dispute among the 
Learned and for controversy among those who use Reason. 

For whoever says that creating is identical with the thing created means 
that if the doer does anything, then there is nothing in this but the doer and 
the thing done. But the idea denoted by terms like "creating" and "bring- 
ing into existence" is an expression for that which takes place in Reason, 
since there is a relation between the doer and thing done. It is not something 
verified as distincdy different from the thing done in the world of reality. 
He does not mean that what is understood by creating is identical with 



Chapter 8 



THE BEATIFIC VISION OF ALLAH 

T 

J_hat there is a Vision of Allah is allowed by Reason and necessary by 
Tradition. A proof on authority has come down affirming that Believers have 
a vision of Allah in the abode of the next World. And He is seen [unlike 
any material being] not in place nor in a direction so far as being confronted, 
nor by the conjunction of the rays of light, nor by a certain definite distance 
between the one who sees and Allah. 

That there is a Vision (ru'ya) 1 of Allah/This means the complete un- 
veiling {in\ishdf) through the [sense of] sight, which is defined as the 
comprehension 2 of a thing as it really is by means of the sense of sight. 
That is to say that whenever we look at the full moon and then close the 
eyes, it is clear that, though we see the moon unveiled both when the eyes 
arc open and when they are closed, its being unveiled is more complete and 
perfect in gazing at it. So we have in relation to the object seen a special state 
called Vision. 

is allowed by Reason/This means that Reason when acting by itself does 
not decide that the Vision is impossible so long as there is no proof brought 
against it, in spite of the fact that at first there was no Vision [before it was 

1 This matter of the Beatific Vision was one of the principal points on which the 
orthodox Muslims differed from the Mu'tazilites. Strange to say, al-Taftazan! does not men- 
tion the Mu'tazilites. The Philosophers and the Shi'ites also denied die possibility of the ocu- 
lar vision. The Comparers, the Corporeal izers and the Karramites because of their extreme 
anthropomorphic ideas held in a very real sense to the possibility of the vision. See al- 
Babu 'l-Hadi 'Ashar, pp. 35 ff.; al-Ash'ari, Maqalat, pp. 213 ff., 433 f.; al-Ash'ari, al- 
Ibana, pp. 13 ff. (Klein, al- As" art's Al-lbanah, pp. 56 ff.); al-Shahrastam, Nihdyatu 
'l-lqddm, pp. 356 ff.; al-Razi, Muhassal, pp. 136 ff.; Miiller, Philosophic, pp. 73 ff.; al- 
Fadali, Kifdyat al- Awamm (also the commentary of al-Bayjuri), pp. 66 L; al-Iji, al- 
Mawdqif, pp. 78 ff.; A.J., p. 141; Macdonald, Development, pp. 145, 296, 344; Wensinck, 
The Muslim Creed, pp. 63 ff., 88 f., 179. 

2 A. J., p. 136, and al-Kastali, Constantinople text of a.h. 1310, p. 103, read ithbat, 
"affirmation" or "establishing," instead of idrak- 



VISION OF ALLAH 7$ 

mentioned in revelation]. This is a necessary ruling, so whosoever claims 
that the Vision of Allah is impossible must produce his proof. 

The People of Reality 8 demonstrated the possibility of the Vision in two 
ways, one based on rational argument ('aqli) and the other based on tradi- 
tional authority (sam'i). The establishment of the first proof is as follows. 
Undoubtedly various [bodily] substances and various accidents are seen by 
us, inasmuch as we of necessity distinguish by the faculty of sight between 
one body and another body and one accident and another accident. Now 
the common designation inevitably implies a common cause; this cause 
is either existence or origination or possibility, inasmuch as there is no 
fourth alternative which is common to both substances and accidents. 4 
Origination is a term explicatory of the fact that the existence took place 
after non-existence; and possibility is a term explicatory of the fact that both 
existence and non-existence are not the result of the necessity of their own 
nature. But as for non-existence, it cannot enter at all into consideration of 
causality [for non-existence cannot be the cause of anything]. Consequently 
[whichever of the three alternatives is taken] existence has been established 
[inasmuch as origination and possibility also imply existence]; and this 
existence is common both to the Maker and to that which is made by Him. 
Thus it has been established that it is possible for Allah to be seen by reason 
of the fact that the cause for such a possibility, namely existence, has been 
demonstrated as being true concerning Him. 

[92] That sometimes a thing is not seen [even though it exists] is due to 
the fact that it is of the nature of that kind of possible which depends for its 
realization on the presence of a certain condition; or as may be said the 
absence of such a condition acts as something which of necessity is a pre- 
venter [of its being seen]. Therefore it would be proper to say that other 
existent things such as sounds, flavors, odors, and their like may be seen; 
and the fact that they are not seen is only because Allah did not create 
in the creature the vision of them in the customary way, and not because 
they cannot be seen. 

It may be objected that it is not proper [for us to say that sounds, flavors, 
and odors may be seen], so no cause 5 is required. And even if this fact were 

3 A.J. (p. 137) explains this term to mean here the early theologians of the People of 
the Approved Way (ahl aUsunna). 

4 That is to say the existence or the origination or the possibility of these things is 
the cause of their being seen. These three, existence, origination or possibility are common 
to both substances and accidents, but non-existence cannot be considered as being common 
to them inasmuch as we see that some of them do exist at some time. 

6 A.J. (p. 138) adds mushtara\a, "in which there is partnership." 



7 6 VISION OF ALLAH 

to be admitted, one specific thing may be caused by different things, just as 
heat is caused by the sun and by fire. So in this instance the one specific thing 
did not require a cause that is common [to it and other things that have a 
common designation]; and even were this fact admitted, the non-existent is 
suitable as a cause for the non-existent; and were this fact to be admitted, 
existence in general is not admitted to be a common cause, but rather the 
existence of each separate thing in itself. To all this it may be answered that 
the meaning of cause in this case is that which is connected (mutdalliq) 
with the Vision and the one receiving the Vision. It is quite clear that this 
connection must be something having existence. But then it must not be 
that which pertains especially to body or accident, for when we first see a 
shape approaching from afar we comprehend of it only a sort of "itness" 
(huwiya) rather than anything which specifies it as substance or accident or 
man or horse and so on. After first seeing it as connected with the "itness" 
of the shape, we may be able to distinguish what substances and accidents 
there are in it, and sometimes we may not be able. So that which is con- 
nected with the Vision is the fact that we may be able to distinguish what 
substances and accidents there are in it, and that sometimes we may not 
be able. So that which is connected with a Vision is the fact that the thing 
has some sort of "{mess." [93] This is what is meant by existence, and it is 
necessary that existence be common to all things seen. This calls for consid- 
eration, because the thing which is connected with the Vision may be the 
fact that it possesses body and whatever there are of accidents accompanying 
it without considering its particular characteristic {kjiususiya). 

The statement of proof from the second standpoint [that is, from authority] 
is first, that Moses requested a vision, saying, "O my Lord, make me see, let 
me look unto Thee" 6 (Qur an 7:139); so had the vision not been possible, 
the request for it would have been something of ignorance on his part 
as to what is permissible and not permissible in regard to the essence of 
Allah, or it would have been some sort of foolishness, or trifling, or a request 
for the impossible, but the prophets (al-anbiya) are far removed from any- 
thing like that; and second, that Allah connected the vision of Moses with 

6 The remainder of this verse in the Qur'an reads, "He said, 'Thou shalt never see me, 
but look towards the mountain, then if it abides in its place, thou shalt see me.' And when 
his Lord manifested Himself to the mountain, He made it a level place, and Moses fell 
down in a swoon." Al-Baydawi (Anwar al-Tanzil, I, 343) maintains that the answer 
"thou shalt never see me" instead of "I am never seen, etc." calls attention to the fact 
that the vision depends on the preparation of the person seeing. It is a proof that the 
vision in general is permissible. See al-Razi, Mafatih aUGhayb, IV, 292 ff. for a much 
more detailed statement. 



VISION OF ALLAH 77 

the abiding of the mountain firm in its place, which is something possible 
in itself. That which is connected with the possible is possible — the idea in 
this statement being to give the information that the establishing of a thing 
connected [with something else] goes along with the establishing of the 
thing with which it is connected — and the impossible is not to be estab- 
lished on the basis of any of those things the determination of which is 
possible [so the vision requested by Moses and connected with the mountain's 
abiding firm, is something possible]. 

Different objections have sometimes been made to this view. The strongest 
objection is that this request of Moses was made on behalf of his people 
when they said, "We will never believe in thee, until we see Allah openly" 7 
(Qur'an 2:52). So he asked that they might know that it was impossible, 
just as he knew that it was. Then some objectors say, "We do not admit that 
the thing to which it was connected is possible; no, indeed, for it was the 
abiding of the mountain firm in its place at the very time that it was moving 
and that is impossible." Answer may be made that each of these two state- 
ments is contrary to the literal meaning of the verse. There was no neces- 
sity for Moses to commit a fault [like this] because if the people were Be- 
lievers, it was sufficient for Moses to tell them that the Vision was impos- 
sible; and if they were Unbelievers, they would not have believed him in 
saying that Allah had ruled that the Vision was impossible. In any case the 
request would have been [under such circumstances] a sort of trifling. 
The abiding of the mountain firm in its place at the time of motion is also 
possible [if the verse means] that rest occurs in place of motion, for the only 
thing that is impossible is the joining together of motion [94] and rest. 

and necessary by Tradition. A proof on authority has come down affirming 
that Believers have a vision of Allah in the abode of the next World/ 

First, there is the Book, which gives the statement of Allah, "On that day 
beaming faces to their Lord shall be looking" (Quran 75:22). Second, 
Tradition {al-sunna) gives the statement of the Prophet, 8 "Verily you will see 
your Lord just as you see the moon on the night when it is full." This is a 
well-known {mashhur) tradition reported by twenty-one of the principal 

7 Al-Baydawl (Anwar al-Tanzil, I, 61) in commenting on this verse says that it is 
possible for Allah to be seen in a vision that is far removed from modality, and that the 
vision is for Believers in the next world and for individuals from among the Prophets 
in this. 

8 See al-Bukhari, al-Sahih, I, 153; Muslim, aUSahih, I, 85 £.; Musnad, II, 368 f.; al- 
Ghazzall, Ihya', IX, 585. For other traditions concerning the vision see Goldsack, Muham- 
madan Traditions, pp. 279 f.; Wensinck, Handbook, p. 17. 



78 VISION OF ALLAH 

Companions. Third, as for Agreement, it states that the Muslim people were 
agreed that the Vision of Allah occurs in the abode of the next World and 
that the verses which have come down regarding it are to be taken literally. 

Later there appeared the statement of those who differed [from this], and 
their equivocations and interpretations spread. Their greatest equivocation is 
the rational one, that it is a stipulation of a person seen in a vision that he 
must be in place, in a direction and [in a position] confronting the one who 
sees; that there be a certain definite distance between the two, so that he 
who is seen is neither extremely near nor extremely far away; and that there 
be a conjunction of the rays of light from the eye with the one seen. All this, 
they say, is impossible in the case of Allah. The answer is to make this 
stipulation impossible. Al-Nasafi referred to it in saying, 

And He is seen [unlike any material being] not in place or in a direction 
so far as being confronted, nor by the conjunction of the rays of light, nor by 
a certain definite distance between the one who sees and Allah/To draw 
analogy for the Unseen {al-ghaib) from the Seen (al-shdhid) is unsound. 
The fact that it is not stipulated that Allah see us [with the sense of sight] 
is sometimes adduced as a proof [that Allah is not seen in a place, and so 
on]. This is a matter for consideration, [95] for the statement concerning the 
Vision says that it is by the sense of sight. 

Objection may be made that were the Vision a possibility, were the senses 
sound and all the other stipulations existent, of necessity He would be 
seen; otherwise it would be possible for lofty mountains to be in front of us 
and yet we should not see them, but this is sophistry. We reply that this is 
impossible, for the Vision according to us is by the creating of Allah; and it 
does not necessarily follow when all the stipulations are met. 

The objectors say that among the authoritative proofs [against it] there 
is the statement of Allah, "Eyes do not perceive Him, although He per- 
ceives the eyes" (Qur'an 6:103). Now although we admit that the meaning 
of eyes in the verse is inclusive [without any exception being made]; and 
that the purport of the verse is a general negation and not a negation of per- 
ceiving in general [to which there might have been a particular case as an 
exception]; and that perception here is absolute vision, not vision from 
the standpoint of encircling all sides of the one seen; yet our answer is that 
there is no indication regarding perception that this is a general statement 
covering all times and states. 

It may be deduced from the verse quoted that the Vision of Allah is al- 



VISION OF ALLAH 79 

lowable; since were it impossible there would be no reason for commending 
the negation of it, just as the non-existent being is not commended for its 
non-vision, for the Vision itself [in this supposition] is impossible. But 
rather the commendation appears in the fact that though the Vision of Him 
is possible, yet He is not seen because of its being made impossible and unat- 
tainable by the veil of Majesty. 

If we make perception an expression for vision from the standpoint of 
encircling one from all sides and boundaries, then the verse indicates that 
the Vision is allowable, nay rather it is verified even more clearly as real, for 
the meaning is that Allah although seen, is not perceived by the eyes because 
He is exalted of Himself above being limited and described by boundaries 
and sides. 

Also objectors say that the verses of the Qur'an expressing a desire for 
the Vision are joined up with a desire for magnifying [Allah] and disap- 
probation [of the people of Moses]. The answer to this is that it was for the 
purpose of distressing the people of Moses and opposing them in asking 
for the Vision, not because it was impossible. Otherwise Moses would have 
prevented them from doing it, just as he did when they asked him to make 
gods for them. And he said, "Nay rather you are an ignorant people** 9 
(Qur'an 27:56). And this is a mark of the possibility of the Vision in this 
world (al-dunyd). For this reason the Companions of the Prophet differed as 
to whether the Prophet 10 saw his Lord on the night of the Ascension (a£- 
mi'rdj) or not. And the differing about its occurrence is a proof [96] of its 
possibility. But [the occurrence of] the Vision in sleep has been recorded of 
many of the Fathers. Doubtless it is a species of observation by the heart 
(al-qalb) rather than the eye. 

9 Here al-Taftazanl has quoted from the Qur'an Lot's statement to his people (bal antutn 
qawmtm tajhahln) % whereas Moses' words (inna^um qawmun tajhaliin) are given in 
Qur. 7:134- 

10 Traditions denying that Muhammad ever saw his Lord are to be found in al- 
Bukhari, al-Sahih, III, 339 f., IV, 447; Mttsnad, VI, 49 f.; some affirming it are in Mttsnad, 
I, 285, V, 170 f. See also below, Chap. 15. 



£hapter p 



THE CREATOR AND THE ACTIONS 
OF HIS CREATURES 

A 

JL JLllah is the creator of all the actions of His creatures whether of Unbe- 
lief or of Belief, of obedience or of disobedience. And they are all of them 
by His Will and Desire, by His judgment, by His ruling, and by His decree^ 
ing. His creatures have actions of choice for which they are rewarded or 
punished. And the good in these is by the good pleasure of Allah and the 
vile in them is not by His good pleasure. 

Allah is the creator {\haliq) of all the actions of His creatures whether of 
Unbelief (al-fafr) or of Belief (al-iman), of obedience (al-taa) or of dis- 
obedience (al- is y an) /This is unlike the Mu'tazilites, who asserted that the 
creature is the creator of his own actions. The early Mu'tazilites refrained 
from using the expression "creator" when speaking of the creature {al-abd) y 
and only used expressions like "bringer into existence" (mujid), "inventor" 
{mu^htart), and so on. But when al-Jubba'I and his followers saw that the 
terms all meant the same, namely "the one who brings out of non-existence 
into existence" (al-mu^hrij min al-adam 'ild 'l-wujtld) they became bold 
and used the expression "creator" (al-^hdliq). 1 

The People of Reality objected for certain reasons. The first is that the 
creature, were he the creator of his actions, would know all the particulars 
of these actions, since of necessity the bringing a thing into existence through 
power and choice cannot be anything but that. And the obligation [to know 
all the particulars] is unsound, for walking from place to place may comprise 
a series of interrupted rests and of motions, some swifter and some slower 
than others, yet all the while the person walking has no feeling of this. This 
is not because he is diverted from the knowledge of it, nay rather, were he 
asked about the actions he would not know. Yet this happens with the most 

1 Some of the Shi'ites hold the same position regarding a creature's acts. See al-Babu 
'l-Hadi ' Ashar, pp. 42 ff.; Ibn Hazm, Kitab al-Fisal, III, 54 ff.; al-Ash'arl, Maqalat, pp. 72 f. 



CREATOR AND HIS CREATURES 81 



evident of actions. But when you consider the motions of the members of his 
body in walking, grasping, seizing, and so on, and what he needs for mov- 
ing his muscles and straining his nerves and so on, the matter is clearer still 
[that is, that he does not know all their particulars]. The second reason is 
that there are the statutes (al-nusus) which have come down regarding this 
subject, such as the statement of Allah, "And Allah has created you and 
what you do" (Qur an 37:94). This means "your doing," 2 the ma (what) 
being masdarlya (related to a verbal noun) so that there is no necessity for 
omitting the pronoun; or it means "your deed," the ma being mawsula 
(relatival), and this comprises actions. [97] For if we say the actions of the 
creatures are created by Allah or by the creatures, we do not mean by the 
action the masdarlya meaning, which is the bringing into existence and the 
bringing to pass, but the result of the mas day (verbal noun) which is con- 
nected with the bringing into existence and the bringing to pass, I mean 
what we observe of motions and rests, for example. The fine point that may 
be forgotten is that one may fancy that the citation of the verse depends on 
the ma being masdarlya. And there is the statement of Allah, "Allah is the 
creator of everything" (Qur'an 39:63, 13:17). This by rational proof means 
everything possible, and the action of the creature is a possible thing. There 
is also the statement of Allah, "Is the one who creates as the one who does 
not?" (Qur'an 16:17). This commends the office of creator, and connects it 
up with being worthy of receiving adoration (al-ibdda). 

But it must not be said that he who asserts that the creature creates his 
action is a polytheist (mushri^) rather than a monotheist {muwahhid) y for 
we say that polytheism is positing a partner for the Deity, meaning a neces- 
sarily existent partner just as the Magians (aUMajus) 8 assert, or a partner 
deserving such adoration as the idolaters render their idols. The Mu'tazilites 
do not assert that, and moreover they do not make the office of creator in the 
creature like that of Allah, because the creature lacks causes and instru- 
ments which are [given to him] by the creation of Allah. However, the 
Early Theologians of the Trans-Oxus went so far in attributing error to 
them as to say that the Magians were in a happier state than the Mu'tazilites 
since the Magians only posited of the Deity one partner, whereas the 
Mu'tazilites posited innumerable partners. The Mu'tazilites argued that of 
necessity we distinguish between the motion of one who is walking and of 

2 Sec William Wright, Arabic Grammar (Cambridge, 1896-98), I, 270, 273; II, 267, 
for relative ma; I, 277; II, 220, 252, for infinitive ma; al-Zamakhshari, al-Mufassal, pp. 
57 f., 147, 160; al-Baydawi, Anwar al-Tanztl, II, 174, al-Zamakhshari, al-Kashshaf , II, 121 1. 

8 See Qur. 22:17; Enc. of Islam, III, 97 ff.; al-Shahrastanl, al-Milal, pp. 179 f.; Diet, of 
Tech. Terms, p. 1330. 



82 CREATOR AND HIS CREATURES 

one who is trembling, for the first movement is by choice, but the second is 
not. They also said that if everything were by the creative act of Allah, the 
imposing [on the creature] of a legal responsibility (ta\ltf) would be un- 
sound, as would also praise and blame, reward and punishment [of him]. 
[98] And this [according to them] is quite clear. The answer is that this 
argument should be addressed to the Jabrites {al-]abrtya) 4 who deny abso- 
lutely to him, that is the creature, the power of acquisition and choice. 

But we shall establish this point on grounds which we shall verify, if Allah 
wills. It is sometimes maintained that if Allah were the creator of the actions 
of the creatures, He would then be the one who stands, sits, eats and drinks, 
and the adulterer and the thief and so on. But this is a bit of stupendous 
ignorance, for the one of whom something is predicated (al-muttasif) is that 
one in whom it subsists, not the one who brought it into existence. Do they 
not see that Allah is the creator of blackness and whiteness and all the 
other things predicated of bodies, but they are not predicated of Him? Or 
perhaps it is maintained [that the creature creates] because of the sayings 
of Allah, "And Allah the best of creators is blessed" (Qur'an 23:14), "Since 
thou dost create 5 from clay as it were in the shape of birds" (Qur'an 5:110). 
The answer is that creating here means decreeing (aLtaqdir). 

And they/that is, the actions of creatures 

are all of them by His Will and Desire 6 /It has been shown that we hold 
these [two terms] to be an expression for the same idea. 

by His judgment (hu\tn)/lx. is not unlikely that the reference here is to the 
direct command (\hitdb) [of Allah] in creating. 

by His ruling (qadiy a) /that is, His decision (qada). 7 This is an expression 
for the action taken together with the judgments in addition [to it]. Objec- 

*The Jabrites were the believers in absolute predestination. See Enc. of Islam, II, 605; 
Wensinck, The Muslim Creed, pp. 106, 157, 213; al-Fatfall, Kifayat al-Awamm, pp. 67 f.; 
al-Shahrastanl, al-Milal, pp. 59 f.; Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 200. 

0 Al-Baydawi, Anwar al-Tanzil, I, 156, also explains \halq when used by al-Maslh as 
taqdir. 

6 Cf. al-Rawda al-Bahiya, p. 19; al-Raz!, Muhassal, pp. 140 ff.; al-Ijl, al-Mawaqif, 
pp. 105 ff.; al-Fadali, Kifayat al-Awamm, p. 64. 

7 "The accepted position in Islam is that al-qada* means the universal, general and eternal 
decree and al-qadar the individual development or application of that in time." Enc. of 
Islam, II, 603 ff.; cf. Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 1179*-* 1234 f.; al-Tcfrifat, pp. 181, 185; 
Abu Hanlfa, al-Wasiya, p. 8. 



CREATOR AND HIS CREATURES 83 

tion is not to be made that were Unbelief by the decision of Allah, it would 
be necessary to be well pleased with it, for it is incumbent on us to submit 
to Allah's decision. The obligation [suggested here] is unsound, for being 
well pleased with Unbelief is Unbelief, for we say that Unbelief is not a 
decision but something decided, and that being well pleased is with the 
decision and not with the thing decided. 

and by His decreeing (tag dir) /This is the limiting of each creature to the 
limit within which he exists whether of goodness or vileness, of use or 
harm, and to what he occupies of time and place and to what results thereby 
of reward and punishment. The purpose is to make a general statement con- 
cerning the Will and Power of Allah because of what has already been said 
about everything being by the creation of Allah. This [creation] calls for 
Power and Will [in Allah] since there is no coercion or compulsion [of 
Him]. 

[99] Objection may be raised that the Unbeliever (al-^dfir) is made an 
object of compulsion in His Unbelief {\ujr) and the evil-doer (al-fdsiq) 8 in 
his evil-doing (fisq), so it is not sound to make them legally responsible for 
Belief and obedience. To this we reply that Allah willed for them Unbelief 
and evil-doing by their own choice, so there is no compulsion. For just as He 
knew that on their part they would choose Unbelief and evil-doing, so He 
did not make them legally responsible for the impossible [because they had 
choice]. 

The Mu'tazilites denied that Allah wills wicked and vile things, even to 
the extent that they said that He wills of the Unbeliever and the evil-doer 
that they believe and obey, and not that they disbelieve and disobey, be- 
cause they [that is, the Mu'tazilites] asserted that willing the vile is vile, just 
as is the creating of it and bringing it into existence. We preclude that by 
saying that rather the vile is that which is acquired by the vile creature and 
is predicated of him. So with the Mu'tazilites most of the actions of crea- 
tures that occur are contrary to the Will of Allah. That position is indeed 
abominable. It was said of *Amr b. 'Ubayd 9 that he said, "No one ever si- 
lenced me as did a Magian who was on a ship with me. I said, Why dost 

8 Fdsiq, "one who departs from the right way," "one who has taken upon himself to ob- 
serve the law and has fallen short." Zalim, "wrong-doer," "one who acts unjustly" is a more 
general term. Fdsiq, in turn, is more general than \dfir. Lane, Lexicon, p. 2398; Enc. of 
Islam, II, 81; Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 1132. 

9 'Amr b. 'Ubayd (d. a.h. 145, a.d. 762) was an early Mu'tazilite. See Enc. of Islam, 
I, 336; Ibn Qutayba, al-Ma'arif, pp. 243 i.\ Ibn Khallikan, Biographical Dictionary, II, 
393 & 



84 CREATOR AND HIS CREATURES 

thou not become a Muslim?' He said, 'Because Allah has not willed my 
becoming a Muslim; if He wills it, I shall become a Muslim.' So I said to the 
Magian, 'Allah wills your becoming a Muslim but the Shaytans do not leave 
you alone.' So the Magian replied, 'In that case I shall stay with the more 
victorious partner.' " It is related that al-Qadl 'Abd al-Jabbar al-Hamadanl 10 
came on a visit to his friend Ibn 'Abbad 11 with whom was al-Ustadh Abu 
Ishaq al-Isfara'inl. When he saw al-Ustadh, he said, "Praise be to Him who 
is far removed from wickedness {al-jahsha)." And al-Ustadh immediately 
replied, "Praise be to Him in whose kingdom nothing transpires but what 
He wills." 

And the Mu'tazilites believed that command (al-amr) requires willing 
and that prohibition (al-nahy) requires non-willing. So they made the Belief 
of the Unbeliever the thing willed [by Allah] and his Unbelief that which 
was not willed. But we know that a thing may sometimes not be willed and 
yet commanded and may sometimes be willed and yet prohibited because 
of wise and beneficial matters which are within the knowledge of Allah; or 
because He is not to be asked concerning that which He does. Do you not 
perceive that a master whenever he wishes to demonstrate before those present 
with him the disobedience of his slave commands him to do something, and 
yet does not will that he do it? [ioo] Both sides [the orthodox and the 
Mu'tazilites] may hold fast to verses [which they cite] on the subject, and 
the door of interpretation is open to both parties. 

His creatures have actions of choice for which they are rewarded/if they are 
actions of obedience 

or punished/if they are actions of disobedience. This is unlike the position 
of the Jabrites, who claimed that no action at all belongs to the creature and 
that his movements are merely the movements of solid bodies (al-jamddai) , 
the creature having no power over them, and no purpose or choice. And 
this is unsound, because of necessity we distinguish between the movement 
of grasping and that of trembling. We know that the first is by choice and 
the second is not. It is also unsound because were the creature not to have 
any part at all in action, it would not be sound to impose responsibility on 
him or to base his deserving reward and punishment on his actions, nor 

10 Al-Qadi Abu '1-Hasan 'Abd al-Jabbar (d. a.h. 415, a.d. 1024), a leading Mu'tazilite 
and a ShafVite Qa^I in Ray. See Brockelmann, Gcschichtc, I, 411. 

11 The §ahib Abu '1-Qasim Isma'il Ibn 'Abbad al-Talakam, was a vizier of the Buwayhids 
(d. a.h. 385, a.d. 995). See Ibn Khallikan, Biographical Dictionary, I, 212 ft*. 



CREATOR AND HIS CREATURES 8j 

would it be sound to ascribe to him actions which demand for being real 
that purpose and choice precede them, that is, such actions as "he wor- 
shipped/' "he fasted," and "he wrote," which are different from "the boy 
grew tall" and "his color darkened." The decisive statutes deny the position 
[of the JabritesJ as seen in the sayings of Allah, "A reward [101] for that 
which they were doing" (Qur an 32:17, 46:13, 56:23), "Whoever wills let him 
believe and whoever wills let him be an Unbeliever" (Qur 'an 18:28). And 
there are other verses. 

Objection may be raised that since the Knowledge and Will of Allah have 
been rendered universal it is absolutely certain that compulsion [of creatures] 
follows, for Knowledge and Will are either connected with the existence of 
the action and so it is necessary, or with the non-existence of the action and 
then it is impossible; and there can be no choice when there is necessity and 
impossibility. To this we reply that He knows and wills that the creature 
will do the action or not do it by his own choice, so there is no confusion 
about that. Or objection may be made that his act of free choice is either 
necessary or impossible, which fact is inconsistent with free choice. To this 
we reply that this position is impossible, for necessity by choice verifies 
choice as a reality and is not inconsistent with it. Furthermore, the position 
is contradicted by the actions of the Creator — glorious is the mention of 
Him — for His knowledge and Will are connected with His actions, so it 
follows that His action is necessary to Him. 

Objection may be raised that there is no meaning to the statement that 
the creature acts by choice, unless he be the one who brings his actions into 
existence by purpose and will; and that it has already been shown that Allah 
is independent in creating actions [102] and bringing them into existence; 
and also that it is a well-known fact that a thing over which someone has 
power does not come under two independent powers. We reply there is no use 
discoursing about the force and strength of this statement. We can only say 
that since it has been established by proof that the Creator is Allah, and that 
of necessity the power and will of the creature enter into some actions like 
the movement of grasping, though not into others like the movement of 
trembling, we needed to escape from this perplexing problem by saying that 
Allah is the creator (al-\haliq) of everything and the creature is an acquirer 
(\dsib)} 2 

12 Al-Taftazani here introduces the Ash'aritc solution, which is the use of the term 
\asb, "acquisition," and its derivatives. The Maturidites emphasized ikhtiyar, "choice." See 
al-Rawda al-Bahiya, pp. 26 ff.; Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 419 ff., 1243 f.; Enc. of Islam, 
II, 785 f. 



86 CREATOR AND HIS CREATURES 



The verification of this position is that when the creature expends his 
power and will in action it is an acquisition (kasb), and when Allah brings 
it into existence following upon that, it is a creating {\halq)> so the maqdur 
(the thing which is subject to power) comes under two powers but from two 
different standpoints. The act is a maqdur of Allah from the standpoint of 
being brought into existence (al-Jjad), and a maqdur of the creature from 
the standpoint of acquisition (al-kasb). This statement is necessary from the 
meaning of the word "decreeing," even though we are unable to go beyond 
this in summarizing the expression used which already proves that the 
creature's action is by Allah's creating and bringing into existence exercised 
along with what the creature has of power and choice. 

There are a number of ways of expressing the difference between the two 
things [that is, creating and acquisition]. Acquisition is that which occurs 
by the use of some instrument, but creating does not. Acquisition is a 
maqdur which occurs in the locus of its power, and creating is a maqdur 
which does not occur in the locus of its power, and it is not valid to separate 
acquistion from the one who has power over it; but it is valid to do so with 
creating. 

And someone may object, "You have thereby established a co-partnership 
(al-shari\a) [with Allah], the very thing with which you charge the Mu'tazi- 
lites." We reply 13 that co-partnership is the coming together of two for a 
certain thing; then each may detach himself from the other along with that 
which is his own. [103] So that would be like the partners of a village or a 
place, for example, just as though the creature were made a creator of his 
own acts and the Maker were made creator of all the rest of the accidents and 
the bodies. This is quite different from the position that something may be 
related to two things from two different standpoints; as for example a bit of 
ground belongs to Allah from the standpoint of creating and to creatures 
from the standpoint of the establishment of control over it; or just as the 
act of the creature is ascribed to Allah from the standpoint of creating and to 
the creature from the standpoint of acquisition. 

And someone may object, saying, "How is it that the acquistion of the vile 
{al-qablh) is vile, vulgar, and necessarily deserving of blame and punish- 
ment, whereas the creating of it is not?" We reply that it^s because it has 
been established that the Creator is wise, and because he does not create 
anything unless it has a praiseworthy outcome. Although we do not perceive 

18 Cf. the answer of a modern Muslim theologian: Mohammed Abdou, Rissalat al- 
Tawhid, pp. 43 f. 



CREATOR AND HIS CREATURES 87 

it, wc must hold that those actions which we deem vile sometimes have in 
them wise and beneficial matters, 14 just as in the creation of the base and 
harmful bodies which give pain, whereas it is not so in the case of acquisi- 
tion; for sometimes the good may be done and sometimes the vile. So together 
with the prohibition of that which is vile we make his acquisition of it vile 
and vulgar and necessarily deserving of blame and punishment. 

And the good in these/that is, of the actions of the creatures. And the good 
is that which is connected with praise now and reward hereafter, or it may be 
better interpreted as that which is not connected with blame and punish- 
ment in order to include that which is permissible (al-mubah). 

is by the good pleasure (rida) of Allah/that is, by His Will without any ob- 
jection 

and the vile in them/and it is that which is connected with blame now and 
punishment hereafter 

is not by His good pleasure/since there is objection to His having pleasure 
in it. Allah said, "And He does not take pleasure in the Unbelief of His 
creatures" (Qur'an 39:9). This means that Willing, Desiring, and Decreeing 
are connected with all actions, while good pleasure and desire and command 
are only connected with the good to the exclusion of the vile. 

14 This is a point much emphasized by Mohammed Abdou (Rissalat al-Tatuhid, 
pp. 46 ff.). 



Chapter 10 



THE CREATURE'S LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY 
AND ALLAH'S SUSTENANCE AND 
GUIDANCE 

A 

JL Jund ability accompanies the action, and it is the real essence of the 
power by which the action comes into being; and this word applies to the 
soundness of causes, instruments, and members of the body. And the validity 
of imposing a legal responsibility depends upon this ability, and the creature 
has no legal responsibility imposed upon him which is not in his capacity. 

And the pain which exists in the one beaten as the consequence of being 
beaten by some man, or the state of being broken in glass as the consequence 
of its being broken by some man, and such things — all that is something 
created by Allah. The creature has no part in the work of its creation, and a 
slain man is dead at his appointed time. The appointed time is one. 

The forbidden thing is still Appointed Sustenance. Everyone receives 
in full his Appointed Sustenance whether from things permitted or for- 
bidden; and it is inconceivable that a man will not eat his own Appointed 
Sustenance or that another than he will eat his Appointed Sustenance. 

Allah leads astray whom He wills and guides aright whom He wills, and 
it is not incumbent on Allah to do that which is best for the creature. 

And ability {ahistitif a) accompanies the action/This is contrary to the posi- 
tion of the Mu'tazilites. 

and it is the real essence of the power by which the action comes into being/ 
This is a reference to that which was mentioned by the author of al-Tabsira, 
in that ability is an accident which Allah creates in the animal, whereby he 
performs actions of choice, the ability being the cause {'ilia) of the action. 1 

1 The majority of the Mu'tazilites said that Power was connected with the action before 
its existence and that it was impossible for its connection to be at the time of the origina- 



RESPONSIBILITY AND GUIDANCE 89 

The Multitude (al-jumhur) hold that it is a condition (sharf) for the per- 
formance of the action, but not its cause. In general, ability is an attribute 
which Allah creates [within the creature] following upon the soundness of 
the causes and the instruments when there is the purpose for acquiring the 
action. So if the creature purposes a good action Allah creates the power to do 
good, and if he purposes an evil action Allah creates the power to do evil 
[104] and he thus loses the power to do good and deserves blame and punish- 
ment. For this reason Allah blames the Unbelievers because they are lacking 
[in the ability] to hear. 

If ability then is an accident, it is necessary that it be concomitant with the 
action and not prior to the action, otherwise it would take place without 
[his having] any ability and power over the action. This rests on what has 
already been said regarding the impossibility of the continuance of acci- 
dents. Objection may be raised as follows, "Suppose the impossibility of the 
continuance of accidents is admitted, still there is no dispute about the pos- 
sibility of similar new accidents coming into being following upon the pass- 
ing away of these; where then is the necessity for saying that the action 
occurs without there being any power ?" In reply we say, "We claim that this 
is necessary only if the power by which [you say] the action takes place is 
that power which was there prior to the action; but if you make it a similar 
new power which is concomitant to the action, you thereby admit that the 
power by which the action is, can only be one that is concomitant with it. 
Then if you claim that there must have been similar powers prior to it, you 
must explain why it was impossible for the action to occur when the power 
first occurred. 

Let us consider then what is to be said were we to suppose that the power 
which precedes the action continued until the time of the action either by 
similar new powers coming into being one after the other or by the con- 
tinuous recurrence of accidents one after the other. If they say that the 
existence of the action is permissible through similar new powers coming 
into being one after the other, they abandon their first position whereby 
they made it permissible for the action to be concomitant with the power. Or 
if they say that the existence of the action is impossible in this way, then it 
follows that there was a making of a decision by someone and a pre- 
ponderance of one thing over another without a determinant {murajjih) 
to make the preponderance, since the power [/05] remains unchanged in the 

tion of the action. Wcnsinck, The Muslim Creed, pp. 157 f.; al-Ash'ari, Maqalat, pp. 229 
A.J., p. 150; 'I.D., p. 104. 



9 o RESPONSIBILITY AND GUIDANCE 

state in which it was. But this conveys no meaning, for in the case of acci- 
dents it is impossible [that a change occur without a determinant]. 

Why then is the action caused by the power in the second case a neces- 
sary action and in the first case an impossible action? This is a matter for 
consideration, because those who say that ability precedes the action do not 
say that it is impossible for the power and the action to be concomitant in 
time; nor do they say that the origination of every action must be through 
a power absolutely prior to it in time, thus precluding the origination of the 
action at the same time as the origination of the power — all other condi- 
tions having been fulfilled. 

This is also a matter for consideration, for it is permissible for the action 
in the first case to be impossible because of some unfulfilled condition or be- 
cause of the existence of something that prevents the action, and yet in the 
second case to be necessary to fulfill the conditions although power is equally 
an attribute of the one possessing power in each case. 

So some took the position 2 that if the power, which gathers to itself all the 
conditions for making the impression (al-ta'thtr) f is meant by the word 
"ability," then the real fact is that it accompanies the action or else it precedes 
it. 

As for the fact that it is impossible for accidents to continue: this is based 
on certain premises 8 which are hard to explain. These are, first, that the 
continuance of a thing is something verified as real and superadded to it, 
second, that it is impossible for an accident to subsist in an accident, and 
third, that the two accidents cannot subsist together in a locus. 

Since those who assert that ability precedes the action have made the de- 
duction that the imposition of legal responsibility {al-ta\lif) occurs before 
the action, for of necessity the Unbeliever is legally responsible for Belief, 
and the one who neglects worship is legally responsible for worship after the 
time for it arrives; then if ability were not verified as real, it would follow 
that the one who is powerless is legally responsible, and that is unsound; 
so al-Nasafi referred to the refutation of this by saying, 

and this word/that is, the expression "ability" 

2 This is the position of al-RazI (A.J., p. 152). Al-Tahawl (d. a.h. 321; a.d. 933), a 
Hanafite and a contemporary of al-Maturidl, said that there are two sorts of ability, one 
having to do with the help from Allah which comes along with the action, the other having 
to do with soundness of instruments, etc., and preceding the action. See his 'Aqida Ahl 
al-Sunna wa 'l~]am&a (Kazan, 1902), p. 14. 

8 Cf. al-RazI, Muhassd, pp. 79 ff.; Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 988. 



RESPONSIBILITY AND GUIDANCE 91 

applies to the soundness of causes, instruments, and members of the body 

{cd-jawdrih)/2L$ in the saying of Allah, "And Allah demands of men Pil- 
grimage (hajj) to the House, of him who is able (istataa) to find a way" 
(Qur'an 3:91). Objection may be raised that ability is an attribute of the one 
legally responsible, that the soundness of causes and instruments is not one of 
his attributes, and that how then is it valid to interpret ability as soundness? 
We reply that the purpose is the soundness of the causes and instruments 
which he possesses, so then ability may be predicated of the one who is 
legally responsible just as is this soundness. Therefore one may say [106] 
that he is the possessor of soundness of causes and instruments. Because this 
compound expression is used, there is no derived name of the agent 
(ism fail) which may be predicated of him, which is not true of the word 
"ability." 

And the validity of imposing a legal responsibility (al-ta^Hf) depends upon 
this ability/which is the soundness of the causes and the instruments, not 
ability according to the first definition. If by powerlessness (al-ajz) lack of 
ability is meant according to the first definition, we do not admit that it is 
impossible to impose responsibility on the one who is powerless. If it is 
understood to have the second meaning we do not admit the necessity 
of it, for it may be that the soundness of the causes and the instruments takes 
place prior to the action, even though the real essence of the power by which 
the action takes place has not yet come into being. Answer may be made 
that power is something potential (saliha)* applicable to [either of] two 
contraries according to Abu Hamfa, 5 so that the power which is spent in 
Unbelief is the same power that is spent in Belief. There is no difference be- 
tween them except in the connection which is made. This does not require 
a difference in the power itself, for the Unbeliever possesses power to be- 
lieve, for which Belief he is legally responsible, only he has spent his power in 
Unbelief and by choice has wasted the opportunity of spending it in Be- 
lief, so he deserves blame and punishment. It is evident that in this answer 
there is an admission that power precedes the action, for one's power to be- 
lieve while yet in the state of Unbelief is undoubtedly prior to Belief. 

And if someone answers that the purpose of this statement is that even 
though the power is potentially applicable to two contraries, yet from the 

4 Sec Hortcn, Die spe^. und pos. Theologie des Islam, p. 193. Cf. use of the term suluhi 
by al-Fadall, Kijdyat al- Awamtn, p. 43. 

5 See al-Rawda al-Bahtya, pp. 53 ff. for his position on tariff. Cf . Wensinck, The Mus- 
lim Creed, p. 191. 



92 RESPONSIBILITY AND GUIDANCE 

standpoint of connection it applies to only one of them — so that what must 
be concomitant to the action is the power connected with the action, and 
what must be concomitant to refraining from the action is the power con- 
nected with this refraining — so the power itself may be something antecedent 
and connected with the two contraries, we reply that it is inconceivable that 
there should be a dispute about this, nay rather it is futile. This is a matter 
which should be taken into consideration. 

and the creature has no legal responsibility imposed upon him which is not 
in his capacity/ whether something impossible in itself like the uniting to- 
gether of contraries, or possible in itself, but not possible for the creature, like 
the creation of a body. As for what is impossible on the basis that Allah knows 
something different or wills something different, as in the case of the Belief 
of the Unbeliever or the obedience of the disobedient, there is no disputing 
the fact that legal responsibility is imposed upon him, since this is something 
in the power of the one who is legally responsible when seen from his view- 
point. Then again it is a matter of agreement that there is no imposition of 
legal responsibility which is not in his capacity, as seen in the statement of 
Allah, "Allah does not impose upon a soul legal responsibility beyond its 
capacity'* (Qur'an 2:286). There is also the command in His saying, "Tell 
me the names of these" (Qur'an 2:29). This was to baffle them, not to impose 
a legal responsibility. There is also the statement of Allah in which he spoke 
of the state of the Believers, "O our Lord, do not burden us beyond our 
ability" 6 (Qur'an 2:286). The meaning of "burden" here is not the im- 
posing of legal responsibility but the introduction [/07] of limiting obstacles 
beyond their ability. The dispute is whether or not it is permissible [to impose 
a legal responsibility beyond the creature's ability]. The Mu'tazilites, disap- 
proving of it on rational grounds, said that it was impossible. Al-Ash'ari per- 
mitted it because nothing which is from Allah is to be disapproved. 

From the saying of Allah, "Allah does not impose upon a soul legal re- 
sponsibility beyond its capacity" (Qur'an 2:286), the denial of its being per- 
mitted is sometimes inferred. The statement of this is that were it permissible 
to impose legal responsibility on a creature beyond its capacity, on the sup- 
position that it actually occurred, something impossible would not neces- 
sarily follow. For of necessity the impossibility of alAdzim (the necessary) 
brings about the impossibility of al-malzum (the thing made necessary) in 

6 Other verses from the Qur'an with the same meaning arc 2:233, 6:153, 7:40, 23:64. 
See al-BaytfawI, Anwar aUTanzil, I, 143. 



RESPONSIBILITY AND GUIDANCE 93 

order to verify the meaning of al-luzum (necessity); but were this actually 
to occur it would necessarily follow that the Word of Allah is false. But that 
is impossible. 

This is a telling point in showing that it is impossible for anything to 
occur if its non-occurrence is connected with the Knowledge, Will, and 
Choice of Allah. The solution of this question is that we do not admit in 
regard to everything possible in itself that, on the supposition that this 
possible thing occurred, it then follows that there was an impossible [as an 
alternative], and that this is necessary only were it [that is, the impossible] 
not precluded by something else which happens to it. Otherwise it would be 
permissible to say that the impossible is necessary on the basis of its being 
precluded by something else. Is it not seen that when Allah brought the 
world into existence by His power and choice, its non-existence was pos- 
sible in itself, even though on the supposition that it occurred, the thing 
caused followed necessarily the complete cause? And this is impossible. And 
the upshot is that because something is possible in itself, then an impossible 
as an alternative does not necessarily follow on the supposition that the 
thing occurred. This is when we consider the essence of the thing; but when 
we consider something superadded to itself, we do not admit that there is no 
necessity for the impossible [as an alternative]. 

And the pain which exists in the one beaten as the consequence of being 
beaten [108] by some man, or the state of being broken in glass as the con- 
sequence of its being broken by some man/The statement is limited in this 
way because it is valid that there be a ground for difference as to whether 
the creature has a part in it or not. 

and such things/as death, for example, as the consequence of killing 

all that is something created by Allah/because of what has already been said 
about Allah alone being the Creator and about all possible things being 
ascribed to Allah without there being any intermediary. The Mu'tazilites, in 
ascribing some actions to something other than Allah, said that if the action 
proceeds from the doer without the interposition of another action, then 
it results by way of immediate causality; otherwise it is by way of mediate 
causality (tawlid). 7 The meaning of this is that the one action makes it 

7 A1-Razl uses the term tawallud, Muhassal, p. 145. Cf. al-Ijl, al-Mawaqif, pp. 116 f.; 
Macdonald, Development, p. 142; al-Ash'arl, Maqalat, pp. 400 if.; Horovitz, Ueber den 



94 RESPONSIBILITY AND GUIDANCE 

necessary for him to do another action, as, for example, the motion of the 
hand necessitates the motion of the key in the hand; so pain is derived from 
the blow and the state of being broken from breaking. There are not two 
things created by Allah. We hold that everything is by the creation of 
Allah. 

The creature has no part in the work of its creation/It would have been better 
not to have limited the statement by saying "creation/' for in those acts result- 
ing from mediate causality which they call mutawallidat the creature has no 
part at all. As for creation, [he has no part in it] because it is impossible for 
the creature to create; and as for acquirement [of the action, he has no part 
in it] because it is impossible for the creature to acquire that which does not 
subsist within the locus of his power. For this reason the creature is not en- 
abled to do anything of this because he has not obtained this power, which is 
in contrast to actions of choice. 

and a slain man is dead at his appointed time ('a/a/) /That is to say, at the 
time decreed for his death. This is unlike the assertion of some of the 
Mu'tazilites, who say that Allah 8 cut short his appointed time. We believe 
that Allah has decided the appointed times of His creatures according to His 
knowledge without any changing of His mind, as is to be seen in the verse, 
"Whenever their appointed time comes, they will neither delay nor outstrip it 
an hour" (Qur'an 7:32, 16:62). The Mu'tazilites objected to this, citing 
traditions 0 which mention the fact that some actions of obedience increase 
one's age; [109] and also saying that if one should die thus at his appointed 
time, then his slayer would not deserve blame or punishment, nor would the 
payment of blood-money or chastisement be necessary, since the death of the 
slain man is neither by the creation of the slayer nor by his acquiring it. 

The answer to the first objection is that Allah knew that, were the man not 
to perform such and such an obedient action, his age would be forty years; 
but He knew that he would perform it, so his age is seventy years. This in- 
crease in his age is related to that action of obedience because Allah knew 
that were it not for this action there would not have been an increase in his 

Einfluss der griechischen Philosophic auf die Entwicklung des Kalam (Brcslau, 1909), 
PP. 78 ff. 

8 A. J. (p. 157) suggests that al-Taftazani should have said "the killer" instead of "Al- 
lah," because with the Mu'tazilites the "mutawaUid" is one of the creature's actions, not 
something created by Allah. 

8 Cf. Musnad, III, 229. 



RESPONSIBILITY AND GUIDANCE 95 

age. To the second objection the answer is that the necessity for punishing 
the slayer and making him accountable for his deed is linked up with 
service to Allah, because the slayer committed a thing forbidden by Allah 
and thereby acquired the action which resulted in death to the one slain by 
the customary way of things, for slaying is the action of the slayer by way of 
acquisition, although it is not his by way of creation. 

And death subsists in the dead man and is created by Allah, and the 
creature has no part in it either in creating it or in acquiring it. 10 This is 
based on the fact that death is existential (wujiidi) y in proof of which there is 
the statement of Allah, "He created death and life" (Qur'an 67:2). The 
majority, however, hold that it is non-existential {'adami) 11 and that the 
meaning of the creation of death is that He ordained it. 

The appointed time is one/This is unlike the position of al-Ka'bi, 32 who as- 
serted that the slain man had two appointed times, the one being slain and 
the other death, so that were he not slain he would live until his appointed 
time which is his death. This is also unlike the position of the Philosophers, 
who asserted that an animal has a natural appointed time, which is the 
time of its death through the dissolution of its moisture and the snuffing out of 
its heat, both of which are implanted in it, and other appointed times which 
cut it off contrary to the requirements of its nature through plagues and 
sicknesses. 

The forbidden thing (al-haram) is still Appointed Sustenance (rizq) 13 / 
for Appointed Sustenance is that which Allah conveys to the animal so that 
he eats it. This may sometimes be a lawful thing (halal) and sometimes a 
thing forbidden (haram). This is a better way of defining Appointed Sus- 
tenance than by saying that it is that by which the animal is nourished, be- 
cause such a definition lacks any relating of Appointed Sustenance to Al- 
lah, whereas He must be taken into consideration from the very meaning 
of the term. With the Mu'tazilites the forbidden thing is not Appointed 
Sustenance, because they explain it sometimes as something possessed which is 
eaten by the possessor, and sometimes as that by which one may be benefited 

10 A.J. (p. 157) makes this sentence a part of the text of al-Nasafl. Al-Kastal! (Con- 
stantinople text of a.h. 1 3 10, p. 126), puts the words "and death subsists in the dead 
man" in al-Nasafi's text, and the remainder as the words of al-Taftazanl. The Cureton 
text agrees with 'I.D. 

11 See Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 1461 f. 

12 For al-Ka'bi see above, Chap. 4. n. 25 on al-Balkhl. 

13 See Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 580 ff.; al-Ta'rifat, p. 115. 



9 6 RESPONSIBILITY AND GUIDANCE 

and that can only be something lawful. But it follows then according to 
their first definition that what the beast eats is not Appointed Sustenance. 
And according to both definitions he who eats what is forbidden throughout 
his whole life is not sustained by Allah at all. 

This difference of opinion rests upon the question of taking into con- 
sideration the relationships which Allah bears to Appointed Sustenance. 
[They reason as follows trying to show the fallacy of our position]: there is 
no provider of Appointed Sustenance save Allah alone; the creature deserves 
[no] blame and punishment for eating forbidden things; that which is sup- 
ported by Allah is not a vile thing, and so [they say that we should hold that] 
the one who does this is not deserving of blame and punishment. The refuta- 
tion of this argument is that the creature has made a wrong contact with the 
causes of the action through his free choice. 

Everyone receives in full his Appointed Sustenance whether from things 
permitted or forbidden/for he obtains nourishment from both of them 

and it is inconceivable that a man will not eat his own Appointed Sustenance 
or that another than he will eat his Appointed Sustenance/for a person must 
eat what Allah has ordained as nourishment for him, and it is impossible 
that another than he eat it, but if Appointed Sustenance means possession, 
then it is not impossible [that one's Appointed Sustenance may be the pos- 
session of another]. 

Allah leads astray (yudillu) whom He wills and guides aright (yahdi) whom 
He wills 14 /meaning that He does so by creating the acts of going astray 
(al-dalala) and being guided (al-ihtida), for He alone is Creator. In condi- 
tioning [the leading astray and guiding aright] upon His will there is an al- 
luion to the fact that the meaning of guidance is not "to explain the way of 
Reafty," for the explanation of the way of Reality is something general for 
everyone; nor is leading astray an expression for "finding the creature 
astray" or his "being called astray," since to connect these things with the 
will of Allah would mean nothing. Indeed, guidance is figuratively related 
to thu Prophet by way of assigning causation just as it is ascribed to the 
Qur'ari? and leading astray may be ascribed to Satan figuratively just as it is 
to idols fyl-asnam) [yet it is Allah who leads astray and guides aright]. 
Moreover, expressions in the statements of the Early Theologians such as 

14 Cf. al.-Raz»» MafStih, I, 246 ff. 



RESPONSIBILITY AND GUIDANCE 97 

"With us guidance is the creation of being guided" and "Allah guided him 
but he was not guided" are figurative terms for "indication of the way" 
(al'dalala) and "the call to be guided," 

But with the Mu'tazilites all of these usages are "a declaration of the 
right way." This position, though, is unsound because of the statement of 
Allah, [in] "Verily thou dost not guide him whom thou lovest" (Quran 
28:56), and because of the statement of the Prophet, "O Allah, guide my 
people." Muhammad said this in spite of the fact that he had declared the 
way and called them to be rightly guided. It is well known that guidance 
(al-hiddya) with the Mu'tazilites means the indication (al-daldla) of the 
way, which indication actually reaches the goal; but with us guidance is the 
indication of a way which reaches the goal, whether it actually is arrived at 
and one is really guided or not. 

and it is not incumbent on Allah to do that which is best for the creature 16 / 

otherwise He would not have created the poor Unbeliever who is tormented 
in this world and the next; nor would He have shown favor to His creatures 
and deserved thanks for guidance, and poured out all kinds of good things 
upon them, for these things would be the performance of a duty incumbent 
upon Him. And [furthermore were this not true] the favor of Allah to the 
Prophet would not be above that of His favor to Abu Jahl 16 — Allah curse him 
— since He should go to the limit in doing the best within His power for 
each of them. And [also were it not true] there would be no meaning to the 
question of a prophet's being preserved from error (al~isma) 9 of succor [in 
time of trouble], and of the exposure of some to harm and the giving to some 
abundance of fruitfulness and ease. What Allah failed to do in the case of 
each one would be for each one something of a cause of corruption from 
which Allah ought to desist; nor would the power of Allah continue to 
bear any relation to the welfare of creatures, since He would have performed 
that which is incumbent on Him. 

And I swear that the causes leading to corruption which are found in 
this principle — I mean, that it is incumbent on Allah to do the best for his 
creatures — rather, [one might say], in the most of the Mu'tazilite principles, 
are so clear that they cannot be hidden and are so many that they cannot 

18 The Mu'tazilites of Basra said that Allah must do what is best for His creatures in 
the Judgment; those of Baghdad said, "in this world and the Judgment." *I.D., p. in; 
A.J., p. 160; cf. al-Razi, Mafdtih, III, 440; ibid,, Muhassal, pp. 147 f.; al-Iji, al-Mawaqif, 
pp. 155 ff.; Ihyd' (commentary of Sayyid Murta^a), II, 186 f. 

lfl Abu Jahl, one of the bitterest opponents of Muhammad. See Enc. of Islam, I, 83; 
Ibn Hisham, Sirat Rasul Allah, pp. 190 f.; al-Tabari, Annates, I, 1175^., 1187, i3<>7' 



98 RESPONSIBILITY AND GUIDANCE 

be counted. This fact is because of their limited consideration of the various 
kinds of knowledge dealing with divine matters and because by tempera- 
ment they are firmly intent on finding an analogy between the seen and the 
unseen. The extreme tenacity with which they hold to their position is 
because of their belief that for Allah to forsake that which is for the creature's 
best interest means niggardliness and foolishness [on His part]. 

The refutation of this is that since His generosity, His wisdom, His grace, 
and His knowledge of the outcome of events have been established by de- 
cisive proofs, [112] so if there is any denial of good to the creature by the 
one who has the right to deny, this then is absolute justice and wisdom. 
Then what, pray, is the meaning of something being incumbent on Allah, 
since it does not mean in this case that he who forsakes the duty incumbent 
on him deserves blame and punishment? This is plainly so. There is no 
need then for even supposing that something contrary to what is incum- 
bent on Him proceeds from Him, since He is not enabled to forsake that 
which is incumbent on Him — on the basis that this requires something im- 
possible in the way of foolishness, or ignorance, or nonsense, or niggardliness, 
or something like that. This position of theirs rejects the principle of choice 
and is a leaning towards that type of philosophy the shame of which is quite 
evident. 



Chapter u 



SOME ESCHATOLOGICAL REALITIES 



T 

JLhc punishment of the grave for Unbelievers and for some of the dis- 
obedient Believers, and the bliss of the obedient in die grave by that which 
Allah knows and wills, and the questioning of Munkar and Nakir are estab- 
lished by proofs based on authority. And the Quickening of the Dead is a 
Reality, the Weighing is a Reality, the Book is a Reality, the Questioning 
is a Reality, the Tank is a Reality, and the Bridge is a Reality; the Garden 
is a Reality and the Fire is a Reality, and they both are created, existing and 
continuing; they shall not pass away, nor shall their inhabitants pass away. 

The punishment ('adhdb) of the grave 1 for Unbelievers and for some of the 
disobedient Bclievers/Al-Nasafi specified some of the Believers, for there are 
some of them whom Allah does not will to punish, so they will not be 
punished. 

and the bliss (tan'im) of the obedient in the grave by that which Allah knows 
and wills/This statement is better than that of the majority of books, which 
are confined to establishing the punishment of the grave rather than the 
bliss, on the ground that there are many more statutes (nustls) referring to 
it and that the people of the grave in general arc Unbelievers and disobedient, 
so it is more fitting to mention the punishment. 

and the questioning of Munkar and Naklr/They are two angels who enter 
the grave and ask the creature concerning his Lord, his religion, and his 
prophet. Al-Sayyid Abu Shujja* 2 said that children are questioned, and some 
say also that the prophets are questioned. 8 

1 The Mu'tazilites and the Kharijites denied the punishment of the grave. Sec al-Ash'ari, 
Maqalat, pp. 127, 430. 

2 Abu Shujja' (b. a.h. 434; a.d. 1042) was the author of a much-used manual of juris- 
prudence. See Enc. of Islam, I, 107; Brockelmann, Geschichte, I, 392. 

3 Some say that children, prophets, martyrs, and also the demented are not asked. See 
A.J., p. 161. 



ioo ESCHATOLOGICAL REALITIES 

arc established/that is, every one of these things 

by proofs based on authority (al-sam'iy a) /became they are possible things 
which [113] tne Veracious One has narrated concerning things spoken of by 
the statutes. Allah said, "The Fire, to which they will be exposed morning and 
evening, and the day when the Hour shall arise — 'Bring in the people of 
Pharaoh {Fir* awn) 4 for the severest torture* " (Qur an 40:49), and "They 
were drowned and made to enter the Fire" (Qur'an 71:25). The Prophet 
said, "Avoid contact with urine, for the punishment of the grave in general 
comes from it." 5 The Prophet also said that the statement of Allah, "Allah 
will establish those who believe with His established word in this world and 
the next" (Qur'an 14:32), was revealed in regard to the punishment of the 
grave; 6 and that whenever [the occupant of] it is asked, "Who is thy Lord, 
what is thy religion, and who is thy prophet?" he should reply, "My Lord is 
Allah, my religion is Islam, and my prophet is Muhammad." 7 The Prophet 
said, "Whenever a dead man is placed in his grave, two black angels with 
blue eyes come to him, one being called Munkar and the other Naklr" 8 and 
so on to the end of the tradition. The Prophet said, "The grave is either one 
of the meadows of the Garden or one of the pits of the Fires." 0 In general 
the traditions 10 which have come down on this subject and on many of the 
states of the next world are mutawatir in meaning, although the individual 
traditions taken separately do not attain the rank of tawatur. 

Some of the Mu'tazilites 11 and the Rawafid 12 denied the punishment of 
the grave because a dead man is a solid body (jamdd) devoid of life and 
comprehension, so punishing him is impossible. The answer to this is that it 
is possible for Allah to create in all or in some of the parts a kind of life such as 

4 For the story of the torture of Pharaoh and his people see al-Tabari, Annates, I, 481, 
al-Tha'labl, Qisas al-Anbiya' , pp. 171 ff,, as well as the commentaries on this text. 

8 See al-Bukhari, al-Sahih, I, 66; Muslim, al-$ahih, I, 127; A.J., p. 162; Wensinck, The 
Muslim Creed, p. 118. 

6 See also al-Baydawl, Anwar al-Tanzil, I, 491. 

7 See Musnad, III, 4; al-Nasa'I, Sunan (Cairo, a.h. 13 12), "Jana'iz," 114. 

8 See al-Tirmidhi, $ahih, "Jana'iz," 70; Wensinck, The Muslim Creed, pp. 164 f. 
0 This is given by al-Tirmidhi, $ahih, "Qiyama," 26. 

10 See Muslim, al-Sahih, II, 488 ff.; al-Bukharl, al-$ahih, I, 267 ff.; Kitab Ahwal al- 
Qiyama, ed. Wolff (Arabic), pp. 40 f., cf. al-Ghazzall, Ihya' (commentary of Sayyid Mur- 
tatfa), II, 216 ff. 

11 That is, most of the later Mu'tazilites; many of them, however, like Abu al-Hudhayl, 
Bishr b. al-Mu'ammar (//V), the Jubba'ites, and al-Ka'bl affirmed it according to al-Ash'arl, 
Maqalat, p. 430, and A.J., p. 162. Cf. 'I.D., p. 113. 

12 See four. Am. Or. Soc, XXIX, 137 ff.; al-Baghdadl, al-Varq hayn al-Firaq, p. 22 ff.; 
Hortcn, Die phil. Systeme der spel(. Theologen im Islam, see Index. 



ESCHATOLOGICAL REALITIES 101 

would be able to comprehend the pain of punishment or the enjoyment of 
bliss. This does not require that the spirit (al-ruh) be returned to the body 
nor that it move or be troubled or show any mark of punishment; for even 
the drowned man in water, or the one devoured [and] in the bellies of beasts, 
or the one [who hangs] crucified in the air is punished, although we do 
not see it. Whoever ponders the wonders of Allah in the kingdoms of 
this world (mul{) and of Heaven (mala\ui) and the marvels of His Power 
and His Might (jabarut) 18 will not consider such things improbable, let 
alone impossible. 

Know then that since the states (ahwal) of the grave are midway between 
this world and the next, al-Nasafl put this in a section apart and then went 
on to explain the Reality of the great Assembly {al-hashr) and the details 
connected with the matters of the next world. The proof of all these is 
that they are possible things about which the Veracious One has informed 
[us] and of which the Book and the Tradition speak, so they arc established 
facts. He explained the Reality of each of them for the sake of verifying 
them, for emphasizing them, and in order that their importance may be 
realized. 

[114] And the Quickening of the Dead (al-ba'th) /that is to say that Allah 
quickens the dead from the grave by gathering their original parts and re- 
storing their spirits to them. 

is a Reality/because of the statements of Allah, "Then on the Day of 
Resurrection (yawm al-qiyama) 14 you will be quickened" (Qu'ran 23:16), 
and, "Say, 'He who formed them at first will revive them' " (Qur'an 
36:79). And there are many other decisive statutes 16 which speak of the 
Day when the bodies will be assembled. 

The Philosophers denied the Quickening of the Dead on the basis that 
the restoration of the non-existent thing {al-mctdum) with its substance is 
impossible. Although there is no proof worthy of consideration for their 

13 For jabarut in contrast with mul\ and mala\ut see al'Ta'rifat, pp. 77, 246; Diet, of 
Tech. Terms, pp. 200, 1339; Erie, of Islam, I, 986 £.; Macdonald, in Jour, Am, Or, Soc,, 
XX, 116 ft 

14 There are about 70 verses in the Qur'an in which the expression "yawm al-qiyama" 
occurs. See Concordantiae Corani Arabicae, ed. Flugel, p. 159; Path al-Rahman, pp. 373 f. 
See also al-Razi, Muhassal {Ma'alim), pp. 128 ff.; al-Iji, al-Maw&qif, pp. 244 ff.; al- 
Shahrastani, Nihayatu 'l-lqddm, pp. 467 f. for al-bafth. 

15 See Muslim, al-Sahih, II, 487 f.; al-Bukhari, al^ahih, I, 206 ff., IV, 235 ff.; Goldsack, 
Selections, p. 269; Wcnsinck, Handbook, pp. 205 f.; Kitab Ahwtil al-Qiydma, pp. 49 ff. 



ESCHATOLOGICAL REALITIES 



statement it does not harm the purpose [of the Quickening], for our 
meaning is that Allah gathers the original parts of man and restores the 
spirit to him, whether or not that is called the restoring of the non- 
existent thing with its substance. In this way their supposition falls down, 
which is that if a man ate a man so that he became part of the one who ate 
him, then those parts must be restored in both of them, and that is im- 
possible; or in one of them only, and thus the other is not restored with all 
his parts. This [supposition falls down] because the restored parts are the 
original parts continuing from the earliest of one's life until its end; and the 
parts eaten are superfluous in the eater and not original. 16 

Someone may object that this statement admits that there is transmigra- 
tion (al-tanasu\h), 17 for the second body is not the first [n$\ because tradi- 
tion 18 relates of the people of the Garden that they are without hair on their 
bodies and beardless, and ornamented with kuhl; and that the molar 
tooth 10 of one of the people of jahannam (Hell) is like the mountain of 
Uhud. So from this it is seen that in every school of thought [the idea of] 
transmigration has a firm footing. But we reply that transmigration would 
only be necessary were the second body not a creation out of the original 
parts of the first body. If anything like that is called transmigration the dis- 
pute is only in the name; and there is no proof that it is impossible to re- 
store the spirit to such a body; but the proofs rest on the fact of its reality, 
whether or not this is called transmigration. 

the Weighing (al-wazn) 20 is a Reality /This is based on the statement of 
Allah, "The Weighing on that day is the Reality" (Qur'an 7:8). The Balance 
(al-mizdn) is the expression used for that by which the amounts of the 
deeds are known. Reason falls short of comprehending the manner in 
which the Balance works. The Mu'tazilites 21 deny the weighing because 
deeds are accidents and so, even if they were restored, they could not be 

16 Cf. al-Ijl, al'Mawdqif, pp. 249 ff., and al-Dasuql's supcrcommcntary on al-Sanusi, 
Vmm al-Bardhin, p. 220. 

17 Cf. Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 1380; al-Baghdadi, al-Farq bayn al-Firaq, pp. 253 
al-Razi, Muhassal, pp. 166 f.; Ibn Hazm, Kitdb al-Fisal, I, 90; Ibn SIna, al-Najdt, 
pp. 309 f. 

18 Al-Tirmidhi, Sahth, "Janna," 8 and 12. 

19 This is given by Afrmad (b. Hanbal) from Abu Hurayra. A.J,, p. 165. 

20 See Musnad, III, 178; Kitdb Ahwdl aUQiydma, pp. 81 f.; Goldsack, Selections, p. 271. 
Cf. Ihyd' (commentary of Sayyid Murtada), II, 218 If. 

21 Some of the Mu'tazilites like Abu '1-Hudhayl and Bishr b. al-Mu'tamir held it possi- 
ble (A.J., p. 165). Cf. al-Shahrastanl, al-Milal, p. 35. 



ESCHATOLOGICAL REALITIES 103 

weighed; and since they are known to Allah it is nonsense to weigh them. 
The answer to them is that it is the books of deeds that are weighed 22 ac- 
cording to what has come down in tradition, so there need be no difficulty. 
Since we admit that there are purposes in the acts caused by Allah, per- 
chance there is some wisdom in the Weighing which we do not discover, and 
just because we have not discovered the wisdom of it, it does not necessarily 
make it to be nonsense. 

the Book (al-\itdb) 23 /in which are established the acts of obedience and 
disobedience belonging to creatures. The Believers receive their books in 
their right hands and the Unbelievers [theirs] in their left hands and behind 
their backs. 

is a Reality/This is based on the saying of Allah, "We shall produce a book 
for him on the day of Resurrection, offered to him wide open" (Qur'an 
17:14), and His saying, "Whosoever is presented with his book in his right 
hand, will be easily accounted with" (Qur'an 84:7). The author did not 
mention the Accounting (al-hisab), 2 * considering [the mention] of the 
Book as sufficient. The Mu'tazilites denied the Book, asserting that it was 
nonsense. The answer to them has already been given. 

the Questioning (al-su'al) is a Reality/This is based on the saying of Allah, 
"We shall certainly question them all" (Qur'an 15:92). There is also the 
statement of the Prophet, 25 "Allah will bring the Believer near and He shall 
place over him His wing (\anaf) and cover him and then say, 'Dost thou 
know such and such a sin? Dost thou know such and such a sin?' Then he 
will answer, 'Yes, my Lord.' This goes on until He makes him confess his 
sins, and see himself lost; then Allah will say, 'I have veiled thy sins over 
thee in this world, and I will forgive them to thee this Day.' He will be 
given the Book of his good deeds. But the Unbelievers and the Hypocrites 

22 This is by means of al-bataqa, which is a paper on which is inscribed, "There is no 
god but Allah," which will outweigh the 99 scrolls recording the sins of a man. Lane, 
Lexicon, p. 218; Taj al-'Arus, VI, 296; A.J. (p. 165) says that the tradition concerning 
al-bataqa is given by al-Tirmidhi and al -Hakim. 

23 See Kitab Ahwal al-Qiyama, pp. 77 ff. 

24 Al-Bukharl, al-Sahth, IV, 238; Muslim, al-Sahih, II, 491 

25 This tradition is given by the Two Shaykhs from Ibn 'Umar, A.J., p. 165. A.J. ex- 
plains away any anthropomorphic interpretation that the saying might have. Cf. al-Bukhari, 
al~Sahth, III, 362, where it says that the Lord will uncover His leg and every Believer 
will prostrate himself before Him; also Kitab Ahwal al-Qiyama, pp. 79 f. 



io 4 ESCHATOLOGICAL REALITIES 

(al-mundfiqun) shall be proclaimed above the heads of all creatures, *These 
are they who denied their Lord, is not the curse [116] of Allah on all wrong- 
doers?* " (Qur'an 11:21). 

the Tank (al-hawd) 26 is a Reality/This is based on the saying of Allah, 
"Verily we have given thee al-\awthar" 27 X Qur'an 108:1), and also on the 
saying of the Prophet, "My tank is a month's journey long, and its corners 
arc symmetrical, its water is whiter than milk and more fragrant than musk, 
and its goblets outnumber the stars of the heavens. Whoever drinks from 
them never thirsts." There are numerous traditions about the Tank. 

and the Bridge (al-sirat) 28 is a Reality/It is a causeway stretched over the 
middle of hell (jahannam), finer than a hair, sharper than a sword, over 
which the people of the Garden will pass, while the feet of the people of the 
Fire will slip on it. Most of the Mu'tazilites deny it on the grounds that it is 
impossible to cross such a bridge and that were it possible it would be a punish- 
ment for the Believers. The answer is that Allah is Powerful to make 
possible the crossing of the Bridge. And He makes the way easy for the Be- 
lievers so that some go over as quickly as swift lightning and others as a 
gust of wind, while others go over like a steed, and so on according to the tra- 
ditions on this subject. 

the Garden (al-janna) is a Reality and the Fire (al-nar) 29 is a Reality/ 
for the verses (al-ayat) and the traditions (al-ahadith) which have come 
down regarding these two matters are too plain to be hidden and too many 

26 For traditions about al-hawd see al-Bukhari, al-Sahih, IV, 247; Muslim, al-$ahih, 
II, 283 ff.; Musnad, II, 134, 162 ff., V, 275 ff.; Wcnsinck, Handbook, P- 33; Goldsack, 
Selections, p. 272. Cf. al-Ghazzall, Ihyd' (commentary of Sayyid Murtatfa), II, 221. 

27 Among the delights to be enjoyed by the Faithful in the Gardens of Paradise is an 
abundance of milk, wine, and honey, as well as sweet-smelling water. The tradition of 
the Prophet describes the Tank and its contents. Many authorities differ from al-Taftazani 
and distinguish between the Tank and al-kawthar, which they say is a river in the 
Garden, A.J., p. 166; al-Fatfali, Kifayat al-Awamm, p. 75; al-Bayo'awI, Anwar al-Tanzil, 
II, 419; Wensinck, The Muslim Creed, pp. 231 f. See also Enc. of Islam, II, 834; Kitab 
Ahwal al-Qiyama, pp. 105 ff.; Ibn Hisham, Sirat Rasul Allah, p. 261; 'I.D., p. 116. 

28 For traditions about al-sirat see al-Bukhari, al-Sahih, IV, 238, 246; Musnad, II, 368 f.; 
Wensinck, Handbook, p. 40, The Muslim Creed, pp. 232 f.; Kitab Ahwal al-Qiyama, 
p. 82; cf. lhya' (commentary of Sayyid Murtada), II, 220. 

29 Al-janna, al-nar. There are many references to these in the Qur'an. See Concordantiae 
(Fliigel), pp. 45, 200. For references in tradition and description of them see also Muslim, 
al-Sahih, I, 90 ff., II, 464 ff.; Wensinck, Handbook, pp. 96, 180; Hughes, Diet, of Islam, 
pp. 170, 449; Kitab Ahwal al-Qiyama, pp. 86 ff.; al-Ijl, al-Mawaqif, pp. 2541.; al- 
RazI, Muhassal (Ma'alim), pp. 132 ff. The positions taken regarding the creation of the 
Garden and the Fire are discussed by Ibn Hazm, Kitab al-Fisal, IV, 81 f. 



ESCHATOLOGICAL REALITIES 105 

to be numbered. And those who deny the Garden maintain that since its 
breadth is described as being the breadth of the heavens and the earth it is 
therefore an impossibility in the world of elements, and in the world of 
spheres the insertion of one world into another or into another world out- 
side it necessitates the passing through an opening (al-kharq) and its join- 
ing together again {al-ilti' am) , and that [they say] is unsound. We reply, 
"This is based on the corrupt foundation of your position," and we have al- 
ready spoken of that in its proper place. 80 

and they both/that is, the Garden and the Fire 
are created/now 81 

existing/He said this for sake of repetition and emphasis. Most of the 
Mu'tazilites assert that they will only be created on the day of Recompense. 
To support our position there is the story of Adam and Eve and their being 
made to live in the Garden. 82 There are also the verses [117] which plainly 
show the preparation of the Garden and the Fire, such as, "prepared for the 
pious, prepared for the Unbelievers ,, (Qur'an 3:126, 127). [They are to be 
taken according to their evident meaning] since there is no necessity for 
deviating from what is the plain teaching [of the statutes]. But if this posi- 
tion is opposed by [the citation] of a statement of Allah such as, "This is the 
final abode we will prepare for those who do not desire an exalted place in 
the earth nor corruption" (Qur'an 28:83), we reply that it is possible for the 
tense of the verb to be present and continuous. If it were admitted [that the 
reference above is to other than the present continuous tense] the story 
of Adam remains unaffected by the one who opposes [this position]. They 
say that if the Garden and the Fire were in existence now, it would not be 
permissible to speak of the destruction (hala\) of the food of the Garden, be- 
cause of the statement of Allah, "Its food is everlasting (daim)" (Qur'an 
13:35). They also say that the necessary [conclusion in that case that its food 
be not destroyed] is unsound because of the statement of Allah, "Everything 
perishes except His face" (Qur'an 28:88). But we reply that it is clearly im- 
possible for the food of the Garden in its substance to last forever, but "ever- 
lasting" here means that if any of its food passes away something takes its 

80 See above, Chap. 3; A.J., p. 75; 'I.D., p. 47. 
31 A.J. makes "now" a part of al-Nasafi's text. 

82 See Qur. 2:33. 7:18; al-BaytfawI, Anwar d-Tanzil, I, 52; al-Tha'labi, Qijaf d- 
Anbiya', pp. 26 f.; al-Tabari, Anndes, I, 115 ff. 



io6 ESCHATOLOGICAL REALITIES 



place. This is not inconsistent with the destruction momentarily of some 
of it, although destruction does not require passing away (al-fana'), but 
merely passing beyond the limit of its being used. Even were it admitted 
[that everything actually perishes except the face of Allah] it is per- 
missible that the meaning is "every possible thing," for it perishes within 
the limit of its essence. This means that possible existence when considered 
from the standpoint of necessary existence ranks as non-existence. 

and continuing: they shall not pass away, nor shall their inhabitants pass 
away (yafna) /That is to say, everlasting; no perpetual non-existence befalls 
them, because of the statement of Allah in regard to both parties [that is, 
those of the Garden and those of the Fire], "They abide forever in it" 
(Qur'an 4:60, 121, 167). But as for what has been said about the Garden 
and the Fire being destroyed even though for a moment in order to verify 
the statement of Allah that "Everything perishes except His face" (Qur'an 
28:88): this meaning is not inconsistent with their abiding. You well know 
that there is nothing in the verse to indicate passing away. 

The JahmTya 38 took the position that both the Garden and the Fire and 
their inhabitants with them pass away. This is without doubt an unsound 
position contrary to the Book, the Sunna, and the Agreement. Beyond the 
fact that this is an argument [it is of no consequence]. 

33 These were the followers of Jahm b. §afwan (d. a.h. 128), who was a Persian rebel 
against the Arab rule. He held that belief is an affair of the heart and denied all anthropo- 
morphic attributes of Allah and the eternity of the Fire and the Garden. Macdonald, De- 
velopment, pp. 126, 138, 146; al-Shahrastani, al-Milal, pp. 60 f.; al-Baghdadi, al-Farq 
bayn al-Firaq, pp. 199 f.; Wensinck, The Muslim Creed, p. 119. 



Qhapter 12 



SINS 

A 

JL JL great sin does not remove from Belief the creature who believes, nor 
does it lead him into Unbelief. Allah does not forgive the one who joins 
another with Himself, but He pardons whomsoever He wills any sin, 
whether great or small, except this. 

The punishment of a small sin is permissible, and also the pardon of a 
great sin, if it is not of the nature of considering lawful what is forbidden; 
for that is Unbelief. The intercession of the Messengers is established by 
narratives in the case of those who commit great sins. 

And those of the Believers who commit great sins do not remain forever 
in the Fire. 

A great sin (al-kabira) 1 /The traditions differ about this term. It is related 
by Ibn 'Umar — Allah be well pleased with both father and son — that the 
great sins are said to be nine; namely, polytheism (al-shir\ bi 'Hah), unlaw- 
ful manslaughter, slandering a chaste woman by a charge of adultery, adul- 
tery, fleeing from war against Unbelievers, magic, devouring the property of 
an orphan, disobedience to Muslim parents, and contravening the ordinances 
concerning the sacred territory {aUilhdd fYl-haram). Abu Hurayra added to 
these usury, and 'All added stealing and wine drinking. A great sin has been 
said to mean anything the corruption of which is like the corruption of the 
things already mentioned or more than it; or it is that concerning which the 
Law 2 threatens a punishment; also, every disobedience in which the crea- 
ture persists is a great sin, and everything for which he asks pardon 

1 For other statements of the Muslim doctrine of sin see Enc. of Islam, II, 925 ff.; Enc. 
of Religion and Ethics, XI, 567 ff.; al-Ash'ari, Maqalat, p. 475. The number of great sins 
differed in tradition. See al-Bukharl, al-Sahih, II, 151 and 193, IV, 269, 313-14; Muslim, 
al-Sahih, I, 49; al-BaydawI, Anwar al-Tanzil, I, 206; Wensinck, Handbook, p. 215; al- 
Rawda al-Bahiya, p. 60. 

2 A.J. (p. 168) reads al-Shari', the Lawgiver. 



108 SINS 

is a small sin (saghtra). The author of al-Kijaya 8 said that in reality [118] 
the two are relative terms, which cannot be defined separately. Thus every 
disobedience, if it is compared to that which ranks above it, is small; and 
if to that which is below it, is great. 4 The absolutely great sin is Unbelief, 
since there is no offence greater than it. In general the meaning of "great 
sin" here includes other things besides Unbelief. 

does not remove from Belief the creature who believes/because assent, which 
is the real essence of Belief, continues. 5 This is unlike the position of the 
Mu'tazilites in that they assert that whoever commits a great sin is neither 
a Believer nor an Unbeliever. This is the rank which they make between 
the two ranks [that of the Believer and that of the Unbeliever J on the 
basis, according to them, that works are a part of the real essence of Belief. 

nor does it lead him/that is, the creature who believes 

into Unbelief /This is unlike the Kharijites, for they took the position 
that one who commits a great sin or even a small sin is an Unbeliever and 
that there is no middle position between Belief and Unbelief. 

We have some points to stress. The first, the statement of which comes 
later, is that the real essence of Belief is the assent of the heart {al-tasdtq 
al-qalbt). So then the Believer is not removed from being described by 
Belief through doing that which is inconsistent with it. And merely per- 
severing in a great sin because appetite, or an outburst of anger, or indigna- 
tion, or even laziness got the better of him is not inconsistent with Belief 
whenever it is joined with the fear of punishment, the hope of forgiveness, 
and the resolution to repent. But whenever it is by way of making lawful 
the unlawful (al-istihldl) or making light of it, it is Unbelief because it is a 
sign of denial (al-ta\dhib) . There is no doubt that the Lawgiver made some 
disobedient acts an indication of denial. This is known from proofs based 
on the Law, as seen in such acts as prostration to an idol, throwing the 
Sacred Volume (al-mushaf) amidst filthy things, uttering words of Unbe- 
lief, and other things which are established by proofs to be Unbelief. And in 
this there is the solution of what has been stated, in that if Belief is an ex- 

8 The author was Abu Bakr Ahmad b. 'AH b. Thabit al-Khatlb al Baghdad!, (a.h. 392- 
463; a.d. 1002-1071). See Brockelmann, Geschichte, I, 329. 

4 Al-Ghazzall {lhyd' t VI, 511) said that persistence in a small sin becomes a great sin, 
and that even the continuance of some thing permissible might become a small sin. 

5 Cf. al-ftazi, Muhasfal, p. 174; al-Ijl, aUMawaqif, pp. 264 f. 



SINS 109 

pression for assent and confession, the one who assents and confesses does 
not become an Unbeliever by committing any of the acts or utterances of 
Unbelief so long as denial or doubt on his part is not established. 

The second point is that the verses and the traditions apply the term 
"Believer" to the disobedient, as seen in the sayings of Allah. "O ye who 
believe, retaliation for the slain is prescribed for you" (Qur'an 2:173). "O ye 
who believe, turn to Allah in sincere repentence" (Qur'an 66:8). "If two 
parties of the Believers are carrying on warfare against one another, etc." 
(Qur'an 49:9). The verses on this subject are many. 

The third point is the Agreement of the Muslim people {al-umma) from 
the time of the Prophet till now that worship (al-sala) be performed over 
any one of the People of the qibla [worshiping in the direction of Mecca J 
who dies unrepentant. And prayer (al-du'a) for them and petition for 
their forgiveness are made with full knowledge of their having committed 
great sins; although it is understood that this is not permissible in the case 
of one who is not a Believer. 

The Mu'tazilites objected on two grounds. The first was that the Muslim 
people, after agreeing that he who has committed a great sin is an evil-doer 
(fdsiq), differed as to whether he is a Believer, which is the position of 
the people of the Approved Way and the Community; or an Unbeliever, 
which is the position of the Kharijites; or a hypocrite (mundfiq), which is 
the position of al-Hasan al-Basri. Therefore [say the Mu'tazilites] we hold 
to the point upon which there is agreement and forego the point in dispute, 
saying that he is an evil-doer, neither a Believer, nor an Unbeliever, nor a 
hypocrite. The answer to them is that this position is [only] saying anew that 
which contradicts the position on which the Fathers agreed, namely that 
there is no [middle] rank between the two ranks; so it is unsound. 

The second [of the Mu tazilite objections] is that he [who commits a 
great sin] is not a Believer. They based this on the statement of Allah, "Was 
the Believer like the evil-doer?" (Quran 32:18) — where the Believer is 
contrasted with the evil-doer; and on the statement of the Prophet, "The 
adulterer, when he commits adultery does not commit adultery being a 
Believer," 6 and also his statement, "He who is devoid of trustworthiness 
(amdna) is devoid of Belief (iman)." 7 They also say that anyone who com- 

6 This tradition is capable of an antinomian interpretation, especially in the light of the 
tradition of the Prophet's statement to Abu Dharr which comes later. Sayyid Murtao'a on al- 
Ghazzall, Ihyd', II, 254 fT., interprets it to mean that one who commits such a deed could 
not be a Believer. Cf. Ibn Khaldun, Muqaddima, III, 34. 

7 Musnad, III, 135. 



no 



SINS 



mits a great sin is not an Unbeliever, because of the mutawatir tradition that 
the Muslim people did not kill him, nor did they carry out the judgments in 
his case regarding apostates, but they buried him in a Muslim cemetery. The 
answer to this is that the meaning of "evil-doer" in the verse referred to 
(Qur'an 32:18) is "Unbeliever" since Unbelief is one of the greatest of evil 
deeds. [119] The tradition that has been handed down in this connection is 
stated in strong and emphatic language in order to counsel strongly against 
disobedience. This is by way of proof from the verses and traditions which 
indicate that the evil-doer is a Believer inasmuch as the Prophet said so to 
Abu Dharr 8 to his great humiliation 9 when he asked repeatedly in this 
connection, "And if he commits adultery and steals?" 

But the Kharijites objected, citing the statutes which clearly say that the 
evil-doer is an Unbeliever, such as, "And those who do not judge according 
to what Allah has sent down, those are the Unbelievers" (Qur'an 5:48), and 
the verse, "And those who become Unbelievers after that, those are the 
evil-doers" (Qur'an 24:54). They cited also the statement of the Prophet, 
"Whoever forsakes worship intentionally has become an Unbeliever." They 
also cite statutes which say that punishment applies to the Unbeliever such 
as the statements of Allah, "Punishment is for him who denied and turned his 
back" (Qur'an 20:50), and, "None shall burn in it except the most wretched, 
who denied and turned his back" (Qur'an 92:15-16), and, "Verily this day 
shame and evil shall be on the Unbelievers" (Qur'an 16:29). And there are 
other verses. The answer [to the Kharijites] is that [120] the literal meaning 
is set aside by the statutes, which [definitely] say 10 that he who commits 
a great sin is not an Unbeliever, and by the settled Agreement which is 
according to what has already been said. The Kharijites are secessionists from 
the settled position of Agreement, and therefore no recognition is to be made 
of them. 

Allah does not forgive the one who joins another with Himself/This is by 
the Agreement of [all] Muslims. However, they disagreed as to whether 
or not forgiveness of ishra\ [that is, the joining of another to Him] is per- 
missible on the basis of Reason. Some took the position that it is permissible 
on the basis of Reason, but from authoritative proof it is known not to be 
permissible; while some took the position that it is impossible on the basis 

8 Musnad, V, 159. 

9 Raghima 'l-anfu literally means "The nose touched the dust." See Lane, Lexicon, 
p. 1 1 13; Taj-al-Ariis, VIII, 314; Lisdn al-'Arab, XV, 137; A. J., p. 170; 'I.D. and al-Khayall, 
p. 119. 

10 A.J. (p. 171) reads al-zawahir (plur.) for al-zdhir (sing.), "literal"; and al-qdti'a, 
"decisive," for al-ndtiqa. 



SINS in 

of Reason since wisdom demands a distinction between the doer of wicked- 
ness and the doer of good. Since Unbelief is the extreme offense, it is im- 
possible to permit the forgiveness of ishra\ or to lift the ban from it at all, so 
it does not admit of being pardoned and cleared of the damage done. The 
Unbeliever also has the conviction that this is a Reality and does not seek 
pardon and forgiveness; so it is unwise to pardon him. Also this is a con- 
viction which, in contrast with the rest of the offenses, has to do with 
eternity (al-abad) so it demands a recompense that shall be to eternity. 

but He pardons whomsoever He wills any sin, whether great or small, ex- 
cept this/ whether accompanied by repentance or not. This is unlike the posi- 
tion of the Mu'tazilites. In the statement of this judgment consideration 
is to be given to that type of verse which indicates that this has been 
established. The verses and traditions giving this meaning arc many. The 
Mu'tazilites applied these especially to small sins and to great sins accom- 
panied by repentance. They held firmly to two points. First there are the 
verses and traditions which have come down regarding [121] the threatening 
of the disobedient. And the reply [to the Mu'tazilites] is that these verses 
and traditions, on the supposition that they have a general application, indi- 
cate only that forgiveness may take place rather than that it necessarily docs. 
Since there are many statutes that have to do with pardon, there is specified 
the sinner who is forgiven in general terms, the being threatened [with 
punishment]. 

Some 11 assert that the non-fulfillment of a threat is a favor permissible 
to Allah. However, the Verifiers, who hold to the opposite of this, say, 
"How is this possible since it is a changing (tabdlt) of Allah's word, and 
Allah has said, 'The word which comes from me changes not'?" (Qur'an 
50:28). 

In the second place the Mu'tazilites say that should the sinner know that he 
was not to be punished for his sin, that would only establish him in his 
sin and incite others to sin. This is inconsistent with the wisdom of [Allah 
in] sending Messengers. The answer to this is that the mere possibility of 
pardon does confirm the opinion [of some] that there is no punishment at 
all in addition to the [fact that we have] knowledge [that there is]. How 
[do they say this] when being threatened [with punishment] in general is 
accompanied by the declaration that punishment will very probably occur 
when related to each individual case? For this reason, the author con- 
sidered it sufficient to give warning. 

11 The Ash'arites. See I.D., p. 121; A.J., p. 172. 



ii2 SINS 

The punishment of a small sin is permissible/whether or not the one who 
committed it avoided a great sin, because it comes under the category of the 
statement of Allah, "And He forgives less than this to whomsoever He 
wills" (Qur an 4:51, 116), and, "He does not pass by a small sin nor a great 
one without counting them" (Qur'an 18:47). And counting is only by 
way of questioning and of giving recompense. There are other statements 
[in proof of this] in the verses and the traditions. Some of the Mu'tazilites 
took the position that if one avoided great sins it is not permissible to punish 
him. This does not mean that it is impossible on the basis of Reason, but that 
it is not permissible for it to happen, since in proofs based on authority 
there is ground to believe that it does not happen. There is the statement of 
Allah for this, "If ye avoid great sins (\abair) which are forbidden you, we 
shall blot out your faults" (Qur'an 4:35). Answer is made that the great sin 
which is absolute is Unbelief because it is the perfect sin. The noun is plural 
[kaba'ir, in the verse above] because of the different kinds of Unbelief, 
[122] even though all are of one degree from the standpoint of judgment; 
or the statement is of individual sins subsisting in the individuals addressed. 
This is according to what has been fixed by the rule that putting a plural 
alongside a plural demands the separation of the units into units, just as we 
say, "The people (al-qawm) rode their beasts and wore their clothes." 

and also the pardon (al-afu/) of a great sin/He has already mentioned 
this but he repeated it that it might be understood that the neglect to punish 
sin may be termed "pardon" just as it may be termed "forgiveness" (al- 
maghfira), and that the following statement might be connected to it. 

if it is not of the nature of considering lawful what is forbidden; for diat is 
Unbelief/since in it there is a denial that is inconsistent with assent. In this 
way are interpreted the statutes which indicate that the disobedient are made 
to remain forever in the Fire and that they are deprived of the term "Be- 
lief." 

The intercession 12 of the Messengers is established by narratives 13 in the 

12 Cf. al-RazI, Muhassal {Ma'dlim), pp. 143 f.; al-Shahrastani, Nihdyatu 'Mqddtn, 
pp. 470 f.; Ibn Hazm, Kitdb d-Fisal, IV, 63 ff.; al-Ash'ari, Maqdldt, p. 474; Wensinck, 
The Muslim Creed, pp. 180 if. 

13 A.J. (p. 173), al-Kastall (p. 148) and the Cureton text (p. 3) read wa UUa\hydr, 
"and of the excellent," which suggests the position of the Shi'ites, namely, that others than 
Messengers have the power of Intercession. See al-Bdbu 'l-Hddi ' Ashar, p. 88. 



SINS 113 

case of those who commit great sins/by the narratives widely spread abroad 14 
(al-mustafid). 16 This is unlike the position of the Mu'tazilites. It rests on 
what has already been stated, namely, that pardon and forgiveness arc per- 
missible without intercession, so how much more permissible they would 
be with it! But the Mu'tazilites held that when pardon is not permissible, 
neither is intercession. We have on this the statements of Allah, "Ask pardon 
for thy sin and for the Believers, both men and women" (Qur'an 47:21), and, 
"Then the intercession of the intercessors will not avail them" (Qur'an 
74:49). This kind of statement indicates that intercession is established in 
general; otherwise there would be no meaning in denying the value in it for 
Unbelievers, when the purpose is to render vile their state and to verify as 
certain their misfortune; for in such a position there is a demand that they 
[who are Unbelievers] be stamped in some particular way rather than by 
something that is a general characteristic of them and others as well. This 
does not mean that connecting the judgment [regarding intercession for 
those who commit great sins] with the Unbeliever indicates that it is not 
connected with anyone else, so that answer might be made that this is 
raising an argument only against the one who takes the sense to be that 
Allah does not carry out His threat. There is also [as a proof of interces- 
sion for Muslims who have committed great sins] the statement of the 
Prophet, "My intercession is for those of my people who have committed 
great sins." 16 This tradition is well known (mashhur); moreover, there are 
traditions which are mutawatir as to meaning on the subject of inter- 
cession. 

The Mu'tazilites objected [to this conception of intercession], quoting 
such statements of Allah as, "Dread the day [/2_j] when in nothing a soul 
shall render satisfaction for a soul, nor shall any intercession be received 
for it" (Qur'an 2:45), and, "The wicked shall have no friend nor inter- 
cessor who shall be obeyed" (Qur'an 40:19). The answer [to their position] 
is that although we admit that these verses apply in general to persons, 
times and states, yet there must be a special application to Unbelievers here 
to make the proofs consistent {jam' an bayn al-adilla). And when the 
foundation for pardon and intercession became established in Islam by de- 

14 The Cureton text makes this a part of al-Nasafl's text whereas A.J. and 'I.D. make 
it a part of Taftazani's commentary. Al-Kastall follows the Cureton text, but reads 
ahhyar again for akjkbar. 

16 Mustajida is the equivalent of mashhur, see Guillaume, The Traditions of Islam, 
p. 182; Notices et extraits, XX, 1, 484. 

16 Abu Da'ud, Sunan, "Kitab al-Sunna," b. 20; al-Tirmidhl, Sahih, "§ifat al-Qiyama," 
b. 11. 



ii4 SINS 

cisive proofs from the Book, the Surma, and Agreement, the Mu'tazilites 
claimed that the small sins were pardoned absolutely and the great sins by 
repentance and through intercession to augment the reward [of Believers]. 
Both of these claims are unsound. The first is unsound, because neither he 
who is repentant nor he who has committed a small sin and abstained from 
a great sin deserves punishment according to them, so pardon means noth- 
ing. The statutes indicate in the second place that intercession has the 
meaning of asking pardon for an offense. 

And those of the Believers who commit great sins do not remain forever in 
the Fire/although they die without repentance, by reason of the statement of 
Allah, "Whoever has done an atom's worth of good shall behold it" (Qur'an 
99:8). And Belief itself is a good work, so it is impossible for the Believer to 
behold the reward of it before entering the Fire and then to enter the Fire 
to remain there forever. That is unsound by Agreement, so al-Nasafi speci- 
fied the exit from the Fire. There are also other statements of Allah in sup- 
port of this. "Allah promised to the Believers, both men and women, Gar- 
dens beneath which the rivers flow" (Quran 9:73). "Verily those who be- 
lieve and do good works [124] have the gardens of Paradise {al-firdaws) 
for a resting place" (Quran 18:107). Similar statutes indicate that the Be- 
liever 17 is of the people of the Garden, as well as other things which have 
already been stated, such as that the creature is not removed from Belief 
because of disobedience and that remaining forever in the Fire is the severest 
of punishments. Since the Fire has been made the recompense for Unbelief, 
which is the greatest of offenses, were others than the Unbeliever so recom- 
pensed [and remain forever in the Fire] that would be more than their 
offense deserves and therefore an injustice to them. 

The Mu'tazilites took the position that the one who is consigned to the 
Fire remains in it forever, for he is either an Unbeliever or the unrepentant 
one who has committed a great sin; since from what we have seen of their 
principles the person preserved from error (al-tna'sum), the repentant one, 
and the one who commits a small sin — if he has avoided great sins — are not 
of the people of the Fire. The Unbeliever remains forever in the Fire on the 
basis of Agreement and so also [they say] does the unrepentant who com- 
mits a great sin, for two reasons. The first is that he deserves such punish- 
ment as a genuine everlasting injury to him, and this punishment is incon- 
sistent with his deserving a reward, which is a genuine, everlasting benefit. 

1T A.J., p. 175, reads "Believers." 



SINS us 

The answer to this is to preclude the restriction of the meaning of "ever- 
lasting," yea rather to preclude the meaning of "deserves" [such punish- 
ment] since what they mean to say is that there "necessarily follows" [such 
punishment]. But reward is only an act of grace from Allah, and punish- 
ment an act of justice; if He wills He pardons, and if He wills He punishes 
for a time and then causes him to enter the Garden. The second reason 
[for the unrepentant who has committed a great sin remaining in the Fire] 
is that there are the statutes which indicate that he remains forever in the 
Fire, like the statements of Allah, "Whoever kills a Believer purposely, his 
reward is Jahannam; forever he remains in it" (Qur'an 4:95), and, "Whoever 
disobeys Allah and His Messenger and transgresses His restrictive ordinances, 
him He makes enter the Fire; forever he remains in it" (Qur'an 4:18), and, 
"Whoever acquires an evil, and he whose sin environs him — those are the 
dwellers of the Fire; forever they remain in it" (Qur'an 2:75). And the 
answer [to the Mu'tazilites] is that the one who kills a Believer because he is 
a Believer can only be an Unbeliever, and so also is anyone who transgresses 
all the restrictive ordinances and so also the one whom sin environs and 
surrounds from every side. Even were the Mu'tazilite position to be ad- 
mitted, the term "abiding forever" is sometimes used to express an extended 
period, just as they say "perpetual imprisonment." Also were their position 
admitted [as a rational one] it nevertheless opposes the statutes, which in- 
dicate that abiding is not forever as already stated. 



Chapter 13 



BELIEF 



I Jrtirf is assent to that which he brought from Allah and confession of it. 
As for works, they increase in and of themselves, but Belief neither increases 
nor decreases. 

And Belief and Islam are one. And whenever assent and confession are 
found in the creature, it is right for him to say, "I am a Believer in reality," 
and it is not fitting that he should say, "I am a Believer, if Allah wills." 

The happy one sometimes becomes miserable and the miserable one some- 
times becomes happy; and the changing is in happiness and misery, not in 
making happy and making miserable, for these are both attributes of Allah 
and there is no alteration in Allah and His attributes. 

Belief (al~imdn) 1 /linguistically is assent (al-tasdiq) [725], that is to say, 
acknowledging {al-idh'an) the judgment of a narrator, accepting it, and 
considering it to be veracious. Iman is the noun on the measure of ifal from 
ahamn (safety, security) as though the real meaning of "he believed in 
him" were "he rendered him secure from denial and disagreement." The 
verb takes its object 2 with the preposition // as when Allah relates, 3 "And 
thou art not a Believer on us?" (Qur'an 12:17). This means "one who 
assents." Or it takes its object with the preposition bi as in the statement of the 
Prophet, "Belief means that thou believe in Allah, etc.," that is, "that thou 
assent to." 

The real essence of assent does not bear the relation to the heart 4 that 

1 Cf . Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 94; al-Shahrastanl, Nihdyatu 'l-lqddm, pp. 470 ff.; Ibn 
Hazm, Kitdb al-Fisal, III, 188 ff.; al-Sanusi, Utnm al-Bardhtn, p. 226; al-Fadali, Kifdyat 
al'Aw&tntn, p. 77; al-Rawda al-Bahiya, p. 24; al-BaydawI, Anwar al-Tanzil, I, 15; al- 
Razi, Mafdtth, I, 172 f.; Wcnsinck, The Muslim Creed, pp. 22 ff., 131 ff. 

2 Sec Taj al-Arus, IX, 125. 

8 The text of A.J. (p. 176) adds, "of the brothers of Joseph (Yusuf)." 
4 Cf. Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 1170 ff.; Macdonald, Rel. Att. and Life, pp. 221 ff.; al- 
GhazzaK, Ihya", VII, 201 ff. 



BELIEF ii 7 

veracity docs to the narrative or to the narrator without any acknowledg- 
ment or acceptance [of the object], but it is an acknowledgment and an 
acceptance of that, so that the term "surrender" (al-taslim) may be applied 
to it as the Imam al-Ghazzali 5 explained. And in general it has the meaning 
which is expressed in Persian by the term girawidan. 6 It has the meaning 
of assertion (al-tasdtq) as contrasted with conception, just as is said in the 
first principles of the science of logic (al-rriizari)? "knowledge is either con- 
ception (tasau/wur) or assertion (tasdiq). 8 The leader of the logicians, 
Ibn Slna, 9 made this clear. For though this meaning [of assertion] were 
applied to some Unbelievers, 10 the term "Unbeliever" would be used with the 
idea that the person has some signs of denial and rejection. It is just as 
though we should suppose that someone assented to all that the Prophet 
brought and confessed it and practised it and yet girded himself with 1 126] 
the zunnar 11 by choice or bowed to an idol by choice; we should consider 
him an Unbeliever because the Prophet made such things a sign of denial 
and rejection. 

The verifying of this position according to what I have mentioned simpli- 
fies for you the explanation of many of the difficulties which have come 
down regarding the question of Belief. If you would know the real essence 
of the idea of assent, then know that Belief according to the Law 

is assent to that which he 12 brought from Allah/that is, assent in general to 
the Prophet with the heart regarding all that his coming from Allah made 
known; and that it is sufficient to bring one out 13 into the category of Belief. 
The degree of this kind of Belief is no lower than that of detailed Belief. 
The Polytheist (al-mus/iri^) who asserts the existence of the Maker and His 
attributes is only a Believer according to the uses of language, but not ac- 

5 See al-Ghazzali's Ihyd', II, 240. 

0 Girawidan, "to follow, admire, adore, believe, confide in" from the root giratv mean- 
ing "to wager, pawn, contract." Steingass, Persian -English Dictionary (London, 1930), 
p. 1085. 

7 See Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 33. 

*Cf. al-Ghazzall, Maqasid al-Faldsifa, I, 4 ff.; Ibn Slna, al-Najdt, pp. 3 ff.; al-Risdla 
al-Shamsiya, p. 1. 

9 Ibn Slna, al-Najdt, pp. 3 ff . 

10 Cf. Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 1251 f. for a full statement of the definitions of kafir. 

11 Zunnar. This is the belt worn by one who pays the jizya, to distinguish him from 
Believers, in order that the honors due to Muslims only should not be paid to him. See 
Lane, Lexicon, p. 1258; Enc. of Islam, IV, 1241 f.; Dozy, Dictionnaire des noms des 
vctements chez les Arabes, pp. 1 96 ff . 

12 The text in A.J. (p. 178) inserts "the Prophets." 

13 See Heinrich L. Fleischer, Kleinere Schriften (Leipzig, 1885-88), II, 649 f. 



n8 BELIEF 

cording to the Law, because he falls short of monotheism. Allah alludes to 
such a one in the statement, "And most of them do not believe in Allah, 
without being polytheists as well" (Qur'an 12:106). 

and confession of it/that is, by the tongue. It is not permissible at all for 
one to fall short in the matter of assent, whereas it is permissible for one not 
to confess as when under compulsion. And if objection is made that assent 
may not [always] continue as [when one is] in sleep or in a state of un- 
mindfulness, we reply that assent continues in the heart, the neglect [of 
Belief] only being a neglect of realizing it. Even were we to admit the ob- 
jection [that assent does not always continue], the Lawgiver considers 
that the kind of Belief which has been verified is that against which there 
has not occurred any judgment to the contrary, so that the word "Be- 
liever" is applied to the one who believed in the past or present and in whom 
there appeared no sign of denial. 

This position that al-Nasafl mentioned, namely, that Belief is assent and 
confession, is the position of some of the Learned 14 (al-ulama) and it was 
also chosen by al-Imam Shams al-A'imma 15 and Fakhr al-Islam 16 — Allah 
have mercy on them both. The Multitude (al-jumhur) of the Verifiers took 
the position that assent is by the heart but that confession is the condition 
on which judgments [as to whether one is a Believer or not] are passed in this 
world (al-dunya), because, since assent is by the heart, it is a hidden thing 
which must have a sign. So then whoever assents with his heart and does 
not confess with his tongue is yet a Believer with Allah, even though he is not 
according to the judgments of this world; but whoever confesses with his 
tongue and does not assent with his heart like the hypocrite is just the op- 
posite. This is the position chosen by Abu Mansur [al-Maturldl]. 

The statutes support this position, for Allah said, [127] "On the hearts of 
those He has written Belief" (Qur'an 58:22), and, "His heart being tranquil 
in Belief" (Qur'an 16:108), and, "Belief has not yet entered your hearts" 

14 This is the position of Abu Hanlfa, A.J., p. 179. 

18 The reference is probably to Shams al-A'imma Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Ahmad b. 
Abl Sahl al-Sarakhsl, or Shams al-A'imma Abu Muhammad 'Abd-al-'AzIz b. Ahmad al- 
Halwanl, both of whom lived in the fifth century of the Hijra and wrote extensively on 
Fiqh from the Hanafite standpoint. See Haji Khalfa, Lexicon, cd. Fluegel (London, 1858), 
VII, 1 213; Brockclmann, Gcschichte, I, 373. 

16 This must be either Fakhr al-Islam Abu '1-Hasan 'AH b. Muhammad al-PazdawI 
(d. a.h, 482), who was a Hanafite writer on jurisprudence, or Fakhr al-Islam Abu Bakr 
Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Qaftal (d. a.h. 507) who was a Shafi'ite. See references in Haji 
Khalfa, Lexicon, VII, 1071 and Brockclmann, Geschichte, I, 373. 



BELIEF 119 

(Quran 49:14). The Prophet said, "Establish, O Allah, my heart in Thy 
religion and obedience to Thee." 17 He said to Usama, 18 when Usama had 
killed one who said that there is no deity but Allah, "Didst thou not cleave 
his heart?" 10 

And if you say that Belief is assent, yet the lexicographers know only as- 
sent by the tongue, and the Prophet and his Companions were content 
to have Believers utter the words of the Witnessing Formula (al-shahada) 
and judged one a Believer without asking for an explanation of what was 
in his heart; I answer that it is clear that what we express by assent is the 
work of the heart, so even if we should suppose that assent did not have 
this conventional usage, or had a usage other than the assent of the heart, 
none of the lexicographers and the people who know common usage would 
rule that whoever uttered the words, "I assented [to him]" was [of neces- 
sity] one who assents to the Prophet and believes in him. Therefore it is 
quite sound to deny Belief in the case of some who confess with the tongue. 
Allah said, "Some people say, 'We believe in Allah and the last day,* but 
they are not Believers" (Qur'an 2:7), and, "The desert Arabs say, 'We have 
believed/ Say thou, 'Ye have not believed, but rather say, We have become 
Muslims' " (Qur'an 49:14). 

But as for one who confesses with his tongue only, there is no dispute 
about his being called a Believer from the standpoint of the language, nor 
about the application to him in outward matters of the laws dealing with 
Belief. But the dispute is whether he is a Believer when it is a matter between 
him and Allah. The Prophet and those who came after him, just as they ruled 
that one was a Believer who uttered the Witnessing Formula, also ruled 
that a hypocrite was an Unbeliever. Thus the Prophet indicated that the 
action of the tongue is not sufficient for Belief. Also the Agreement of the 
Muslim community confirms the Belief of him who assented [128] with his 
heart and purposed to confess with his tongue, but something like dumbness 
prevented him. 

It is evident that the real essence of Belief is not merely the two words of 
the Witnessing Formula as the Karramites asserted. And since the Multi- 
tude of the Mutakallims and the Traditionalists (al-muhaddithun) and the 
Canon Lawyers (al-fuqaha) take the position that Belief is the assent of the 

17 Al-TirmidhI, Sahih, "Qadar," b. 7; Musnad, III, 112, 257, VI, 251, 294, etc. 

18 See Ibn Qutayba, Kitab al-Ma'arif, p. 71; Ibn Ha jar, A Biographical Dictionary of 
Persons Who Knew Muhammad, I, 55; Wensinck, Handbook, p. 239. 

19 See Musnad, V, 207, and also Wensinck, The Muslim Creed, pp. 29 f. 



120 



BELIEF 



inner heart (al-jandn), confession by the tongue and the performance of the 
pillars {aUar\an) of Islam, the author alludes to the denial of this by say- 
ing, 

As for works 20 /that is, the obedient acts 

they increase in and of themselves, but Belief 21 neither increases nor de- 
creases 22 /Here then are two matters [for consideration J. 

The first is that works do not enter into Belief, since we have already seen 
that the real essence of Belief is assent and because of certain things that 
have come down to us in the Book and the Sunna. (a) In the first place 
works are coupled with Belief as in the saying of Allah, "Verily those who 
believe and do good deeds" 23 (Qur'an 2:23, 277, etc.), and yet it is quite 
certain that the conjunction of the two together demands a distinction be- 
tween them so that the thing joined on does not enter into that to which it is 
joined, (b) Secondly, Belief was made a condition of the soundness of 
works as in the statement of Allah, "Whoever does good deeds, whether a 
male or a female, being a Believer" (Qur'an 4:123), and yet it is quite 
certain that the thing conditioned does not enter into the condition, since 
it is impossible to condition a thing on itself, (c) Thirdly, Belief is affirmed 
of one who even neglects some of the [required] works as in the saying 
of Allah, "If two factions of Believers are at war" (Qur'an 49:9). And yet 
as has already been said it is quite certain there is no real verification of a 
thing without that which is its fundamental element. It is clear then that 
these points only raise an argument against the one who makes obedience 
a fundamental element of the real essence of Belief, so that, as the Mu'tazilites 
held, he who omits works is not a Believer. But it is not an argument against 
those who hold that works are a fundamental element of perfect Belief, so 
that he who omits them is not outside the real meaning of Belief, as the 
school of al-ShafVl 24 holds. And the tenets of the Mu'tazilites and the re- 

20 Curcton (p. 3) adds in the text of al-Nasafi "and they are obedient acts." 

21 The text of A.J. (p. 181) inserts, as from al-Taftazanl, "in itself." 

22 See al-Razi, Muhassal, p. 175 f.; al-fjl, al-Mawdqif, p. 282 f.; al-Ghazzall, lliyd' (com- 
mentary of Sayyid Murtada), II, 256 flf. 

23 This expression occurs about sixty times in the Qur'an, see Concordantiae , pp. 17, 
no; Fath aURahmdn, p. 258. 

24 Al-ShafVl, the founder of one of the four Sunnite schools of jurisprudence, is re- 
membered especially for the emphasis he placed on Ijmd' (Agreement). Sec al-Nawawi 
(Wustenfeld), Veber das Leben, p. 56 ff.; Ibn Khallikan, Biog. Diet., II, 569 ff.; Enc. of 
Islam, IV, 252; Macdonald, Development, pp. 104 rT. 



BELIEF in 

plies to be made to them have been mentioned in what we have already 
said. 

The second matter is that the real essence of Belief does not increase or 
decrease. It has already been said that it is the assent of the heart which 
reaches the point of decision and acknowledgment. 25 In this no decrease 
or increase is conceivable, so whoever attains to the real essence of assent, 
whether he does obedient acts or commits disobedient ones, his assent con- 
tinues in a state in which there is no change at all. [129] The verses which 
indicate an increase of Belief may be interpreted in the way that Abu Hanlfa 
mentioned, saying that after people had believed in general there came one 
obligation (fard) after another, and as they believed each special obligation 
[as it came] the consequence was that Belief increased just as Belief in each 
obligation necessitated; and that this [increase in Belief] was inconceivable 
except in the time of the Prophet. This is a matter for consideration, for ob- 
taining knowledge of the details of the ordinances is possible in other than 
the Prophet's time. Belief is incumbent upon people in general in matters 
that are known in general, and in detail in matters that are known in de- 
tail, it being clear that detailed Belief is [something] additional — nay rather, 
more perfect. What has already been said about general Belief not being 
lower in rank that detailed Belief has to do with its being described as the 
foundation of Belief. It has been suggested that as fixity and perseverance in 
Belief increase hour by hour, the consequence is that Belief increases as 
times increase since it is an accident which only continues by the continual 
renewing [of Beliefs] similar to it. But this calls for consideration, because 
the occurrence of something similar to a thing after it has been made non- 
existent does not mean an increase at all, just as in the case of the blackness 
of a body, for example. 

It has been suggested that the meaning [of increase in Belief] is. the in- 
crease of the fruits of Belief and the shining forth in the heart of its light 
and brilliance, for it increases through works and decreases through dis- 
obedient acts. It is quite evident that he who holds that works are a part 
of Belief accepts the increase and decrease [of Belief]; consequently this 
problem of increase and decrease is a part of the [larger] problem of obedient 
acts as a part of Belief. Some of the Verifiers said, "We do not admit that the 
real essence of assent does not permit of increase and decrease, but it varies 
indeed as to power and weakness since the assent of the individuals of a 

2n The text of A. J. (p. 181) adds al-qubtll, "acceptance." 



122 



BELIEF 



people is not like that of the Prophet." For this reason Abraham said, "But let 
my heart be confident" 26 (Qur'an 2:262). 

There remains yet another subject for discussion, namely that some of the 
Qadarites 27 held that Belief is cognition (al-marifa). 28 Our Learned Men 
agreed that this position is unsound because the People having Scriptures 
(ahl al-fytdb) knew that Muhammad was a prophet, just as their descendants 
do, yet undoubtedly they were Unbelievers because of their failure to assent 
[to Muhammad's being a prophet], and because there were among the Un- 
believers those who knew the truth very well indeed and yet through stub- 
bornness and pride denied it. Allah said of them, "They denied it though 
their souls knew them [that is, the signs] to be genuine" (Qur an 27:14). So 
of necessity there is a distinct difference between the cognition of the judg- 
ments and deciding that they are true on the one hand, and the assent 
to them and conviction about them on the other. So it is sound to call the 
second kind Belief in distinction from the first. 

Some of the Early Theologians mention the suggestion that assent is an 
expression for binding the heart to that which is known of the narratives 
given by the Narrator; and it is something acquired {\asbi), established by 
the choice of the one who assents. Therefore it is to be rewarded and con- 
sidered the chief of religious duties (al-ibaddt) rather than cognition which 
sometimes occurs without any acquisition, as when one's glance falls on some 
body and there results to him knowledge that it is a wall or a stone. This 
is what has been mentioned by some of the Verifiers who say that assent 
means that by your choice you ascribe veracity to the Narrator. Thus, if it 
were to occur in the heart without choice, it would not be assent, even though 
it were cognition. There is a problem about this, for assent is one of the 
divisions of knowledge. It is one of the qualities of the soul {al-\ayfiyat 
al-nafsdniyd), rather than one of the voluntary actions, for whenever we 
conceive the relationship between two things and doubt whether it is to 

26 The occasion was Abraham's dispute concerning his Lord's power to give life to 
the dead. Abraham prayed, "O Lord, show me how thou bringest the dead to life." The 
Lord answered, "Hast thou not believed?" Then he replied, "Yes, but let my heart be 
confident." See al-BaydawI, Anwar al-Tanzil, I, 134; al-Tabarl, Annates, I, 261. 

27 Al-Qadariya, the name given to the free-will party, Macdonald, Development, pp. 
127 ft.; Wensinck, The Muslim Creed, pp. 52 ff.; al-Shahrastanl, al-Milal, p. 29; al-Fadall, 
Kifayat al-Awamm, p. 67; al -Baghdad!, al-Farq bayn al-Firaq, pp. 260 ff.; Goldziher, 
Vorlesungen iiber den Islam, pp. 95 ff. 

28 Al-Ghazz5ll took the position that there are three different degrees of Belief. His 
position that cognition (ma'rifa) was the highest, however, is different from that of the 
Qadarites for his is essentially a ?ufi attitude. See al-Ghazzall, Ihya', VII, 236 ff.; Mac- 
donald, Rel An. and Ufe, pp. 245 ff.; cf. also Ibn Khaldun, Muqaddima, III, 33 f. 



BELIEF 123 

be affirmed or denied, and then proof is adduced for establishing it, that 
which takes place in us is the acknowledgment and acceptance of this rela- 
tionship. This is the meaning of assent, judgment, affirmation (ithbat), and 
realization (iqa>). 

Yes, it is true that these qualities are arrived at [130] through choice, by 
coming into contact with the causes, the use of speculation, the removing of 
objections, and so on. In this way the imposition of responsibility for Belief 
occurs. This is, as it were, the meaning of its being acquired and of its 
being by choice. Cognition is not sufficient for obtaining assent, for it is 
sometimes devoid of assent. Most assuredly this absolute cognition which is 
acquired by choice must be assent. There is no objection to this, for in this 
way one attains the idea expressed by the Persian word girawidan, for 
Belief and Assent are nothing else but that. It is impossible for the obstinate, 
haughty Unbelievers to obtain that. And if their obtaining it were a possible 
supposition they would become Unbelievers through denial with their 
tongues, their perseverance in obstinacy and arrogance, and through such 
things as are signs of denial and rejection. 

And Belief and Islam are one 29 /for Islam is resignation (al-^hudu*) 
and submission (al~inqiyad) 9 meaning the acceptance of judgments and 
acknowledgment. That is the real essence of assent, as we have seen. This is 
supported by the statement of Allah, "So we brought out the Believers of 
those who were in it and we only found one house of Muslims" 30 (Qur'an 
51:36). And in general it is not sound in the Law to judge one a Believer 
who is not a Muslim nor to judge one a Muslim who is not a Believer. And 
we mean nothing more than this by their being one. 

The evident purpose of the statement of the Early Theologians was [131] 
that they intended to make no distinction in meaning [between the two], so 
that one [term] is inseparable from the other, yet there is no absolute unity as 
that term is understood, as seen in what was mentioned in al-Kijdya, that is, 
that Belief is assent to what Allah has narrated of positive commands and 
prohibitions; and Islam is submission and resignation to the Deity, and that is 
not verified except by acceptance of the positive command and prohibition [of 
Allah]. So Belief is inseparable from Islam as to judgment and they are not 
distinct from one another. One may say to him who makes a distinction, 

29 This is al-Razi's position also. See Muhassal, p. 174. 

30 The reference here is to Abraham and his honored guests and their visit to the 
wicked city of Lot. Cf. Gen. 18 and 19; al-Tha'labl, Qisas al~Anbiya\ pp. 88 ff.; al- 
Tabari, Annates, I, 332 f. 



i2 4 BELIEF 

"What is the judgment to be applied to one who believes but docs not be- 
come a Muslim, or who becomes a Muslim but does not believe?" If he 
affirms for one of them a judgment not established as applicable to the other, 
well and good; otherwise the unsoundness of his statement is clear. 

The following statement of Allah may be cited as evidence that Islam is not 
necessarily Belief, "The desert Arabs say, 'We have believed/ Say thou, 
'Ye have not believed, but rather say, We have become Muslims' " (Qur'an 
49:14). To this we would reply that the meaning of Islam which is con- 
sidered as such in the Law is not to be found without Belief. The Islam 
referred to in the verse above is an outward submission devoid of an inward 
submission, just as in the case of the one who utters the words of the 
Witnessing Formula without assent, as seen in the section [above] on Be- 
lief. 

Objection may be made that there seems to be an indication that Islam 
is works 31 and not an assent of the heart in the saying of the Prophet, "Islam 
means that you bear witness that there is no deity but Allah and that Muham- 
mad is the Messenger of Allah, and that you perform worship (al-sala), bring 
the poor rate (al-za^d), fast the month of Ramadan, and make the pil- 
grimage to the House, if you are able to make the journey there." 32 To 
this we reply that the meaning is the fruits and signs of Islam, just as the 
Prophet said to some people who came as a delegation to him, "Do you 
understand what Belief in Allah alone means?" They replied, "Allah and 
His Messenger know better." He said, "It means witnessing that there is no 
deity but Allah and that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, and [it 
means] the performance of worship, the bringing of the poor rate, the fast 
of Ramadan, and that you give a fifth of the booty." 33 Or it is as the Prophet 
said, "Belief is seventy-some sects: 34 the highest is to say that there is no 
deity but Allah, and the lowest is the removing of that which is harmful 
from the path." 85 

And whenever assent and confession are found in the creature, it is right 

81 The traditions in general seem to make a distinction between Belief and Islam; 
the former having to do with doctrine, the latter with practice. See Musnad, I, 27 f., 51 f., 
97, 133. 319; HI, 134 ff- 

32 Al-Bukhari, al-Sahih, I, 10; Muslim, al-Sahih, I, 26. 

33 Al-Bukhari, al-Sahih, I, 23, 34, and also Musnad, I, 228. The accounts in al-Bukhari, 
IV, 417, 499 differ in some details. Cf. also Muslim, I, 23 ff. 

34 See Musnad, II, 414, 445; Al-Bukhari (I, 11) says sixty-some sects. One tradition 
given by the Musnad (II, 379) says there are 64 doors to Belief, the remainder of the 
tradition being as given by al-Taftazani. 

36 Cf . Ibn Maja, Sunan, "Muqaddima," b. 90. 



BELIEF 12 j 

for him to say, "I am a Believer in reality" 36 /because Belief in him has been 

verified. 

and it is not fitting that he should say, "I am a Believer, if Allah wills "/If 
he says that because of doubt there is no avoiding the fact that it is Unbelief. 
If one says it because of good breeding and in order to refer matters to the 
will of Allah, or because of doubt about 37 the final consequence and out- 
come [of his life], not as to his present [Belief], or because of an expected 
blessing from mentioning Allah, or to clear himself of self-righteousness 
and of glorying in his state — well, in any case it is preferable to omit it, since 
it may give the impression of doubt. Al-Nasafl said, "It is not fitting" rather 
than "it is not permissible/' since were [the saying of] it due to something 
else than doubt there would be no reason to deny the permissibility of using 
the expression. How would that be possible when many of the Fathers, even 
of the Companions and their Followers, used this expression? 38 This is not 
like your saying, "I am a youth, if Allah wills"; because being a youth is not 
an acquired action, nor is it to be conceived that one will continue [to be a 
youth] as a final consequence [132] and outcome [of his life]; nor does self- 
righteousness and glorying result from it, but [saying "I am a Believer, if 
Allah wills" in this way] is as though you said, "I am abstinent from 
worldly pleasures and devoted to the service of Allah, if He wills." 

Some of the Verifiers held that the result for the creature was that real es- 
sence of assent by which he escapes from Unbelief; even though assent 
in itself admits of being strong or weak. It is only by the will of Allah that one 
attains to that perfect saving assent which is referred to in the saying of 
Allah, "Those in reality are the Believers. They have ranks with their Lord, 
forgiveness, and a generous sustenance" (Qur'an 8:4). From what has been 
reported from some of the Ash'arites we learn that it is right to say, "I am 

88 This is a point of dispute between the Ash'arites and the Maturidites. See Wensinck, 
The Muslim Creed, pp. 138 fT.; al-Rawda al-Bahiya, pp. 6 f. The story is told in al-Rawda 
of Abu Hanlfa who answered, "Yes," when asked if he were a Believer. They said, "Are 
you a Believer in the sight of Allah?" He replied, "Are you asking me about my knowl- 
edge and fixed purpose, or that of Allah?" They said, "We are asking you about your 
knowledge." Then said he, "Verily I, by my knowledge, know that I am a Believer." 

37 The text of A.J. (p. 186) adds, "in the present." 

38 Al-Ghazzali (Ihya\ IX, 621 fT.) gives some narratives that teach the humiliation that 
may lie back of the Ash'arite position. Fuo'ayl said, "If you are asked, 'Do you love 
Allah?' be silent, for if you say 'No' you become an Unbeliever; and if you say 'Yes' 
your saying so is not the description of those who love." Some of the Learned said, "There 
is no higher blessedness in the Garden than that of the People of knowledge and love of 
Allah, and no more serious punishment in the Fire than that of the one who claims to 
have them." 



tz6 BELIEF 

a Believer, if Allah wills," on the basis that the real account of Belief and 
Unbelief, and of happiness (al-sa'ada) and misery {al-shaqdwa) is made 
at the end of life, so the happy Believer is the one who dies in Belief even 
though all his life was spent in Unbelief and disobedience; and the miserable 
Unbeliever is the one who dies in Unbelief — we seek refuge in Allah from 
such — although all his life was spent in assent and obedience. This is as 
Allah pointed out in the case of IblTs, "And he was one of the Unbelievers" 
(Qur'an 2:32, 38:74). There is also the statement of the Prophet, "The happy 
one is he who was happy in his mother's womb, and likewise the miserable is 
he who was miserable in his mother's womb." 39 

Al-Nasafi in order to show the unsoundness of this statement [of some 
of the Ash'arites] said, 

The happy one sometimes becomes miserable/in apostatizing after having 
believed — we seek refuge in Allah from such. 

and the miserable one sometimes becomes happy/by believing after having 
been an Unbeliever 

and the changing is in happiness and misery, not in making happy and 
making miserable, for these are both attributes of Allah/since making happy 
is the bringing of happiness into being and making miserable is the bring- 
ing of misery into being. 

and there is no alteration in Allah and His attributes/This is due to what 
has already been said about the Eternal not being the locus of originated 
things. The real fact of the matter is that there is no disagreement in the 
meaning, for if the meaning of Belief and happiness is merely the obtaining 
of the idea expressed in these, it is obtained in the present; and if the 
meaning is that thing from which salvation and fruitful works result, there 
is, according to the will of Allah, no certainty in obtaining it now. So who- 
ever is certain o£ obtaining Belief and happiness now means the first defini- 
tion, and whoever commits the matter to Allah means the second. 



89 Cf. Muslim, al-§ahih, II, 406 f. 



Chapter 14 



THE MESSENGERS, ANGELS, AND 
BOOKS OF ALLAH 

in the sending of Messengers there is wisdom, and Allah has sent Mes- 
sengers of mankind to mankind announcing good tidings, and warning, and 
explaining to people what they need [to know] of the matters of this world 
and of the judgment. And He has aided them with evidentiary miracles 
which contradict the customary way of things. 

The first of the prophets is Adam and the last is Muhammad. A statement 
of their number has been handed down in several traditions, but it is pref- 
erable not to limit their number in naming them, for Allah said, "Of some 
of them we have told thee their stories, and of others we have not" (Qur'an 
40:78). And there is no security in a statement of their number against there 
being entered in some who are not among them, or of there being excluded 
some who are of them. All of them were narrators conveying information 
from Allah, veracious and sincere. The most excellent of the prophets is 
Muhammad. 

The angels are the creatures of Allah and they do according to His com- 
mand. They are not described as being male or female. 

Allah has books which He has sent down to His prophets, and in them He 
has shown His positive commands and His prohibitions, His promise and 
His threat. 

In the sending of Messengers (al-rusul) 1 /Rusul is the plural of rasul, 
which is on the measure of fa ill from [the noun] risala (a message), | 
and it means the sending of a creature between Allah and intelligent beings 
(dhawlyi 'l-albab) among His creation in order to remove thereby those 
defects by which their reasons have fallen short of the benefits of this world 

1 See Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 584!.; al-Fa^all, Kifayat aW Awamm, p. 68; al-Ijl, 
al-Mawdqif, pp. 169 fT.; Mohammed Abdou, Rissalat al-Tawkid, pp. 57 ft.; Ibn Khaldun, 
Muqaddima, I, 165 ff.; Enc. of Islam, III, 1127 ff.; *I.D. p. 31; A.J. pp. 53 f. 



128 



MESSENGERS OF ALLAH 



and the next. You have already understood the meaning of Messenger and 
prophet in a section at the beginning of the book. 

there is wisdom (hi \ma) /that is, a benefit and a praiseworthy consequence. 2 
In this there is an allusion to the fact that the sending of a Messenger is 
necessary, not meaning that it is incumbent on Allah, 8 but meaning that 
wisdom demands it, since in it there are wise and beneficial things. The 
sending of a Messenger is not impossible as the Sumaniya and the Barahima 4 
assert, nor is it [merely J a possible thing, both alternatives of the possible 
being equal, as is the position of some of the Mutakallims. n 

Then al-Nasafl referred to the actual fact that Messengers had been sent, 
to the advantage derived therefrom, to the method of establishing the send- 
ing [of Messengers], and to the designation of some whose being sent has 
been established, by saying, 

and Allah has sent Messengers of mankind (al-bashar) to mankind an- 
nouncing good tidings (mubashshiriri) /of the Garden and reward to the 
people of Belief and obedience. 

and warning/the people of Unbelief and disobedience of the Fire and 
punishment, for these are among the things of which Reason has no way 
[of obtaining knowledge]. And if it did have a way, it would be by mi- 
nute speculations which would not be easy except for individuals one by 
one. 

and explaining to the people what they need [to know J of the matters of this 
world and of the judgment/for Allah created the Garden and the Fire, and 
He prepared in them reward and punishment. The details of the different 
states to be found in both of them and the way to attain the Garden and guard 
against the Fire are among the things in which Reason is not independent [of 
revelation from Allah]. He also created useful and harmful bodies and He 
did not give Reason and the senses complete independence for knowing 

- It is also called a lutf (a favor) from Allah. See al-Ghazzali, Ihyd' (commentary of 
Sayyid Murtatfa), II, 199. 

3 The Shi'ites say that it is absolutely incumbent on Allah to send Messengers. See 
al-Bdbu 'l-Hddi 'Ashar, p. 54. 

4 Al-Biddya and other books assert that this is the position of the Sumaniya and the 
Barahima, but the Shark of the Maqdsid states that the Barahima did not deny the possi- 
bility but the necessity of sending prophets (A.J., p. 187). Cf. 'I.D., p. 133, and also 
al-iji, al-Mawdqif, pp. 187 f.; Ihyd' (commentary of Sayyid Murtada), II, 197. 

5 See al-Fa^ali, Kifdyat al-'Att/dmm, p. 68; al-Ijl, al-Mawdqij, pp. 182 f. 



MESSENGERS OF ALLAH 129 

them. And he also made some propositions that are possible, there being no 
way of [knowing for a] certainty which one of the two alternatives [is 
right]; and some propositions that are either necessary or impossible, but 
which are not clear to Reason until after endless speculation and complete 
investigation. So were a man to spend his time in [studying] them, he 
would deprive himself of most of their benefits. Therefore it was of the 
grace (fadl) of Allah and His mercy that He sent Messengers to demon- 
strate that, as He said, "We have not sent thee except in mercy to the 
worlds" (Quran 21:107). 

And He has aided them/that is, the prophets 

with evidentiary miracles (al-mu* jizat) 6 which contradict the customary way 
of things/ Mu'jiz at is the plural of mu'jiza and it is something that appears 
contrary to the customary way of things {al-'dda) at the hands of one who 
claims [134] the office of prophet, [and it happens] in such a way that 
those who deny are unable (yu'jizu) to do the same thing that he does 
when they compete with him. For if he were not aided by the miracle it 
would not be necessary to accept the statement of the prophet, nor would 
the veracious man be clearly distinguished from the false in claiming the 
office of Messenger. But at the appearance of the evidentiary miracle the cer- 
tainty of his veracity results in the customary way whereby Allah creates 
knowledge of his veracity as a consequence of the appearance of the evi- 
dentiary miracle, even though the non-creation of the knowledge [of his 
veracity] is possible in itself. It is as though one were to claim in the 
presence of a group of people that he was the Messenger of a certain king 
to them, and then he would say to this king, "If I am veracious, act con- 
trary to your custom and rise from your seat three times." So when the king 
did that, the group would have [as a result of this action] the necessary 
customary knowledge regarding his veracity in the statement [he has made]. 

If falsehood [on the part of the prophet] were possible in itself — for the 
essential possibility means the rational permissibility — it would not pre- 
clude the attaining of absolute knowledge, just as we know that the moun- 
tain of Uhud did not turn into gold although that in itself were possible. 
So here the knowledge of his veracity results because the customary way 
requires this, since it is one of the means of decisive knowledge just as the 
senses are. The possibility that the evidentiary miracle is not from Allah, or 

6 See above, Chap. 2, n. 20, and below, Chap. 15, n. 6. 



130 MESSENGERS OF ALLAH 

that it is not for the purpose of gaining assent or for a false prophet's gain- 
ing assent, or any other possibility, does not detract from this knowledge, 
just as the possibility of there not being heat in fire does not detract from 
the necessary knowledge through the senses that there is heat in fire. This 
means that, were the non-existence of the evidentiary miracle a supposition, it 
would not follow then that it is impossible. 

The first of the prophets {al-anbiya) is Adam and the last is Muhammad/ 

The prophetic office of Adam 7 is seen from the Book, which points out 
that he was commanded and prohibited along with the certainity that there 
was no other prophet in his time. This is only by revelation (al-wahy). This 
is also [the position] according to Tradition {al-sunna) and Agreement so the 
denial to him of the office of prophet, as has been reported by some, is Un- 
belief. 

But as for the prophetic office of Muhammad, it is so because he claimed 
it and manifested the evidentiary miracle. 8 His claim to the office is known 
from mutawdtir tradition; and as for the manifestation of the evidentiary 
miracle, that is seen from two viewpoints. In the first place he manifested the 
speech (\aldm) of Allah and strove thereby with the eloquent, who, in spite 
of their eloquence, were unable to match the shortest sura of the Qur'an, al- 
though they applied themselves to this task until they risked their hearts' 
blood and turned from opposition by letters to fighting with swords. There 
has not been reported of any one of those who strove with the Prophet that 
he produced anything that came anywhere near it, although many claims 
have been preserved. And that indicates absolutely that it [that is, the 
Qur'an] is from Allah. Thereby the veracity of the Prophet's claim is known 
in such a purely customary way that it detracts nothing from the things 
that are possible according to Reason such as are to be found in other 
customary knowledge. In the second place there has been reported about 
Muhammad, among the things which annul the customary way, that which 
attains a rank sharing with it, I mean, the evidentiary miracle. [These 
things are so many that they reach] the point of a mutawdtir tradition, so 
even though their details are individual traditions like those of the courage 

7 Sec Qur. 2:33, 7:18; Enc. of Islam, I, 127; al-Tabari, Annates, I, 151; al-NawawI 
(Wiistenfcld), Uebtr das Leben, p. 123, and 'I.D., p. 134. 

8 Sec Hughes, Dictionary of Islam, p. 350; Muslim, al-Sahih, II, 279 f.; al-RazI, Uafatih, 
I, 232 ff.; Ihyd' (commentary of Sayyid Murtatfa), II, 209; Ibn Khaldun, Muqaddima, I, 
168 ff. For the Shi'itc statement sec al-Babu 'l-Hadi 'Ashar, p. 56. 



MESSENGERS OF ALLAH 131 

of 'All and the generosity of Hatim, for [135] each of these facts is sup- 
ported by tawatur, although the details are individual traditions which have 
been mentioned in the biographies of the Prophet. 

Those of real insight sometimes deduce from two standpoints proof for 
his having had the prophetic office. Firsdy, from mutawatir tradition there 
are derived certain facts concerning his circumstances before being a prophet, 
at the time of his call, and after the fulfillment of it: his great moral charac- 
teristics, his wise judgments, his boldness when the gallant heroes held 
back, his confidence 9 in the power of Allah to preserve him under all cir- 
cumstances from errors, and his steadfastness before terrors, so that his 
enemies in spite of all their bitter enmity and their eagerness to slander 
him could not find place for slander nor was there any way to impugn 
him. Therefore Reason is certain that the union of all these things is im- 
possible in anyone except the prophets, and that Allah united all these per- 
fections in him of whom He knew that he would be maligned, and yet 
for twenty-three years He would make him patient, and that then He would 
give his religion mastery over other religions, would aid him with victory 
over his enemies, and would keep alive his memory after his death until the 
day of resurrection. 

Secondly, Muhammad claimed this great distinction amidst a people 
who were without a book 10 and devoid of wisdom and showed them the 
Book and wisdom. He taught them judgments and laws, fulfilled the most 
noble characteristics, perfected many people in the theoretical and practical 
virtues, and enlightened the world by Belief and good works. And Allah 
gave his religion mastery over all religion as He promised him. This is the 
whole meaning of the office of prophet and Messenger. Since his prophetic 
office has been established, his speech and the Speech of Allah which 
descended on him having indicated that he is the seal (\hatani) 11 of the 
prophets, and the one sent to all mankind, 12 nay rather to al-Jinn 13 and 
mankind too, it has been established that he is the last of the prophets and 
that his prophetic office is not, as some Christians assert, especially confined 
to the Arabs. 

9 Muslim, al^ahlh, II, 281 ff. 10 Qur. 32:2, 36:5. 

11 Qur. 33:40; al-BaydawI, Anwar al-Tanzil, II, 130. Cf. Ihya' (commentary of Sayyid 
Murtada), II, 202 ft. 

12 Qur. 34:27. Cf. also 38:87 f.; 36:69 f. 

13 Qur. 46:28. See also al-BaydawI, Anwar al-Tanzil, II, 258; al-Tabari, Annates, I, 
1202; Ibn Hisham Sirat Rasul Allah, p. 281. 



i 3 2 MESSENGERS OF ALLAH 

If it is objected that there has been handed down a tradition that Jesus 
will descend 14 after him, 15 we answer, "Yes, but he will be a follower of 
Muhammad, for the law of Jesus has been abrogated (nusi\hat) . There will 
be no revelation nor setting up of judgments on his behalf, but he will be 
the Khalifa (vicegerent) of the Messenger of Allah. Thus it is more correct 
to say that he will perform worship with the people and lead them [in wor- 
ship], and the Mahdi 16 will follow his example, for Jesus is more excellent 
and his leadership (imama) is preferable." 

A statement of their number has been handed down in several traditions/ 
According to what has been handed down the Prophet was asked about the 
number of the prophets, and he replied, "One hundred twenty-four thou- 
sand," 17 and in another narrative it is two hundred twenty-four thou- 
sand. 

but it is preferable not to limit their number in naming them, for Allah 
said, "Of some of them we have told thee their stories, and of others we have 
not" (Qur'an 40:78). And there is no security in a statement of their num- 
ber against there being entered in some who are not among them/that is, if 
one mentions [/j6] more than there are 

or of there being excluded some who are of them/that is, if one mentions a 
number less than their real number, that is to say [in explanation of the 
desirability of not mentioning a definite number] the narrative of an individ- 
ual — on the supposition that it fulfills all the conditions mentioned in the 
foundations of fiqh — is useful only for opinion, and no account is to be 
taken of opinion in the case of beliefs. This is true especially if it [that is, 
the conclusion reached] includes something about which the records handed 
down differ. The statement that affirms [a fixed number of prophets] 
arrives only at a contradiction of the plain meaning of the Book, which is 
that some of the prophets were not mentioned to the Prophet. So it is pos- 
sible that something may be stated contrary to the actual fact, in counting the 
prophet among the non-prophets, and the non-prophet among the prophets, 

14 See al-NawawI (Wiistcnfcld), Ueber das Leben, p. 497; Wensinck, Handbook, p. 113. 
18 The text in A.J. (p. 190) adds "so the Prophet then would not be the last of the 
prophets." 

18 Sec Hughes, Dictionary of Islam, p. 305; Enc, of Islam, III, in; Ibn Khaldun, 
Muqaddima, II, 142 ff. 

17 Wensinck, The Muslim Creed, p. 204; al-Tabari, Annates, I, 152; al-Bay^awI, Anwar 
al-Tanzil, II, 217. 



MESSENGERS OF ALLAH 133 

since on the basis that the number is a specific one in that which it indicates, 
it is not possible then that there be increase and decrease in the number. 

All of them were narrators conveying information from Allah/for this is the 
meaning of the office of prophet and of Messenger {aUnubuwa wa 'l-risala). 

veracious and sincere 18 /to all creation, lest the benefit of the mission and 
message be in vain. In this there is an allusion to the fact that the prophets 
were preserved (masumun) 19 from falsehood, especially in what is con- 
nected with the commanding of laws and the conveying of judgments and the 
guidance of the people. [They are preserved from errors committed] will- 
fully, on the basis of Agreement, and also through inadvertence according to 
the majority. 

In the matter of being preserved from the remainder of sins there is some 
detail [to be given] . By Agreement the prophets were preserved from Unbelief 
both before and after the appearance of Revelation; likewise from the willful 
commission of great sins according to the Multitude in opposition to 
al-Hashwiya, 20 the difference between them being only whether the proof 
for believing that great sins were impossible for them is based on tradition 
or on Reason. But as for great sins committed through inadvertence, the 
majority make this permissible. As for the small sins, the Multitude in op- 
position to al-Jubba'I and his followers make them permissible when will- 
fully committed; and by common consent {bi'l-ittifdq) they are permissible 
when committed through inadvertence, except such sins as indicate con- 
temptibleness, like stealing a morsel and giving a grain less for short meas- 
ure. But the Verifiers stipulated that the prophets after the appearance of 
Revelation must be made aware of such things and refrain from them; yet 
there is no proof for the impossibility of a great sin proceeding from them 
before the appearance of Revelation. The Mu'tazilites held that for prophets 
a great sin is impossible since it compels such a judgment in regard to them 

18 Al-Sanusi (Umm al-Bardhtn, pp. 173 ff.) says there are three qualities necessary in a 
prophet, veracity, faithfulness, and conveying the message, and three that are impossible, 
namely their opposites, lying, unfaithfulness, and concealing of the message. Al-Faclall, 
Kifayat al-'Awdmm, pp. 73 ff., adds one to each group, intelligence and stupidity. 

19 There is no appeal here to the Qur'an and Traditions since this doctrine rests on 
the Agreement of the Muslim people (Ijma'). See aURawda al-Bahiya, pp. 57 ff.; al-Ijl, al- 
Mawdqif, pp. 218 ff.; al-Razi, Mu has sal, pp. 157 ff., Mafatih, I, 318 ff. 

20 They were the literal Anthropomorphists. The Mu'tazilites called all of the Ashab 
al-Hadlth, Hashwlya because they tolerated anthropomorphic expressions. Sec Enc. of Is- 
lam, II, 287; al-Shahrastanl, al-Milal, p. 77; al-Rawda al-Bahiya, p. 57; al-Babu 'l-Hadi 
'Ashar, p. 58; al-Ijl, al-Mawaqif, p. 219. 



134 MESSENGERS OF ALLAH 

as to prevent their being followed and so the benefit of the mission [of the 
prophet] would pass away. The true position forbids [in prophets] what- 
ever compels men to forsake them like the debauchery of [their] mothers, 
vices, and small sins which indicate contemptibleness. 

The Sfri'ites 21 forbid the procession from a prophet of great and small 
sins before Revelation and after; however they permit dissimulation in 
feigning Unbelief for a pious reason {taqiya). If this which we have said is 
settled, then whatever has been reported about prophets, marking them with 
falsehood and disobedience, is to be rejected {mar dud) if it is recorded 
by individual traditions; and [137] is to be changed from its literal mean- 
ing if possible when it comes by way of tawatur; otherwise it is possible to 
explain it as a case of doing the less preferable of two actions, or as some- 
thing that happened before the prophet's mission. The detailed account of this 
[subject] is to be found in the more extensive books. 

The most excellent of the prophets is Muhammad/because of the statement 
of Allah, "Ye were the best people (umma)" (Qur'an 3:106). There is no 
doubt that the measure of the goodness of a people is their perfection in re- 
ligion (al-din), and that follows the perfection of their prophet whom they 
follow. To cite as proof the saying of the Prophet, "I am the lord (sayyid) 
of the offspring of Adam without glorying on my part" 22 is weak, for the 
saying docs not indicate that he was better than Adam, but better than his 
children. 

The angels (al-mala't^a) 28 are the creatures of Allah and they do according 
to His command/As the statement of Allah indicated, "They do not precede 
Him in speech and they do according to His command; and they disdain not 
His service, neither are they wearied' , (Qur'an 21:27, 19). 

They are not described as being male or female/ since there is neither record 
of this in tradition nor any indication of it in Reason. The statement of the 
idolaters that the angels are the daughters of Allah is impossible, unsound, 
and extravagant, just as the statement of the Jews that one of the angels may 
commit the sin of Unbelief and be punished by Allah with metamorphosis is 
also an extravagant statement which belittles their state. 

21 See al-Babu 'l-Hadi 'Ashar, pp. 58 #. 

22 Cf. Muslim, d-Sahih, II, 278; A.J., p. 189; and al-Razi, Uafatih, II, 315. 

28 Cf. Wensinck, The Muslim Creed, pp. 198 f.; al-Razi, Uafatih, I, 261 ff.; al-Ijl, aU 
Uawaqif, pp. 237 ff.; Ibn Hazm, Kit&b al-Fisal, III, 259 ff.; Enc. of Islam, III, 189 ff.; 
Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 1337 f. 



MESSENGERS OF ALLAH 135 

If someone objects saying, "Did Iblis 24 not become an Unbeliever and he 
was an angel, the proof of this being that it was valid for him to be made an 
exception from them? ,, we reply, u No, he was one of the Jinn, and then he 
strayed from the command of his Lord. But, since he had the attributes of 
angels in regard to service and exalted rank, and since he was a lone JinnI 
inexperienced in worship in the midst of the angels, it was proper to make 
him an exception, since he had been outnumbered. ,, But as for Harut and 
Marut, 25 it is more proper to say of them that they were angels from whom 
there proceeded neither Unbelief nor a great sin. Their punishment was only 
by way of rebuke, just as prophets are rebuked for a slip or inadvertence. They 
exhorted the people and taught them magic, yet said, u We are only a means 
of testing, so do not become Unbelievers." It is not Unbelief to teach magic, 
[138] but it is [Unbelief] to have a conviction approving it and to work it. 

Allah has books (kutub) 26 which He has sent down to His prophets, and 
in them He has shown His positive commands and His prohibitions, His 
promise (wa'd) and His threat (wa Id) /All the books are the speech of 
Allah, which is one; the multiplicity and differentiation of them is only to 
be found in the context which is recited and heard. With this consideration in 
mind, the most excellent is the Qur an, then the Tawra, then the Injll, then 
the Zabur. And as the Qur'an is one speech, it is inconceivable to think that 
there are preferable parts; however, from the standpoint of writing and 
recitation some suras may be preferred to others as tradition states. 27 The 
real fact of the preferability of some parts over others is for the reason that the 
recitation of them is more excellent, because there is more benefit in them, or 
because the name of Allah is mentioned oftener. The books have been abro- 
gated 28 by the Qur'an as to the necessity of reading and copying them and 
as to the authority of some of their judgments. 

24 The Devil. See Qur. 2:32, 7:10, 17:63, 18:48, 20:115; Enc of Islam, II, 351; al- 
Bayo'awl, Anwar al-Tanzil, I, 51; al-Iji, aUMawdqif, pp. 237 if.; al-Nawawi (Wiistenfeld), 
Uber das Leben, p. 137; al-RazT, Mafdtth, I, 297 ff. 

25 These two angels, failing to appreciate the frailties of human beings, were sent to 
the earth to be tested. See Qur. 2:96; Rodwell, The Koran, p. 348/2; Enc. of Islam, II, 272; 
III, 190 ff. 

26 See Ibn Qutayba, Kitab al-Ma'arif, pp. 27 f.; al-Fa^alT, Kifayat al-Awamm (com- 
mentary of al-Bayjuri), p. 54; Hughes, Diet, of Islam, pp. 440 ff. 

27 See al-Bukharl, al-§ahih, III, 193; Muslim, al-Sahth, I, 299 f. 

28 Cf. Qur. 61:9; Muslim, al-Sahth, I, 71. 



Chapter ij 



THE ASCENSION OF THE PROPHET 
AND MIRACLES 



T 

JLhc Ascension of the Messenger, while awake, in his person to heaven 
and thence to whatsoever exalted place Allah willed is a Reality. 

The Graces of the Walls are a Reality. The Grace appears on behalf of the 
Wall by way of contradicting the customary way of things, such as covering 
a great distance in a short time, and the appearance of food and drink and 
clothing at the time of need, and walking on the water and in the air, and 
such as the speaking of inanimate solid objects and of animals, and the ward- 
ing off of an approaching calamity, and the protection from enemies of him 
who is anxious, and other things of the same kind. And such a thing is 
reckoned as an evidentiary miracle on behalf of the Messenger to one of 
whose people this act appears, because it is evident from it that he is a Wall, 
and he could never be a Wall unless he were right in his religion; and his 
religion is the confession of the message of the Messenger. 

The Ascension (al-miraj) 1 of the Messenger, while awake, in his person to 
heaven (al-sama) and thence to whatsoever exalted place Allah willed is a 
Reality/It is established by so well-known a tradition that he who denies it is 
an innovator (tnubtadi'). The denial of it and the claim that it is impos- 
sible are based on the fundamental position of the Philosophers; otherwise 
it is permissible of heavenly things that there be an infringement of cus- 
tom and a compliance with it. All bodies are similar to each other so it is 
sound to say of one body what it is sound to say of all. Allah is 
powerful to perform all possible things. 

Al-Nasaff s statement "while awake** (fi 'l-yaqzd) alludes to the refutation 
of the one who asserts that the Ascension was in sleep, which is in ac- 

1 Cf. Enc. of Islam, III, 505 ff.; al-Bukharl, al-§ahih, I, 99; Muslim, al-$ahih, I, 76 f., 
83 £.; Ibn Hisham, Sirat Rasul Allah, pp. 263 ff.; Wensinck, Handbook* p. 25. 



MJLJKJY^LilS 137 

cordance with a tradition from Mu'awiya, who when asked about the Ascen- 
sion said, "It was a proper vision" (ru'ya salt ha)* And there is a tradition 
from 'A'isha who said, "The body of Muhammad was not absent the night 
of the Ascension." And Allah has said, 3 "We have made the vision which 
we showed thee only as a testing for mankind" (Qur'an 17:62). Answer 
is made to this that the meaning here is vision through the eye, and that 
his body was not deprived of his spirit (ruh), but was along with the spirit, 
so the Ascension was both by spirit and body. Al-Nasaffs use of the term "in 
his person" (bi sha\hsihi) is an allusion to the refutation of the one who says 
that it was of the spirit only. [139] It is clear however that the Ascension in 
sleep or in spirit is not something to be denied absolutely. The Unbe- 
lievers denied the matter of the Ascension entirely, yea many Muslims 
apostatized on account of it. His use of the term "to heaven" is an allusion 
to the refutation of the one who asserts that the Ascension made by Muham- 
mad while awake was only to the House of the Holy Place (bayt al-maqdis) 
as recorded in the Book. And the term "then to whatsoever place Allah 
willed" is a reference to the different statements of the Fathers, some saying, 
"to the Garden," others, "to the Throne" (al-'arsh), others, "above the 
Throne," and still others, "to the edge of the world." The night journey 
(al-isra) 4 which was from the Sacred Mosque (al-masjid al-hardm) to the 
House of the Holy Place is an absolute fact established by the Book. The 
Ascension from earth to heaven is a well-known tradition; and from heaven 
to the Garden, or the Throne, or wheresoever it was, is [a tradition based] on 
individuals. But the sound position is that Muhammad saw his Lord with his 
heart (fu'ad) and not with his eyes. 5 

The Graces {al-karamat) <$ of the Walls {al-awliya) 7 are a Reality/The Wall 
is the one who knows {al-'arif) Allah and His attributes, insofar as it is pos- 

- Cf. Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 600 f. 

3 Al-Bayo!awi {Anwar al-Tanzil, I, 544) says that the reference here is to the Ascension, 
although some say that it refers to an incident in the Battle of Badr. 

4 See Qur. 17:1 and the references to the mi' raj above. 

fl A.J. (p. 194) maintains as the correct doctrine that Muhammad saw his Lord with his 
eye {bi 'aynihi). 'I.D. (p. 138 f.) favors the position that his heart was given the sense 
of sight and that it was with the heart that he saw Him. Both appeal to tradition from 
Ibn 'Abbas. 

6 These are "wonders by the divine grace." They seem related to the Xaplaiiara of 
I Cor. 12:9. See Macdonald, Development, p. 174; Goldziher, Muhammadanische 
Stttdien, II, 373 £. Acts that contradict {hjkaraqa — pierce) the customary way have been 
listed as follows: (1) mu'jiza which proceeds from a true prophet when claiming the 
prophetic office, (2) irhas which appears at the hands of a prophet before he is described 
as one, (3) \ar<ima which comes from a wall, (4) mduna which proceeds from any one 



i 3 8 MIRACLES 

sible, who perseveres in acts of obedience, who shuns acts of disobedience, 
and who avoids being engrossed in the pleasures and appetites of the world. 
The Grace which belongs to him is the appearance of something that an- 
nuls the customary way of things on his behalf, but which is not in any way 
connected with a claim to the prophetic office. Such an act which is not ac- 
companied by Belief and good works is only a deception (istidraj), and that 
which is accompanied by the claim to the prophetic office is an evidentiary 
miracle (mu'jiza). The proof for the real existence of the Grace is that so 
much has come down by tawatur from many of the Companions and those 
[who came] after them that denial of it is impossible, especially when the 
matter is something that is common even though the details are [based on the 
testimony of] individuals. The Book also speaks of the manifestation of 
Graces on behalf of Mar yam and the friend of Sulayman. Having once estab- 
lished their occurrence there is little need to prove the possibility of them. 

Al-Nasafl next introduced a statement which refers to the explanation 
of a Grace, and to the details of some of the very strange particulars regarding 
Graces. He said, 

The Grace appears on behalf of the Wall by way of contradicting (naqd) 
the customary way of things, such as covering a great distance in a short 
time/as when the friend of Sulayman, 8 namely Asaf b. Barakhya according to 
the most noted traditions, brought the throne of Bilqls before the twinkling of 
an eye although it was a great distance off. 

and the appearance of food and drink and clothing at the time of need/ 

as in the case of Maryam, 9 for Allah says, "Whenever Zakariya went in to 

of the generality of Believers, (5) istidraj which is performed by an evildoer, (6) ihana 
which proceeds from a false prophet making a claim to the prophetic office. The stock ex- 
ample of ihana is Musaylama's attempt to give a one-eyed man another eye, which ended in 
his good eye being taken. See al-FadalT, Kifayat al- Awamm (commentary of al-Bayjuri), 
p. 69; 'I.D. (and al-Khayall), p. 139; A. J., p. 194. Cf. for the general discussion of miracles 
al-RazT, Muhassal, p. 151 ff., Mafatih, II, 460 ff.; Wensinck, The Muslim Creed, pp. 224 ff.: 
al-Shahrastanl, Nihayatu 'l-Iqddm, pp. 497 f.; al-Iji, al-Mawdqif, p. 243; al-Sanusi, Umm 
al-Barahin, p. 236; Enc. of Islam, II, 744; Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 444 ff.; M. Abdou, 
Rissalat al -Taw hid, pp. 58 f. 

7 The Walt is "one to whom the real essence of things is unveiled, but who is not 
engaged in the improvement of creatures as is the prophet" (al-Ghazzali, Ihyd', VII, 
262 f.). Cf. Macdonald, Rel. Attitude and Life in Islam, pp. 271 ff.; Diet, of Tech. Terms. 
pp. 1 528 ff. 

8 Sec Qur. 27:40 and al-Baydawi, Anwar al-Tanzil, II, 69; al-Tha'labl, Qisas al-Anbiya', 
pp. 271 f.; al-Tabarl, Annates, I, 576. As intimated by al-Taftazan!, not all the accounts 
agree that Asaf b. Barakhya was the messenger sent by Sulayman. 

9 See al-BaytfawI, Anwar aUTanzil, I, 153; al-Tha'labl, Qisas al-Anbiya', p. 328. 



MIRACLES 139 

her at the sanctuary (al-mihrab) he found that she had sustenance. He said, 
'O Maryam, how dost thou get this?' She replied, 'It is from Allah' " (Quran 
3:32). 

and walking on the water/as is related of many of the Walls 

and in the air/as is related of Ja'far b. Abu Talib 10 and Luqman al-Sarakhs! 11 
and others. 

and such as the speaking of inanimate solid objects and of animals/ 2 and 
the warding off of an approaching calamity, and the protection from enemies 

of him who is anxious/ As for speaking of inanimate solid objects, there 
is the tradition of Sulayman and Abu '1-Darda* 13 — Allah be well pleased 
with them both — who had in front of them a bowl 14 which praised [Allah] 
and both of them heard it praising; and as for the speaking of animals there 
is the matter of the dog 15 addressing the Companions of the Cave (al-\ahf). 
There is also the tradition of the Prophet [140] that he said, "There was a 
man among us driving a cow 16 which he used for bearing burdens. Lo, it 
turned to him and said, 'I was not created for this but for plowing/ " The 
people said, "Allah be praised! Does a cow speak?" The Prophet replied, 
"I have believed it." 

and other things of the same kind/such as 'Umar's seeing 17 his army 
at Nihawand, while on the pulpit at al-Madlna, so that he spoke to the 
commander of his army saying, "O Sariya, the mountain, the mountain," in 
order to warn him of the stratagem of the enemy there behind the moun- 
tain; and such as Sariya's hearing his speech in spite of the distance; and like 

10 See al-Nawawi (Wiistenfeld), Ueber das Leben, pp. 193 £. 

11 See al-Hujwiri, Kashf al-Mahjub, translated by Nicholson (London, 191 1), p. 188. 

12 The text of 'I.D. puts the rest of the sentence in ai-Taftazani's commentary. A.J. 
(p. 195) gives the reading followed. 

13 Abu '1-Darda' (d. a.h. 32) was a Companion from al-Khazraj, Enc. of Islam, I, 
p. 82; Ibn Qutayba, Kitdb al-Mafdrif, p. 137; Ibn Ha jar, Biographical Dictionary, III, 89 f. 

14 A.J. (p. 195) says that the story of the "bowl" is given by al-Bayhaql in "The Indi- 
cations of Prophecy" (Dala'il al-Nubiiwa) (Brockelmann, Geschichte, I, 363). 

15 The dog followed the men and when the men of the Cave tried to drive it away, 
Allah gave it speech. It said, "I am the most beloved of the loved of Allah, so sleep and I 
shall guard you." Sec Qur. 18:17; al-BaydawI, Anwar al-Tanzil, I, 557; al-Tabari, An- 
nates, I, 775 ff.; al-Tha'labl, Qisas al-Anbiya' , pp. 361 fT. 

16 Al-Bukhari, al-Sahih, II, 68 and 376; cf. Musnad, II, 245, 246, 382, 502. 

17 Ibn Qutayba (Kitdb al-Ma'drif, p. 152) says that the commander at Nihawand was 
al-Nu'man b. Muqarrin. The story as given by al-Taftazani is to be found in al-Suyuti's 
Tarikjh al-Khulafd' , pp. 124 f. and al-Ghazzall's lhya\ VII, 260. 



i 4 o MIRACLES 

Khalid's drinking poison 18 without being injured; and like the Nile's flow- 
ing 19 on receipt of the letter from 'Umar. There are examples like these 
which are more than can be numbered. 

Since the Mu'tazilites, who deny the Graces of the Walls, deduced proof 
that the manifestation of acts which annul the customary way of things, 
were they permitted to Walls, would be confused with evidentiary miracles 
and the prophet in no way would be distinguished from the non-prophet, 
al-Nasaf I alluded to the answer which is made to them by saying, 

And such a thing is reckoned as/that is to say, the manifestation of acts that 
annul the customary way on behalf of Walls [in general] or an individual 
Wall who is one of a certain people 

an evidentiary miracle on behalf of the Messenger to one of whose people 
this act appears because it is evident from it/that is, from this Grace 

that he is a Wall, and he could never be a Wall unless he were right 20 in his 
religion; and his religion is the confession/by the tongue and assent by the 
heart 

of the message of the Messenger/accompanied by obedience to him with 
respect to his commands and prohibitions, so that even if the Wall claimed 
to be independent and not a follower, he would not be a Wall and the act 
would not be manifested at his hands. 

The outcome is that something which annuls the customary way is an 
evidentiary miracle when in any way related to a prophet, whether it appears 
on his behalf or on behalf of individuals of his people, but when related to a 
Wall it is a Grace because he is free of any claim to the prophetic office of the 
one on whose behalf it was manifested. The prophet must know that he is a 
prophet, he must purpose to manifest those things that annul the customary 
way, and he must give absolute judgment as to the necessity of evidentiary 
miracles; [all of which is] in contrast to the Wall. 

18 See Ibn Hajar, Biographical Dictionary, I, 852. 

19 See al-Suyutl, Tarif{h al-Khulafa', pp. 125 f.; Muir's Caliphate, pp. 165 f. 

20 The text of A.J. (p. 195) inserts a comment as from al-Taftazani, "that is, assenting 
to the Reality." 



Chapter 16 



THE KHALIFATE AND IMAMATE 

T 

JLhc most excellent of mankind after our Prophet is Abu Bakr, the Very 
Veracious, then *Umar the Divider, then 'Uthman, he of the two lights, 
then 'All the Approved. Their Khalifate was in this order. The Khalifate 
was for thirty years and then after it [the form of rule was that of] a kingdom 
and a principality. 

The Muslims must have an Imam, who will carry out the administration 
of their decisions, the maintaining of their restrictive ordinances, the guard- 
ing of their frontiers, the equipping of their armies, the receiving of their 
alms, the subjugation of those who get the upper hand and robbers and high- 
waymen, the performance of worship on Fridays and Festivals, the settlement 
of disputes which take place among creatures, the receiving of evidence based 
on legal rights, the giving in marriage young men and maidens who have no 
guardians, and the division of the booty. 

Then the Imam must be visible, neither hidden nor expected, and he must 
be of the tribe of Quraysh and not of any other. He is not restricted to the 
Bani Hashim nor to the children of 4 All. It is not a stipulation that he should 
be preserved from error, nor that he should be the most excellent of the 
people of his time. It is a stipulation that he should be of the people who 
have free and complete authority, an administrator, able to execute decisions 
and maintain the limits of the territory of the world of Islam and to give the 
oppressed equity against the oppressor. The Imam is not to be removed for 
evil-doing or tyranny. 

The most excellent of mankind after our Prophet/It would have been better 
to say "after the prophets" but he meant "after" in point of time, since there 
is no prophet after ours. Nevertheless he should have made a special excep- 
tion of Jesus, since were he to mean all mankind in existence after our 
Prophet this [statement] would be refuted by [the descent] of Jesus; [141] 



i 4 i KHALIFATE AND IMAMATE 

and since if all mankind to be born after our prophet were meant, this 
stating of a preference would not convey a meaning which includes the Com- 
panions; and 1 if all mankind on the face of the earth at that time were 
meant, then it would not convey a meaning that includes the Followers [of the 
Companions] and those who came after them. And if the meaning were all 
people to be found on the face of the earth in general, it would be refuted by 
the case of Jesus. 

is Abu Bakr, the Very Veracious (al-siddiq) /who assented to the Prophet's 
claim to the office without delay and hesitation 2 and to the Ascension with- 
out hesitating, also. 

then 'Umar the Divider (al-fdruq) /who made a distinction between the real 
and the unsound both in legal cases and quarrels 

then 'Uthman, he of the two lights (dhu %nurayn) /He was so called be- 
cause the Prophet married his daughter Ruqayya to him and, when she died, 
he married Umm Kulthum to him, and when she died, he said, "Had I a 
third, I would marry you to her." 

then 'Ali the Approved {al-murtada) /by the creatures of Allah and by the 
sincerest of the Messenger's Companions. This [is the order in which] we 
have found [them] according to the Fathers. It is evident that if they did not 
have some proof for this [order] they would not have so ruled. 

However we have found that the proofs given by the two sides of the 
question are in opposition to each other. But we do not consider it one on 
which hangs any matter relating to practice, nor does hesitation to commit 
one's self about the matter cause any confusion regarding the duties incum- 
bent [on Muslims towards either of the two parties]. It appears that the 
Fathers were hesitant about preferring 'Uthman to 'All — Allah approve 
of them both — since they made one of the signs of the Approved Way and 
the Community the preference of the two Shay\hs 3 (Abu Bakr and 'Umar) 
and the love of the Khatans* ('Uthman and 'All). The impartial position 

1 The text of A.J. (p. 196) reads "since" for "and." 

2 The texts of A.J. (p. 196) and al-Kastall, Constantinople text of a.h. 1310 (p. 178), 
omit taraddud, "hesitation." 

8 For the Shi'itc position, see al-Babu 'l-Hadi 'Ashar, pp. 69 f. and Journal of the Ameri- 
can Oriental Society, XXIX, 137 rT. 

4 Al-khatan means any relation on the side of the wife. Here the meaning is evidently 
"son-in-law." Lane, Lexicon, p. 704; Lisdn, XVI, 295; A. J., p. 196. 



KHALIFATE AND IMAMATE 143 

to take is that if being more excellent means a greater reward, then hesita- 
tion to commit oneself in the matter has a place; but if it means that 
'Uthman had more of those things which are reckoned as virtues by people 
who use Reason, then hesitation does not [have a place]. 

Their Khalifate 5 (tyilafatuhum) /that is, their vicegerency (niyabatuhum) 
of the Messenger in maintaining religion so that it is incumbent on all peoples 
to follow 

was 6 in this order/also, that is to say, the Khalifate after the Prophet was to 
Abu Bakr, then to 'Umar, then to 'Uthman, and then to 'All. This is based 
on the fact that the Companions, having gathered on the day of the Mes- 
senger's death under the shelter of the Ban! Sa'ida, setded upon the suc- 
cession of Abu Bakr 7 to the Khalifate after some discussion and disagree- 
ment. They all agreed to this and 'All followed him 8 too in the presence 
of witnesses, after hesitation on his part. 9 If the Khalifate had not been Abu 
Bakr's right, the Companions would not have agreed to him, [142] and 'All 
would have contended with him as he contended with Mu'awiya 10 and 
would have argued against them had there been some statute in his favor, as 
the ShT'ites assert. How is it conceivable that it was right for the Com- 
panions of the Messenger to agree on something unsound and fail to act 
according to the statute which had come down to them? 

Then when Abu Bakr felt that his end was near he called 'Uthman and 
dictated to him the letter of his appointment of 'Umar. 11 When 'Uthman 
had written the paper, he sealed it and took it out to the people and com- 
manded them to swear allegiance to the one whose name was written 

5 Cf. Ibn KhaldGn, Muqaddima, I, 344 f.; Erie, of Islam, II, 881 ff.; al-Ash'arl, Maqalat, 
pp. 460 ff.; Ibn Hazm, Kitab al-Fisal, IV, 87 ff.; al-Ijl, al-Mawaqif, pp. 296 ff.; Diet, of 
Tech. Terms, p. 92. 

6 The text of A.J. (p. 197) adds "established" and with al-Kastali (p. 179) makes the 
"also" that follows part of the text of al-Nasafl. 

7 See Ibn Sa'd (Sachau), Biographien Muhammeds, III, a, 128 f.; al-Tabari, Annates, 
I, 1815&; Caetani, Annali dell' Islam, II, 528; al-Bukhari, aU$ahih, II, 421; Musnad, I, 
55 ff.; Muir, Caliphate, pp. 1 ff. 

8 The texts of A.J. (p. 197) and al-Kastall (p. 179) read baya'ahu, "he pledged fealty 
to him," for tabdahu. 

9 See al-Tabari, Annales, I, 1825. Some say 'All was not present: A.J., p. 197; al-Babu 
'UHadi 'Ashar, pp. 70 f. Cf. Muir, Caliphate, p. 5. 

10 See al-Tabari, Annales, I, 3353 ff.; al-Suyu£, Tarikh al-Khulafa* , pp. 173 f., 205 ff.; 
Enc. of Islam, III, 617 ff. 

11 See Ibn Sa'd (Sachau), Biographien Muhammeds, III, a, 133 al-Suyuti. Tari\h 
al-Khulafa: ', p. 79; al-Tabari, Annales, I, 2137 ff.; Muir, Caliphate, p. 77; Caetani, Annali 
delV Islam, III, 119 ff. 



i 4 4 KHALIFATE AND IMAMATE 

therein. So they swore allegiance; even 'All when the paper passed him said, 
"We have sworn allegiance to the one mentioned in it, even if it is 'Umar." 
In general, agreement upon 'Umar's Khalifate occurred. Then when 'Umar 
died a martyr's death, he left the matter of the Khalifate to a council of six, 12 
'Uthman, 'All, 'Abd al-Rahman b. 'Awf, Talha, al-Zubayr, and Sa'd b. Abu 
Waqqas. Then the [other] five committed the matter to Abd al-Rahman b. 
Awf. They accepted his decision and he chose 'Uthman and swore allegiance 
to him in the presence of a group of the Companions. They, then, did like- 
wise and submitted themselves to his commands and prohibitions, and per- 
formed worship with him on Fridays and on Festivals. This was by Agree- 
ment. Then 'Uthman died a martyr's death and left the matter [of a suc- 
cessor] undecided. The older men of the Refugees (al-muhajirun) and the 
Helpers (al-ansdr) agreed upon 'All 18 and besought him to accept the 
Khalifate. They swore allegiance to him since he was the most excellent of 
the people of his time and the most fitting candidate for the Khalifate. The 
dissensions and conflicts which took place were not because of a quarrel over 
the question of his Khalifate but because of an error in ijtihad. The dissen- 
sions which took place between the Shi'ites and the People of the Approved 
Way on this matter, and how each party claimed statutes to substantiate its 
position on the Imamate, and the replies that were given on both sides are all 
mentioned in the more extensive books. 

The Khalifate was for thirty years and then after it [the form of rule was 
that of] a kingdom (mul^) and a principality (imara)/\ This is based] on a 
statement of the Prophet, "After me there will be for thirty years a Khali- 
fate, then it will become a tyrannical kingdom." 14 'All having died as a 
martyr at the beginning of the thirtieth year following the death of the 
Prophet, Mu'awiya and those after him are not considered Khalifas but 
kings and princes. This is a difficult problem, for the People of Loosing and 
Binding (ahl al-hall wa l-aqd) 15 of the Muslim people were agreed on the 
Khalifate of the 'Abbasids and some of the Marwanids, such as 'Umar b. 
'Abd al-'Aziz, 16 for example. Perhaps the meaning here is rather that the 

12 Sec al-Tabari, Annalcs, I, 2724 ff.; al-Suyutl, Tari\h al-Khulafd' , pp. 134 f., 152 f.; 
T. W. Arnold, The Caliphate (Oxford, 1924), pp. 21 ff.; Cactani, Annali dell' Islam, V, 48. 

13 Sec al-Tabari, Annates, I, 3066 ff.; Enc of Islam, I, 283. For the definition of ijtihad 
see the paragraph on Mujtahid in Chap. 19, below. 

14 See Musnad, V, 220 f.; Arnold, Caliphate, pp. 107 f., 163; A.J., p. 198. 

15 See al-Mawardl, al-Ahkjim al -Suit amy a, pp. 7 ff.; al-Ta'rifat, p. 8. 

16 See al-Tabari, Annates, II, 1340 ff.; Ibn Qutayba, Kitab al-Ma'arif, p. 184; al-Suyutf, 
Tarikh al-Khulafa", p. 229; al-NawawI (Wiistcnfeld), Ueber das Leben, pp. 463 fT.; Muir, 
Caliphate, pp. 369 ff . 



KHALIFATE AND IMAMATE i 4 y 

perfect Khalifate, in which there is no dross due to difference [of opinion] or 
inclination away from following [the right Khalifa], will be for a period 
of thirty years, and then after it there might be or there might not be a Khali- 
fate. 

The position of Agreement is that it is necessary 17 to appoint an Imam. 
The difference of opinion is on the question whether the appointment must 
be by Allah or by His creatures, and whether the basis [for appointment] is 
authority or Reason. The correct position is that the creatures must appoint 
a Khalifa on the basis of authority because of the statement of the Prophet, 18 
"Whoever dies not having known the Imam of his time, dies the death of the 
days of Ignorance (al-jahillya) " And they must appoint someone, since the 
people at the time of the Prophet's death made this question the most im- 
portant matter of consideration, so important in fact that they considered it 
more important than the matter of his burial, and so also has it been after the 
death of each Imam. And they must appoint someone for so many legal obli- 
gations are dependent on the Imam, as al-Nasafl has indicated in his state- 
ment which follows. 

The Muslims must have an Imam, who will carry out the administration of 
their decisions, the maintaining of their restrictive ordinances, the guard- 
ing of their frontiers, [143] the equipping of their armies, the receiving of 
their alms, the subjugation of those who get the upper hand and robbers and 
highwaymen, the performance of worship on Fridays and Festivals, the 
settlement of disputes which take place among creatures, the receiving of 
evidence based on legal rights, the giving in marriage of the young men and 
maidens who have no guardians, and the division of the booty 10 /and things 
like these 20 with which individuals of the people are not entrusted. And 
if objection is made, "Why is it not permissible to have sufficient men of 
power in different districts, and thus do away with the necessity of a general 
authority over all?" we reply that this only leads to disputes and quarrels 
which end in disorder both in religious and secular matters, as is to be seen 

17 The Kharijitcs say the Khalifate is permissible, but not necessary. The Imamites and 
the Isma'ilites say the appointment is of Allah; the orthodox say it is of His creatures on 
an authoritative basis, the Zaydites and the most of the Mu'tazilites say on a rational basis, 
al-Jahiz, al-Ka 4 bI, and Abu'l-Husayn al-Basri say both (see A.J., p. 198; *I.D., p. 142). See 
also Ibn Khaldun, Muqaddima, I, 3466*.; Macdonald, Development, pp. 18 ff. 

18 Musnad, IV, 96. 

19 Cf. Ibn Khaldun, Muqaddima, I, 342; al-Mawardl, al-Ahkam al-Sultaniya (see In- 
dex); al-RazI, Muhasftd, pp. 176 ff.; al-Iji, al-Mawaqif, pp. 196 ff.; al-Shahrastanl, 
Nihayatu 'l-lqdam, p. 478. 

20 A.J. (p. 198) reads this phrase as part of the text of al-Nasafl. 



i 4 6" KHALIFATE AND IMAMATE 

at the present time. If objection is made that it is sufficient to have a man of 
power with general authority over all, whether he is called an Imam or not, 
so that the organization [of rule] would be very much like the days of the 
Turks, we reply, "Yes, there would be a sort of order in secular affairs, but 
the religious affairs which are more important and which are the great 
mainstay of the state would be in disorder." 

If objection is made that since the period of the Khalifate was thirty years, 
then the time subsequent to the rightly guided Khalifas {al-khulafa* al- 
rdshidun) is devoid of the Imam and the whole of the Muslim people are 
thus disobedient and when they die, they die as in the days of Ignorance, 
we reply that it has already been pointed out that the perfect Khalifate is 
what is meant. And were it admitted [that the period of the Khalifate was for 
thirty years only] then perhaps after it the era of the Khalifate ends with- 
out the era of the Imamate ending, on the basis that "Imam" is a more 
general term than "Khalifa." However, we have not found this technicality 
of differentiating thus the two terms used by any people except those of the 
Shl'ites who assert that "Khalifa" is a more general term. On this basis they 
speak of the Khalifate of the three Imams, not of their Imamate. But after 
the 'Abbasid Khalifas the matter of the Khalifate is a dubious affair {mush- 

Kit). 

Then the Imam must be visible/that he may be resorted 21 to, and so that he 
may perform what is beneficial, to accomplish that for which the office of 
Imam was established 

neither hidden/from the eyes of men out of fear of enemies and the mastery 
which oppressors have gained 

nor expected (muntazar) /His coming forth will be at the suitable time, at 
the cutting off of the sources 22 (mawarid) of evil and corruption and at the 
loosening of the rule of tyranny and obstinacy. [That is to say the right posi- 
tion] is unlike that of the Shl'ites who assert — especially the Imamites among 
them — that after Muhammad the rightful Imam is 'All, then his son 
al-Hasan, then his brother al-Husayn, then his son 'Ali Zayn al-'Abidlh, 
then his son Muhammad al-Baqir, then his son Ja'far al-Sadiq, then his son 
Musa al-Kazim, then his son 'All al-Rida, then his son Muhammad al-Taql,* 8 

21 A.J. (p. 199) reads this phrase as part of the text of al-Nasafi. 

22 The texts of A.J. (p. 199 f.) and ai-Kastall (p. 18a) read mawadd, "materials." 

28 Cf. al-Bibu 'l-Hddi 'Ashor, p. 78, which reads al-Jawid for al-Taql, and al-HJdi for 



KHALIFATE AND IMAMATE 147 

then his son 'All al-Naql, then his son al-Hasan al-'Askarl, then his son 
Muhammad al-Qa'im, the expected one, the Mahdl, 24 who has hidden him- 
self out of fear of his enemies. [They believe also that] he will appear and 
fill the world with equity and justice just as it has been filled with injustice 
and oppression. Nothing shall prevent his length of years and the prolonging 
of his days. He will be like Jesus and al-Khadir 25 and others in this respect. 
You [O reader] are well aware that the hiding and the non-existence of the 
Imam are alike in failing to attain the purpose to be sought in the existence 
of the Imam, and that his fear of enemies should not require his hiding, 
since nothing but the name now exists; rather the end of the whole matter is 
that fear does require him to hide his claim to the Imamate, just as in the 
case [144] of his ancestors who appeared among men but did not claim the 
office. Moreover when times are corrupt and there are differences of opinion 
and tyrants reign, the people's need for an Imam is just that much stronger 
and their submission to him is just that much easier. 

and he must be of the tribe of Quraysh, and not of any other. He is not re- 
stricted to the Ban! Hashim nor to the children of 'All 26 /This means that it 
is stipulated that the Imam be of Quraysh, because of the saying of the 
Prophet, "The Imams are of Quraysh." 27 This is correct although it is an 
individual narrative. However, when Abu Bakr related it, adducing it as 
evidence to the Helpers (al-ansar), no one contradicted him, and it thus 
became agreed upon. No party has dissented except the Kharijites and 
some of the Mu'tazilites. There is no stipulation, however, that the Imam 
must be a Hashimite or an 'Alid, from what has already been established 
by proof regarding the Khalifate of Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman who 
were of Quraysh although they were not of Ban! Hashim. The name 
Quraysh is applied to the children of al-Nadr b. Kinana, while Hashim was 

al-Naql and $ahib al-Zaman for al-Mahdl. Sec also Enc. of Islam, m, inf.; Ibn Khaldun, 
Muqaddima, I, 363 f.; A. J., p. 199. 

2 * The doctrine of the coming of al-Mahdl, the Guided One, is not confined to Shi'ite 
Islam although that of the expected Imam is. See Enc. of Islam, III, inf.; Enc. of Re- 
ligion and Ethics, VIII, 336 ff.; Jour. Am. Or. Soc, XXIX, 52 ff.; al-Bdbu 'l-Hadi 'Ashar, 
pp. 80 f. 

25 See Enc. of Islam, II, 861 £.; Muslim, al-Sahih, II, 311; Lisan, V, 332; Ibn Hajar, 
Biographical Dictionary, I, 882 ff.; al-Tha*labi, Qisas, pp. 189 ff.; Enc. of Religion and 
Ethics, VII, 693 f. 

26 Here I have adopted the reading of A.J. (p. 198 "nor the children of 'AH'*) who 
makes this phrase a part of al-NasafTs text. I.D. reads it as a part of the commentary. 

2T See Arnold, Caliphate, p. 47; al-Bukhari, al-$ahih, IV, 407; Muslim, al-$ahih, II, 
107 f.; Musnad, III, 129, 183; IV, 421. The Kharijites quoted traditions to contradict it 
See al-Bukhiri, al-$Mh, I, 181 f. 



i 4 8 KHALIFATE AND IMAMATE 

the father of 'Abd al-Muttalib, the grandfather of the Messenger of Allah, 
for he was Muhammad b. 'Abd Allah b. 'Abd al-Muttalib b. Hashim b. 
'Abd Manaf b. Qusayy b. Kilab b. Murra b. Ka'b b. Lu'ayy b. Ghalib b. 
Fihr b. Malik b. al-Nadr b. Kinana b. Khuzayma b. Mudrika b. al-Yas 
b. Mudar b. Nizar b. Ma'add b. 'Adnan. 28 

The 'Alids and the 'Abbasids are of the Bam Hashim, for al-' Abbas and 
Abu Talib were sons of 'Abd al-Muttalib. Abu Bakr 29 was from Quraysh, 
for he was the son of Abu Quhafa, 'Uthman b. 'Amir b. 'Amr b. Ka'b b. 
Lu'ayy, and so also was 'Umar, 80 i or he was the son of al-Khattab b. Nufayl 
b. 'Abd al-'Uzza b. Ribah b. 'Abd Allah b. Qurt b. Rizah b. 'Add! b. 
Ka'b. And so also was 'Uthman, 81 for he was the son of 'Affan b. Abu l-'As b. 
Umayya b. 'Abd Shams b. 'Abd Manaf. 

It is not a stipulation/of the Imam 

that he should be preserved from error (ma sum) 32 /We have already seen 
that there is proof of Abu Bakr's Imamate, in spite of the lack of absolute 
certainty as to his being preserved from error. Furthermore, the stipulation 
is the thing here that needs proof, whereas the lack of proof for the stipula- 
tion is sufficient to show that the stipulation is lacking. The one who differs 
from this position adduces as an argument the saying of Allah, "My 
covenant does not apply to wrong-doers (al-zdlimin)" (Qur'an 2:118). There- 
fore the one who differs says that he who is not preserved from error is a 
wrong-doer, so the covenant of the Imamate does not apply to him. The 
answer is to preclude this, for a wrong-doer is one who commits an act of 
disobedience which brings to pass the downfall of justice, without there 
being any repentance for the act, or reformation. The one who is not pre- 
served from error is not necessarily a wrong-doer. 

The real fact about this matter of preservation from error (al-isma) is 
that Allah does not create a sin (al-dhanb) in the creature while his power 

28 Cf. Ibn Hisham, Sirat Rasul Allah, p. 3; Ibn Qutayba, Kitdb al~Ma'drif, pp. 32 ff.; 
Ibn Sa'd (Sachau), Biog. Muhammeds, I, 1, 28. 

29 Cf. Ibn Hisham, Sirat Rasul Allah, p. 161; al-NawawI (Wustenfeld), Ueber das 
Leben, p. 656; Ibn Hajar, Biog. Diet., II, 328; Ibn Sa'd (Sachau), Biog. Muhammeds, III, 
i, 119; Ibn Qutayba, Kitdb al-Ma'drif, p. 83. There are slight variations in Abu Bakr's 
genealogy as given in some of these. 

80 A1-Nawawl (Wustenfeld), Ueber das Leben, p. 447 and Ibn Sa'd (Sachau), Biog. 
Muhammeds, III, 1, 190 say clearly that Rabah in 'Umar's genealogy is Riyah. 

31 See also al-NawawI (Wustenfeld), Ueber das Leben, p. 409; Ibn Sa'd (Sachau), Biog. 
Muhammeds, III, 1, 36. 

82 The Shi'ites hold that the Imam is ma' sum. See al-Bdbu 'l-Hddi 'Ashar, p. 66. 



KHALIFATE AND IMAMATE 149 

and choice remain. This is the meaning of the saying, "It [that is, al-isma] is 
a favor (luff) of Allah which leads him on to do good and restrains him 
from doing evil, although the power of choice remains in order to verify the 
reality [145] of trial." For this reason al-Shaykh Abu Mansur al-Matundl 
said, "Preservation from error does not remove testing (al-mihna)" From 
this there appears the invalidity of the statement of the one who says that 
this preservation from error is a special characteristic of the soul of a person 
or his body, on account of which characteristic no sin is able to proceed from 
him. How could this be? If the sin were impossible it would not be sound 
for him to be made responsible for forsaking sin, nor would he be rewarded 
for so doing. 

nor that he should be the most excellent 33 of the people of his time 84 /for the 
one who is equal fto the most excellent] in virtue and even less fit as to 
knowledge and practice may be more experienced in the things of the 
Imamate that are conducive to good and evil, and more able to perform the 
necessary duties, especially whenever the appointment of the less excellent 
is better for warding off evil and removing the outbreak of sedition. For 
this reason 'Umar made the Imamate a matter for consultation (shura) 
among six persons, along with the certain fact that some of them were more 
excellent than others. If someone asks, "How can it be sound to make the 
Imamate a matter for consultation among six persons, since it is not per- 
missible to appoint two Imams 35 at one time?" we answer that the thing 
which is not permissible is to appoint two independent Imams, both of whom 
must be obeyed separately, since compliance with mutually opposing de- 
cisions follows the appointing of two independent Imams. But in consulta- 
tation all of them took the place of one Imam. 

It is a stipulation that he should be of the people who have free and complete 
authority 36 /that is, a free, intelligent, male Muslim who is mature, since 
Allah has not made a way for the Unbelievers over the Believers (see 
Qur'an 4:140). The slave is busy in the service of his master, despised in the 

83 The texts of al-Kastall (p. 185) and A.J. (p. 200) read "More excellent than." 
34 The Shi'ite position requires the Imam to be the most excellent man of his time (al~ 
Baku 'l-Hadi 'Ashar, p. 69). 

85 There is an interesting tradition suggesting that one of two contemporaneous Imams 
should be killed. See Muslim, al-Sahth, II, 118. 

86 Cf. Ibn Khaldun, Muqaddima, I, 349; al-Iji, al-Mawaqif, pp. 301 ff.; al-Mawardl, 
al'Ahkam al-Sultantya, pp. 5 ff.; al-Ghazzali, Ihya' (commentary of Sayyid Murtatfa), 
II, 230 ff.; al-Shahrastanl, Nihayatu 'l-lqdam, p. 496. 



i 5 o KHALIFATE AND IMAMATE 

eyes of the people; women are deficient in Reason and religion; and a boy 
and a demented man are wanting [in ability] for the regulation of affairs 
and the management of the common welfare. 

an administrator/that is, in possessing management over the affairs of Mus- 
lims by the force of his opinion and by his deliberation and the aid of his 
boldness and might 

able/by his knowledge, justice, competence and courage 

to execute decisions and maintain the limits (hudud) of the territory of the 
world of Islam (dar al-Islam) and to give the oppressed equity against the 
oppressor/since failure in these matters falls short of the purpose of estab- 
lishing an Imam. 

The Imam is not to be removed for evil-doing 37 /that is, for departing from 
obedience to Allah 

or tyranny (al-jawr) /that is, the oppression of Allah's creatures. This is so, for 
evil-doing has appeared and tyranny has spread among Imams and com- 
manders after the time of the rightly-guided Khalifas [Abu Bakr, 'Umar, 
'Uthman, and 'All]. The Fathers were accustomed to submit to such [Imams 
and commanders] and to perform worship on Fridays and Festivals with 
their permission, without thinking of rebelling against them. This is [also 
true] because preservation from error is not a stipulation for the Imam on 
assuming office, so how much more would it not be for continuing [him in 
office] ! 

According to al-ShafVi the Imam may be removed on the grounds of 
evil-doing and tyranny, and in like manner any judge {qadi) or com- 
mander [may be removed]. The basis for this view is that the evil-doer ac- 
cording to al-Shafi'I is not a person of authority (min ahl al-wilaya) y for 
since he does not look after himself, how can he look after others? According 
to Abu Hanlfa an evil-doer is a person of authority even to the extent 
[146] that it is valid for an evil-doer who is a father to give in marriage his 
daughter who is a minor. That which is written down in the books of the 
ShafVites permits the removal of a judge for evil-doing, but not an Imam, the 

87 This was the Murji'ite position. See Macdonald, Development, pp. 122 ff.; Goldziher, 
Vorlesungcn, pp. 87 ff.; Enc. of Islam, III, 734. 



KHALIFATE AND IMAMATE 151 

difference being that in the removal of the Imam and the appointment of 
another there is occasion for stirring up sedition, since he possesses power 
which the judge does not. 

In the book al-Nawadir 38 it is stated that the three Learned Ones say that 
the judging of an evil-doer is not permissible. Some of the Early Theologians 
say that a man being an evil-doer may be invested [with the office of judge], 
but if, after being invested with the office as an upright man, he does evil he 
may be removed because the one who invested him with the office depended 
on his being upright, and he would not be pleased that he should act as a 
judge devoid of uprightness. QadT Khan in his Fatawl 30 says that all 
are agreed that whenever a judge is bribed, his decision on the matter in 
which he was bribed should not be enforced. And whenever a judge pro- 
cures the position of judge by bribery he should not become a judge, and if 
he should make a decision it should not be enforced. 

88 This may be the book by Muhammad b. 'All al-Tirmidhl. Sec Brockelmann, Gc~ 
schichte, I, 164. 

89 Qadl Khan, a Hanafi mufti and scholar. His Fatdwi, in four volumes, is a widely 
known work. See Enc. of Islam, II, 608; Brockelmann, Geschichte, I, 376. 



Chapter iy 



VARIOUS ARTICLES OF BELIEF CONCERN- 
ING WORSHIP, THE COMPANIONS OF THE 
PROPHET, THE WIPING ON THE INNER 
SHOES, AND NABIDH 



V V orship is allowable behind anyone [acting as Imam], whether right- 
eous or immoral; and worship is to be performed for anyone whether right- 
eous or immoral. 

Only the good concerning the Companions should be mentioned of them. 
We bear witness that in the Garden are the ten Blessed to whom the Prophet 
announced the glad tidings. 

We approve the wiping on the two inner shoes on a journey and at one's 
abode. 

We do not prohibit as unlawful the nabtdh of dates. 

Worship (al-sala) is allowable behind anyone [acting as Imam], whether 
righteous (barr) or immoral (fajir) x /[This is based] on the statement of 
the Prophet, "Worship behind anyone whether righteous or immoral," 2 and 
also on the fact that the Learned of the Muslim people were accustomed to 
worship behind evil-doers, people of personal desires, and the innovator 
without [there being any] disapprobation. With regard to what has been 
reported from some of the Fathers concerning the prohibition of worship 
behind an evil-doer or an innovator, its purport is that such an act is to be 
disapproved, since there is no actual statement about the disapproval of 

1 Most of the Mu'tazilites did not permit worship behind an immoral person, according 
to al-Ash'arl. Maqdldt, pp. 450 f. Cf. Ibn Hazm, Kitdb al-Fisal, IV, 176 f. 

2 Al-Ghazzall {Ihyd', III, 171 ff., tr. in Calverley, Worship in Islam, p. 136) quotes a say- 
ing from Sufyan who said, "Worship behind every one, just or unjust, except one addicted 
to wine, one notorious for transgression, one disobedient to parents, one with an innova- 
tion, or one who is a runaway slave." Cf. al-Ghazzall, al-Wajiz (Cairo, a.h. 13 17), p. 55; 
al-Mawardl, al-Ahhjim al-Sultaniya, p. 175; al-Bukhari, al-Sahih, I, 181 f.; Goidsack; 
Muhammadan Traditions, p. 49. 




VARIOUS ARTICLES OF BELIEF 153 

worship behind an evil-doer or an innovator. This [is the case] if evil-doing 
and innovation do not reach the point of Unbelief, but if they do, then there 
is no question about the impropriety of worship behind them [in that case]. 

Although the Mu'tazilites make the evil-doer something other than a 
Believer, yet they permit worship behind him, since they stipulate for the 
Imam an absence of Unbelief and not the presence of Belief, meaning [by 
Belief] assent, confession, and good works, all taken together. 

and worship is to be performed for anyone whether righteous or immoral/ 
whenever he dies in Belief. This is on the basis of Agreement and the state- 
ment of the Prophet, "Do not fail to perform worship for anyone of the 
People of the qibla who dies." 3 It may be objected that such questions as 
these are of the details of fiqh and have no place in the fundamentals of 
\alam; and that if al-Nasafl means by this statement that a conviction regard- 
ing the reality of this doctrine is [one of the] necessary [articles of Belief] and 
of the fundamentals, then all questions of fiqh are. To this we reply that 
when he had completed the explanation of the purposes of the science of 
\alam in investigating the essence [of the Deity], His attributes and His 
actions, the world to come (al-ma'ad)f the prophetic office, and the Imamate 
according to the law of the people of Islam, and the path of the People of 
the Approved Way and the Community, then he attempted to draw attention 
to some of the matters by which the People of the Approved Way are dis- 
tinguished from others who differ from them, such as the Mu'tazilites, or the 
Shl'ites, or the Philosophers or the Heretics (al-Maldhida) or any others of 
the people of innovation and personal desires, whether these matters are de- 
tails of fiqh or some particular matters connected with the articles of Be- 
lief. 

Only the good concerning the Companions should be mentioned of them/ 

This is on account of their merits which are mentioned in sound traditions, 
and because it is necessary to refrain from reviling them since the Prophet 
has said, "Do not vilify my Companions, for if one of you should spend 
as much as Mount Uhud in gold he would not attain the standard of one 
of them, no, not even half of it." 5 He also said, "Honor my Companions, 
for they are the best of you, and so forth/' 6 and, "Allah, Allah, and regarding 

3 Al-Bukhari, aUSahth, I, nof.; Muslim, d-Sahih, I, 47. Cf. al-Ijl, al-Mawaqif, 
pp. 290 ff. 

4 Sec Lane, Uxicon, p. 2 191; al-RazI, Muha^al, p. 163; al~Babu 'l-Hadl 'Ashar, pp. 82 ft\ 

5 Uusnad, III, 54 f. 6 Musnad, I, 26; al-Bukhari, al-$ahih, III, 416. 



154 VARIOUS ARTICLES OF BELIEF 

my Companions do not make them a target after I am gone, for whoever 
loves them, with my love loves them, and whoever hates them, with my 
hatred hates them; and whoever harms them has harmed me, and whoever 
harms me has harmed Allah, and whoever has harmed Allah is about to be 
taken by Allah." 7 

There are sound traditions regarding the merits of Abu Bakr, 'Urnar, 
'Uthman, 'All, al-Hasan, al-Husayn and others of the important Companions. 
As for the disputes and conflicts which occurred among them, there are rea- 
sons and interpretations for these. Then as to vilifying and reviling them, this 
is Unbelief if it contradicts the absolute proofs [147] such as in the case of 
defaming of 'A'isha; 8 otherwise it is an innovation and evil-doing. In general 
there is no basis in what has been reported from the Fathers, who were 
Mujtahids and from the Learned who were of good repute, for permitting 
a curse on Mu'awiya and his Allies; for the aim of their affair was rebellion 
and secession from obedience to the real Imam, and this does not require 
that they be cursed. However, they [that is, the Fathers and the Learned] 
differed so about Yazld b. Mu'awiya 9 [whether cursing him was permissible 
or not] that it was stated in al-Khulasa 10 and other books that it was not 
fitting to curse him nor al-Hajjaj, 11 since the Prophet prohibited the cursing 
of those who performed worship and who are of the people of the qibla. As 
for that which has been reported about the Prophet s cursing some of the 
people of the qibla, that was because he knew things about the affairs of men 
which no one else knew. Some pronounced a curse on Yazld because he be- 
came an Unbeliever when he ordered the murder of al-Husayn. They agreed 
to permit the cursing of those who killed al-Husayn, or commanded it, or 
permitted it, or consented to it. The real fact is that the consent of Yazld to 
the killing of al-Husayn, his rejoicing in it, and his contempt for the family 
of the Prophet are among those things the meaning of which is based on 
tawatur although the details of the incident are from individual traditions. 

7 Musnad, IV, 87; V, 55, 57, and at-Tirmidhl, Sahih, "al-Manaqib," b. 58. 

8 See Margoliouth, Mohammed, pp. 340 ff.; Muir, Life of Mohammed, pp. 298 ff.; 
al-Bukhari, al-Sahih, II, 153 if.; Musnad, VI, 59#-5 Muslim, al-Sahih, II, 455 ff.; al- 
BaydawT. Anwar al-Tanzll, II, 16; Ibn Hisham, Sirat Rastil Allah, 731 ff.; al-Tabari, 
Annales, I, 1517 ff.; Enc. of Islam, I, 216. 

9 See al-Tabari, Annales, II, 272 ff.; Ibn Qutayba, Kitab al-Ma'arif, p. 178; al-Suyutl, 
Tarikh al-Khulafa', pp. 205 ff.; Henri Lammens, he Calif at de Yazid Ier (Beyrouth, 1921), 
pp. 132 ff.; Goldziher, Muh. Studicn, II, 97. 

10 This is probably Khulasat al-Ahkam, etc., by al-Nawawi. See Brockelmann, Gc- 
schichte, I, 396. 

11 See al-Tabari, Annales, II, 829 ff., 863 ff.; al-Nawawi (Wustenfeld), Ueber das 
Leben, pp. 198 f. 



VARIOUS ARTICLES OF BELIEF 155 

So then we do not hesitate at all concerning him, rather we do not hesitate 
[to decide] about his Belief [as to whether he had any or not] — the curse of 
Allah on him, his Helpers, and his Allies. 

We bear witness that in the Garden are the ten Blessed to whom the 
Prophet announced the glad tidings/of the Garden, 12 inasmuch as the Prophet 
said, "Abu Bakr is in the Garden, 'Umar is in the Garden, 'Uthman is in the 
Garden, 'All is in the Garden, Talha is in the Garden, al-Zubayr is in the 
Garden, 'Abd al-Rahman b. 'Awf is in the Garden, Sa'd b. Abu Waqqas is in 
the Garden, Sa'Id b. Zayd is in the Garden, Abu 'Ubayda b. al-Jarrah is in 
the Garden. 18 We also bear witness that Fatima and al-Hasan and al- 
Husayn are in the Garden because of what is related in sound tradition; that 
Fatima is the mistress 14 of the women who dwell in the Garden, and that 
al-Hasan and al-Husayn are the two masters 16 of the youths who dwell in the 
Garden. The remainder of the Companions are only remembered for their 
good; more is to be hoped for them than for any other Believers. We do not 
bear witness that any [special] individual in himself is in the Garden or in 
the Fire, but we bear witness that the Believers are of the people of the 
Garden and the Unbelievers are of the people of the Fire. 

We approve the wiping on the two inner shoes (al-^huffayn) 16 on a jour- 
ney and at one's abode 17 / Although this is an addition to the Book, yet it 
is established by a well-known narrative. 'All b. Abu Talib, when asked about 
the wiping on the inner boots, replied, "The Messenger of Allah made the 
period three days and nights for the traveler and a day and a night for the 
dweller. ,, 18 Abu Bakr relates that the Messenger of Allah sanctioned the 
wiping on the inner shoes three days and nights for the traveler and a day 

12 Cureton, p. 5, and al-Kastall, p. 188, make "of the Garden" part of the text of al- 
NasafT. 

18 The names are not always in the order given here, nor is the number always ten. 
See Uusnad, I, 187 ff. 

14 See Musnad, III, 64; V, 391. Traditions given in al-Bukhari, al-Sahth, IV, 182, and 
Muslim, al-Sahih, II, 340, say "mistress of the women of the Believers" or "of this religion." 
See also Ibn Hajar, Biog. Diet., IV, 727; Enc. of Islam, II, 85 ff. 

Musnad, III, 3, 62, 64; V, 391, 392; al-Tirmidhi, Sahth, "Manaqib," b. 30. See also 
Ibn Hajar, Biog. Diet., I, 676; al-Nawawi (Wiistenfeld), Ueber das Leben, p. 207. 

16 Al'khuftayn. See Dozy, Dictionnaire des vetements arabes, pp. 155 ff. 

17 This rite, which permits the wiping of the inner shoes instead of washing the feet 
in ablutions, was a distinguishing mark between the Sunnites, the Shi'itcs, and the 
Kharijites. Wensinck, The Muslim Creed, pp. 158, 219 f.; al-Ghazzall, Ihya", VI, 416 ff.; 
idem, al-Wajiz (Cairo, a.h. 1317), I, 23. 

18 Cf. Musnad, I, 133; Muslim, al-Sahih, I, 119 f. 



ij* VARIOUS ARTICLES OF BELIEF 

and a night for the dweller, if one has purified himself and then put them 
on. Al-Hasan al-Basri said that he met seventy of the Companions who ap- 
proved the wiping of the inner shoes. Therefore Abu Hanlfa said, "I did not 
admit the wiping until the proof was as clear to me as the light of day." 
Al-Karkhi said, "I fear him to be an Unbeliever who does not approve the 
wiping on the inner boots, for the precedents on this subject have come 
down in the form of tawatur." So in general whoever does not approve the 
wiping on the inner shoes is one of the people of innovation. It became so 
distinctive that when Anas b. Malik was asked who were the People of the 
Approved Way and the Community, he said, "It means to love the two 
shay\hs [Abu Bakr and 'Umar], not to revile the two \hatans ['Uthman 
and 'All], and to wipe on the inner shoes.' , 

We do not prohibit as unlawful the nabidh of dates (al-tamr) 19 /This 
means that the dates or the raisins are brewed in water and then put in an 
earthen vessel, until a stinging taste develops in the brew as in juqqa [a kind 
of beer J. It seems as though this [nabidh] had been prohibited 20 at the 
beginning of Islam when jars (al-jirar) were the vessels for wines (al- 
\humur)\ then it was abrogated. So then the non-prohibition of nabidh is 
of the rules of the People of the Approved Way and the Community, which 
is contrary to the position of the Rawafid. This [judgment] is different from 
that which has [to do with nabidh that has] become strong and intoxicating. 
Many of the People of the Approved Way and the Community took the 
position that little or much of it is prohibited. 

19 A.J., p. 203 reads al-jurra, "the jar," instead of al-tamr, "the dates." Cureton, p. 5, 
omits both and reads "al-nabidh" only. 

20 Muslim, al-Sahih, II, 182; Musnad, I, 27, 38, and III, 237. 



Qhapter 18 



VARIOUS ARTICLES OF BELIEF CONCERN- 
ING THE RANK OF THE WALI, THE PEOPLE 
OF THE INNER MEANING, THE FEELING OF 
SECURITY AND DESPAIR, THE DIVINER, 
THE NON-EXISTENT, AND PRAYERS 
FOR THE DEAD 



T 

JLhe Wall does not reach the rank of the prophets. 

And the creature does not come to the place where command and prohibi- 
tion do not apply to him. The statutes are [to be interpreted] according to 
their literal meanings, and to turn aside from them to meanings which the 
People of the Inner Meaning assert is heresy. The rejection of the statutes 
is Unbelief. The making of disobedience lawful is Unbelief, and making 
light of disobedience and ridicule of the Law are Unbelief. 

And despair of Allah is Unbelief and feeling secure from Allah is Unbe- 
lief. 

To assent to what a diviner narrates of the Unseen is Unbelief. 
The non-existent is not a thing. 

And in prayer of the living for the dead and the giving of alms for them 
there is advantage for them. Allah answers prayers and supplies needs. 

The Wali 1 does not reach the rank of the prophets/for prophets are pre- 
served from error, secure from fear of their latter end, honored by revelation, 
and by seeing the Angel [of Revelation, Gabriel], and ordered to convey 
judgments and to lead mankind, in addition to possessing the perfections 
of Walls. That which has been reported of some of the Karramites, [148] 
in that they permit a Wall to be more excellent than a prophet, is Unbelief 
and error. Certainly this question of whether the rank of prophet is better 
than that of Wall [in the same individual] is sometimes reopened after [it 

1 Sec above, Chap. 15, n. 7. 



1 58 FURTHER ARTICLES OF BELIEF 

is admitted that] there is decisive proof that the prophet is characterized by 
both dignities and that he is more excellent than the Wall who is not a 
prophet. 

And the creature does not come to the place/as long as he is rational and 
mature 

where command and prohibition do not apply to him/This is because the 
manner of address in the imposing of responsibilities is general, and because 
the Mujtahids are in Agreement on it. Some of the Antinomians (al~ 
Mubahiyun) 2 held that whenever the creature reached the limit of love and 
his heart was pure, and he chose Belief instead of Unbelief without hypocrisy, 
then command and prohibition did not apply to him and Allah would not 
make him enter the Fire for committing great sins. And some said that 
outward forms of service such as worship, fasting, the poor rate, and the 
pilgrimage 8 do not apply to him, but rather his service is meditation (al- 
tafatyur). This is Unbelief and Error, for the most perfect of people in love 
of Allah are the prophets, especially the Beloved of Allah, and yet the im- 
posing of responsibilities in their case was more complete and more perfect. 
As for the saying of the Prophet, "Whenever Allah loves a creature no sin 
shall harm him," it means that He has preserved him from sins, nor has He 
visited him with the harm of them. 

The statutes/of the Qur'an and the Sunna 

are [to be interpreted] according to their literal meanings/unless a decisive 
proof sets them aside, as in case of the verses the literal meaning of which 
refers to a direction or to corporeality 4 [on the part of the Deity] and the 
like. One does not say that these [literal meanings] 5 are not of the statute 
but rather that the statute is equivocal {mutashabih)? For we say that the 

2 See al-Baghdadi, al-Farq bayn al-Firctq, pp. 251 f. 

3 An example of this attitude is that of Abu Sa'id b. Abu 1-Khayr regarding the non- 
necessity of the Pilgrimage. R. A. Nicholson, Studies in Islamic Mysticism (Cambridge, 
1921), pp. 61 f. 

4 The verses of the Qur'an suggesting anthropomorphic ideas were the battleground of 
the early theologians. See al-Ijl, al-Mawdqif, pp. 71 ff.; Ibn Khaldun, Muqaddima, III, 
44 

0 The extreme literalists were called al-Zdhiriya. See Macdonald, Development, pp. 108, 
208 ff.; Hortcn, Die phil. Systeme der spe/(. Theologen im Islam (Index); Goldziher, Die 
Zahiriten, pp. 41 ff.; Ibn Khaldun, Muqaddima, III, 3 f. 

6 See Qur. 3:5; al-RazI, Mafatth, II, 415 ff.; al-BaydawI, Anwar al-Tanzil, I, 145 f. 



FURTHER ARTICLES OF BELIEF 159 

meaning of the statute here is not that which is contrary to the literal 
meaning, or to that which is to be explained as the meaning or that the 
meaning is perspicuous, but rather it is that which embraces all the con- 
ventional divisions of the context. 

and to turn aside from them/that is, from the literal meanings 

to meanings which the People of the Inner Meaning (ahl al-batin) assert / 
They are the Heretics, who are called al-Bdtimya 7 because of their assertion 
that the statutes are not to be interpreted according to their literal meanings, 
but that they have inner meanings which only the Teacher knows. Their 
purpose in this is the disavowal of the Law entirely. 

is heresy 8 /that is, a swerving away and a turning aside from Islam and an 
attaining to Unbelief and being so described, because it is a denial of the 
Prophet in that very thing by which his coming was of necessity known. But 
as for the position which some of the Verifiers have taken — that along with 
their literal meanings there are in the statutes hidden allusions to fine points 
{daqd'iq) which are unveiled to the lords of the Way {arbdb al-sulu^) 9 and 
which it is nevertheless possible to harmonize with the purpose of the 
literal meanings — well, this position is of the perfection of Belief and absolute 
knowledge. 

The rejection of the statutes/by denying the judgments which are indicated 
in the decisive statutes, whether they are from the Book or the Sunna, such as 
the resurrection of bodies, for example 

is Unbelief/for it plainly makes Allah and His Messenger liars. So whoever 
defames 'A'isha on the charge of adultery 10 becomes an Unbeliever. 

The making of disobedience lawful (istihldl) /whether the disobedience is a 
small or a great sin 

7 See al-Shahrastanl, al-Milal, pp. 147 f?.; al-Ijl, cd-Mawdqif, p. 348; al -Baghdad!, al- 
Farq bayn al-Firaq, pp. 265 ff.; Diet, of Tech. Terms, pp. 669 f.; Ibn Khaldun, Muqad- 
dima, I, 363. 

8 A.J., p. 204, adds "and Unbelief." 

9 Al~sulu\ is the Mystic's progress in the way to Allah. See Bnc. of Islam, IV, 549; Mac- 
donald, Rel. Attitudes and Life, p. 258; al-Ghazzali, lhya" (commentary of Sayyid 
Murtatfa), VII, 247 **• 

10 Sec above, Chap. 17, n. 8. 



160 FURTHER ARTICLES OF BELIEF 

is Unbelief/whenever it is established by decisive proof to be an act of dis- 
obedience, and that has already been explained. 

and making light of disobedience and ridicule of the Law are Unbelief /be- 
cause they are among signs of denial. 

From these fundamental principles there are derived many particulars 
which have been mentioned in legal decisions (al-fatdu/t). For example, 
whenever one believes a forbidden thing to be lawful, if it is forbidden to the 
person himself — this having been established by decisive proof or by a proof 
based on opinion — then he becomes an Unbeliever; otherwise he does not 
[become an Unbeliever] because it is forbidden to someone else. Some have 
made no distinction between what is forbidden for himself or for someone 
else and have said, "He is an Unbeliever whoever makes lawful a forbidden 
thing, which has been stigmatized as forbidden in the religion of the Prophet, 
such as marrying those of one's kin whom one should not, or the drinking 
of wine, or eating what dies of itself, or blood, or swine's flesh except when 
necessity demands. And doing these things without making them lawful is 
evil-doing (fisq). Whoever makes lawful the drinking of nabidh until 
one is drunken is an Unbeliever." 

However, if one were to say of something forbidden, "This is lawful," 
in order to sell his merchandise or because he is ignorant, he would not be- 
come an Unbeliever. If he should wish that wine were not forbidden or that 
the fast of Ramadan were not an obligation, because of the hardship it 
brings to him, he would not become an Unbeliever. On the other hand, 
whenever one wishes that adultery or that killing a soul without just reason 
were not forbidden, he is an Unbeliever because the forbidding [149] of these 
things is established in all religions and is in accord with wisdom. Whoever 
then desires to forsake wisdom desires that Allah decide contrary to wisdom, 
and that is ignorance of his Lord on his part. Al-Imam al-SarakhsT 11 in the 
section on menstruation said, "Were one to make copulation with his wife 
who is menstruating a lawful act, 12 he would become an Unbeliever." Ac- 
cording to al'Nawadir 19 [there is a statement] from Muhammad [that] he 
would not, and this is the sound position. As to the question of making 
lawful the committing of sodomy with one's wife, according to the soundest 
position such a one does not become an Unbeliever. 

11 Al-ImSm al-Sarakhsi, the most important Hanafl lawyer of the 5th century a.h. See 
Enc. of Islam, IV, 159; Brockelmann, Geschichte, 1, 172. 

« Cf. Musnad, II, 476. 18 See above, Chap. 16, n. 37. 



FURTHER ARTICLES OF BELIEF 161 

Whoever attributes to Allah something that is not fitting or mocks at one 
of Allah's names or commands, or denies Allah's promises of reward and 
punishment, becomes an Unbeliever. 

So also does he become an Unbeliever were he to wish that there had never 
been a prophet, because of contempt or enmity; or were he to laugh in ap- 
proval of one who speaks of Unbelief, or were he to sit on an exalted seat 
surrounded by a group who propounded problems to him and made him 
laugh and pelted him with pillows; in fact they all would become Unbe- 
lievers. 

So also would he become an Unbeliever were he to order a man to deny 
Belief in Allah, or were he to intend so to order him, or were he to render 
a legal decision advising a woman to get a divorce from her husband by 
means of Unbelief. So also would he become an Unbeliever were he, on 
drinking wine or committing adultery, to say, "In the name of Allah." 14 

So also would one become an Unbeliever were he to worship intentionally 
towards some other direction than the qibla, even though it might really be 
the qibla, or were he to worship intentionally without purification. So also 
would one become an Unbeliever were he to utter the word of Unbelief in 
contempt but not really as a conviction on his part. In like manner there 
are many [further] details [on this subject]. 

And despair {al-ya's) of Allah is Unbelief /because no one despairs of the 
spirit of Allah except the people who are Unbelievers (see Qur'an 12:87). 

and feeling secure (al~amn) from 35 Allah is Unbelief /since "no one feels 
secure from the craftiness of Allah except the people who lose" (Qur'an 
7:97). It may be objected that the decision that the disobedient will be in the 
Fire is a despairing of Allah, and the decision that the obedient will be in 
the Garden is a feeling of security from Allah. It follows then from the ob- 
jection that the Mu'tazilite is an Unbeliever, whether obedient or disobedient, 
for he is cither secure or in despair, although it is one of the rules of the 
people of the Approved Way that no one of the people of the qibla is an 
Unbeliever. To this we reply that this position of the Mu'tazilite is not 
despair nor a feeling of security. On the supposition that he is disobedient he 
does not despair that Allah will fit him for repentance and good works; and 

14 Cf. al-Bukhari, dl-Sahih, I, 49 and III, 492. 

15 A.J. (p. 205) inserts makr, "craftiness" or "stratagem," doubtless because it occurs 
in the Qur'an verse that follows. 



i6z FURTHER ARTICLES OF BELIEF 

on the supposition that he is obedient he is not secure from Allah's for- 
saking him with the result that he will acquire acts of disobedience for him- 
self. From this the answer is clear to what has been said regarding the 
Mu'tazilite in that whenever he commits a great sin, it must follow that he 
is an Unbeliever because he despairs of Allah's mercy and is convinced that he 
is not a Believer. That [answer] means that we do not admit that [his] 
being convinced that he deserves the Fire [when he commits a great sin] 
requires despair, nor that his being convinced of his lack of Belief — which is 
interpreted by them to include assent, confession and works — does not, on 
the basis that there is a negation of works, require Unbelief. 

So much for that. There is a difficulty in reconciling sayings like those [of 
al-Ash'ari and some of his followers], "No one of the people of the qibla is 
an Unbeliever," and their saying, "Whoever declares the creation of the 
Qur'an or that the Vision is impossible or vilifies and curses the two 
shaykjis [Abu Bakr and 'Umar] and the like is an Unbeliever." 

To assent to what a diviner (al~\ahtn) 10 narrates of the Unseen is Unbe- 
lief/because of the statement of the Prophet, "Whoever consults a diviner 
and assents to what he says becomes an Unbeliever in that which came down 
on Muhammad." 17 The diviner is one who tells of things that shall come 
into being in the future and pretends to know secret things and to explain 
the science of the Unseen. Among the Arabs there were diviners who pre- 
tended to know matters; some of them asserted that they had a familiar 
demon of the Jinn and an adherent who informed them of the news, and 
some [150] pretended to comprehend matters by a kind of understanding 
which had been granted them. The astrologer (al-munajjim) whenever he 
pretends to know approaching events is like the diviner. In general, knowl- 
edge of the Unseen is something in which Allah is unique. There is no way 
to the Unseen for His creatures except by a communication from Allah, or by 
an Illumination through an evidentiary miracle, or through Grace, or through 
guidance {irshad) in making a deduction from signs in matters in which 
this is possible. Therefore it has been recorded in the legal decisions (al- 
fatawi) that whoever predicts that there will be rain on seeing a ring 
around the moon, pretending that it is by knowledge of the Unseen and not 
a sign, 18 is an Unbeliever. And Allah knows better. 

lfl See Enc. of Islam, II, 624 ff.; Macdonald, Rel. Att. and Uje, pp. 25 ff. 

17 Musnad, II, 408. Cf. al-Tirmidhi, Sahih, "al-Tahara," b. 102; Ibn Maja, Sunan, "al- 
Tahara," b. 122. 

18 A.J., p. 206, reads \arama t "a Grace" instead of 'alama. 



FURTHER ARTICLES OF BELIEF 163 

The non-existent is not a thing 19 /if by thing is meant the really existent 
and that which is verified as having reality according to the position of the 
Verifiers. This means that being a thing (aLshay'tya) is equivalent to exist- 
ence, real existence, and being verified as having real existence. Non-existence 
is a synonym of negation. This is a necessary judgment 20 which no one dis- 
putes but the Mu'tazilites, who say that the possible non-existent is really 
existent in the outside world. And if they mean that the non-existent is not 
called a thing, then it is merely a question of language based on the explana- 
tion of "thing," whether it is the existent or the non-existent, or of what may 
be validly known and narrated of it. It goes back to tradition {al-naql) and to 
tracing the sources of the use of these expressions. 

And in prayer (du'a') of the living for the dead and the giving of alms 
(tasadduq) /that is, on the part of the living 

for them/that is, for the dead 

there is an advantage for them/that is, for the dead. This is unlike the 
Mu'tazilites, for they maintained that Destiny (al-qada) does not change, 
that every soul has a pledge of what it has acquired, and that man is recom- 
pensed for his own action but not for that of another. We have in support 
of our position that which has come down in the sound traditions regarding 
prayer for the dead, especially the funeral prayer. The Fathers inherited 
this [custom]. If there had been no advantage for the dead in this it would 
have meant nothing. The Prophet said, "No group of Muslims amounting to 
a hundred in number performs worship over a dead person, all of them in- 
terceding for him, without their intercession for him being welcomed." 21 
Of Sa'd b. 'Ubada it is related that he said, "O Messenger of Allah, Umm 
Sa'd has died; what alms is 0651?'* The Prophet replied, "Water." So Sa'd dug 
a well and said, "This is for Umm Sa'd." The Prophet said, "Prayer averts 
trial and alms quenches the anger of the Lord." 22 The Prophet also said 
that if the learned and the learner pass by a village, Allah will remove the 

19 The Curcton text, p. 5, inserts after "non-existent," "is something known of Allah 
just as the existent is known of Him." Also after "thing" it inserts "nor an object of 
vision." See Macdonald, Development, p. 314. 

20 Cf. above, Chap. 1, n. 17; al-Razl, Majatih, II, 391; VI, 164; Ibn Hazm, Kitab al- 
Fisal, V, 42 rT.; al-Shahrastanl, Kitab Nihayatu 'l-Iqddm, pp. 150 ff. 

21 Muslim, al-Sahth, I, 350; Musnad, VI, 32, 40; cf. variants of the tradition in al- 
Tirmidhl, Sahiih, "Jana'iz," b. 40; al-Nasa'I, Sunan, "Jana'iz," b. 78; Musnad, IV, 79; 
VI, 97, 230. 

22 Al-Bukharl, al-$ahth, II, 192. 



i*4 FURTHER ARTICLES OF BELIEF 

torment from the cemetery of that village for forty days. 28 The traditions 
and the precedents to be followed on this subject are more than can be num- 
bered. 

Allah answers prayers and supplies needs/This is based on the statement of 
Allah, "Call upon me, I will answer you" (Qur'an 40:62). There are also 
the statements of the Prophet, "The creature will be answered so long as he 
does not pray for evil or for severing the ties of relationship, and so long as 
he does not hurry," 24 and, "Verily, your Lord is Living and Generous, He is 
ashamed to turn back empty the hands of His creature when lifted towards 
Him." 25 Know that the pillar of prayer is truthfulness of intention, the 
sincerity of aim, and the presence of the heart, because of the statement of 
the Prophet, "Pray to Allah, being certain that He will answer, and know 
ye that Allah will not answer the prayer of a careless and thoughtless 
heart." 26 

The Early Theologians differed on the question as to whether it was per- 
missible to say that the prayer of an Unbeliever is answered. The Multitude 
precludes it on the ground of the statement of Allah, "The prayer of the 
Unbelievers is only in error" (Qur'an 13:15, 40:53), and because the Unbe- 
liever does not pray to Allah, for he does not know Him, and if he confesses 
Him he vitiates his own confession in not ascribing proper attributes to Him. 
What has been related in tradition regarding the prayer of the one who is 
oppressed — that he, even though an Unbeliever, is answered — that applies to 
his lack of Belief in the favor of Allah. Some permitted this on the basis of 
the statement of Allah regarding Iblls, "O my Lord, grant me time until the 
day when men are raised from the dead" (Quran 15:36). Allah replied, 
"Thou art of those to whom time is granted" 27 (Qur'an 15:37). This is one 
answer. Abu 'l-Qasim al-Hakim al-Samarqandi 28 and Abu 'l-Nasr al- 
DabusI took this position. Al-Sadr al-Shahld 29 said, "According to it your 
legal decisions are to be made." 

28 A.J. (p. 207) remarks that this tradition clearly has no foundation. 
24 Muslim, al-Sahih, II, 437; al-Bukhari, al-§ahih, IV, 194. 

28 Cf. Musnad, V, 438; Abu DawGd, Sunan, "Witr," b. 23; al-Tirmidhl, fahih, "Da'wat," 
b. 104; and Ibn Maja, Sunan, Du'a, b. 13. 
28 Al-Tirmidhl, $ahih, "Da'wat," b. 65. 

27 See also Qur. 7:13-14, 38:80-81 and al-Baytfawi, Anwar al-Tanztl, I, 320. 

28 See Jacut (Wustenfeld), Geographische Wdrterbuch, III, 137 f. 

29 Hus5m al-DIn 'Umar b. 'Abd al-'AzIz al-$adr al-Shahld (d. a.h. 536; a.d. 1141) 
was a writer on fiqh. See Brockelmann, Geschichte, I, 374. 



Chapter 19 



VARIOUS ARTICLES OF BELIEF CONCERN- 
ING THE LAST HOUR, MUJTAHIDS, AND 
THE COMPARATIVE EXCELLENCE OF 
MEN AND ANGELS 



V That the Prophet has reported of the indications of the Hour such as 
the appearance of al-Dajjal, and the Beast of the earth, and Ya'juj and 
Ma'juj, and the descent of Jesus from heaven, and the rising of the sun in the 
West is a Reality. 

The Mujtahid sometimes errs and sometimes hits the mark. 
The Messengers of mankind are more excellent than the Messengers of 
the angels, and the Messengers of the angels are more excellent than 
the generality of mankind; and the generality of mankind is more excellent 
than the generality of the angels. 

What the Prophet has reported of the indications of the Hour (al-stfa) 1 /that 
is, its signs 

such as the appearance of al-Dajjal, 2 and the Beast of the earth, and Ya'juj and 
Ma'jiij, 8 and the descent of Jesus from heaven, and the rising of the sun in 
the West is a Reality /for they are all possible things which [151] the Truthful 
One reported. Hudhayfa b. Asld al-Ghifari 4 said, 5 "The Messenger of Allah 
came upon us conversing together and he said, 'What are you conversing 

1 Cf. Enc. of Islam, II, 1050; Sale, Koran with Preliminary Discourse, Sec. Ill, pp. 92 ff. 

2 See Enc. of Islam, I, 886. References to the numerous traditions concerning al-Dajjal 
(the Anti -Christ) are given by Wensinck, Handbook, pp. 50 f.; Concordance, IX, m. 

8 (Cf. Gog and Magog, Gen. 10:2; Ezek. 38-39; Rev. 20:8.) See al-Tabarl, Annates, 
I, 68; Jacut, Geographischc Worterbuch, III, 53 ff.; Wensinck, Handbook, p. 263; Enc, 
of Islam, IV, 1 1 42. 

4 See Ibn Hajar, Biog, Diet., I, 650. 

5 See Muslim, al-$ahlh, II, 501 f.; Ibn Maja, Sunan; "Fitan," b. 25, 28, 29, 32; 
Wensinck, Handbook* P« 100. 




i66 



THE LAST HOUR 



about ?' Wc said, 'We were mentioning the Hour/ He said, 'It will not 
come until you sec ten wonders (dydi) preceding it.' He then mentioned the 
Smoke, al-Dajjal, the Beast, the rising of the sun in the West, the descent of 
Jesus (Isa b. Maryam), Ya'juj and Ma'juj, and three eclipses of the moon 
(\husuf)) one in the East, one in the West, and a third in the peninsula of 
Arabia. At the end of that [time] there is a Fire which will come forth from 
al-Yaman driving the people to the place of their assembly for the last Day." 
The sound traditions concerning these indications are many. Traditions 
{al-ahddtth) [from the Prophet] and narratives (al-dthdr) [from the Com- 
panions] have related in detail these matters and the manner of their 
occurrence. They are to be found in the commentaries, the biographies of the 
Prophet, and the books of history. 

The Mujtahid 6 /both in matters relating to Reason and the Law, whether 
fundamental or derived 

sometimes errs and sometimes hits the mark/Some of the Ash'arites and 
the Mu'tazilites held that every Mujtahid hits the mark in derived matters 
of the Law which are not absolutely fixed. The difference [of opinion] is 
based on their differing as to whether Allah has a fixed judgment for every 
incident or whether His judgment in matters of ijtihdd (that is, striving for a 
legal judgment) is that at which the opinion of the Mujtahid has arrived. 
The verifying of [the possible aspects of] this position is that in the matter 
of ijtihdd, either Allah has no fixed judgment before the ijtihdd of the 
Mujtahid occurs or He has [a fixed judgment]. Then there is either no 
proof from Allah for this judgment, or there is proof from Him. Then 
cither this proof is absolute or it is based on opinion. Some have taken every 
possible viewpoint. 

The one which we have chosen is that the judgment [of Allah] is fixed 
and that there is proof for it based on opinion. If the Mujtahid finds the 
judgment which is fixed, he hits the mark; if he loses it, he misses. The 
Mujtahid is not legally responsible for hitting the mark in the judgment, 
for it is obscure and hidden. Therefore he who misses is excusable, nay 
rather he is to be rewarded. There is thus no difference [of views] regarding 
the position that he who misses is not a sinner (athim). The question is only 
whether he misses the mark both at the beginning and at the end of his 

• Sec above, Chap. 2, n. 29. 



THE LAST HOUR 167 
effort, that is both in consideration of the proof and in the judgment. Some of 
the Early Theologians took this position, among them al-Shaykh Abu 
Mansur (al-Maturldl). Or does he miss the mark at the end only? That is, 
consideration is given to the fact that although he missed the mark in judg- 
ment, yet he hits the mark in [his use of] proof, inasmuch as he establishes it, 
combining all the stipulations and principles, and then brings in all those 
considerations for which he is legally responsible. In matters of ijtihad he is 
not legally responsible for establishing an absolute argument, in which the 
thing to be proved is absolute reality. 

In proof of the proposition that the Mujtahid may sometimes miss the 
mark there are the following points. First, there is the statement of Allah, 
"We gave Solomon (Sulayman) understanding of it** (Qur'an 21:79). 
The pronoun "it" refers to judicial authority or to making a legal de- 
cision. If each of the two ijtihad* s [on the part of David and Solomon] had 
been correct there would have been no reason for particularizing [752] 
Solomon, for each would then have hit the mark in his judgment and under- 
stood it. In the second place, there are traditions [from the Prophet] and nar- 
ratives [from the Companions] which indicate that in ijtihad there was a 
wavering between hitting and missing the mark, so that the idea [that one 
might miss the mark] became mutawatir. The prophet said, "If you hit 
the mark, you will have ten good deeds [to your account]; and if you miss, 
one/* 7 In another tradition the one who hits the mark gets two rewards, the 
one who misses, one. 8 By Ibn Mas'ud [the saying is reported], "If I hit the 
mark, it is from Allah, otherwise it is from me and Satan." It is well known 
that the Companions accused one another of error in ijtihad. In the third 
place, there is Analogy {al-qiyas) which makes a declaration but does not 
establish [of itself], so that which is established by Analogy must be estab- 
lished as to its meaning by statute. Agreement has been reached that there 
is only one right position regarding that which is established by statute, [so, 
since there is a statute proving that the Mujtahid does sometimes miss the 
mark, Analogy declares this to be a principle in ijtihad]. In the fourth place, 
no distinctions are made between persons in the general definitions that have 
come down in the Law of our Prophet, so if every Mujtahid were to hit the 
mark, then it would follow that the one action must be described by 
mutually negating opinions, as prohibited and permitted, as sound and un- 

7 Cf. Uusnad, II, 187, IV, 205. 

8 Cf. al-Bukhari, al-Sahih, IV, 438 and other traditions noted by Wcnsinck (Concord- 
ance, I, 20). 



1 68 THE LAST HOUR 

sound, as necessary and unnecessary. The completion of the verifying of these 
proofs and the answer to the convictions held by those who differ from us 
may be found in our book, Al-Talwih ft Shark al-Tanqih.* 

The Messengers of mankind are more excellent than the Messengers of 
the angels, 10 and the Messengers of the angels arc more excellent than the 
generality of mankind; 11 and the generality of mankind is more excellent 
than the generality of the angels/That the Messengers of the angels are to be 
preferred to the generality of mankind is based on Agreement, nay rather, it is 
so of necessity. But there are certain reasons why the Messengers of mankind 
are to be preferred to those of angels, and why the generality of men is to be 
preferred to the generality of angels. In the first place, Allah ordered the 
angels to prostrate themselves to Adam by way of magnifying and honoring 
him, as is indicated in the statements of Allah, "Seest thou this man whom 
thou hast honored above me?" (Qur'an 17:64), and, "I am better than he; 
Thou hast created me of fire, and Thou has created him of clay" (Qur'an 
7:11, 38:77). The wisdom of this requires [us to believe] that he com- 
manded the lower to prostrate himself to the higher and not vice versa. 
Secondly, every lexicographer understands from the statement of Allah, "And 
He taught Adam all the names" 12 (Qur'an 2:29), that the purpose was to 
prefer Adam to the angels and to demonstrate that he had more knowledge 
and deserved to be magnified and honored. In the third place, there is the 
statement of Allah, "Verily Allah selected Adam, Noah, [153] the family of 
Abraham, and the family of 'Imran above the worlds" (Qur an 3:30). The 
angels are a part of all the worlds. From this it has been specified by Agree- 
ment that the generality of mankind is not to be preferred to the Messengers 
of the angels, otherwise the rule [that mankind is to be preferred] remains in 
operation. It is clear however that this is a matter of opinion based merely on 
proofs from opinion. In the fourth place, man achieves virtues and perfec- 
tions in knowledge and practice in spite of such hindrances and impediments 
as lust and anger and the recurrence of necessary wants which divert his 
attention from acquiring the perfections of life. There is no doubt that re- 
ligious service and acquiring perfections, when done in spite of preoccupa- 
tions and vicissitudes, are more trying and go further in sincerity; so man is 
more excellent. 

9 See Brockclmann, Gcschichtc, II, 214, 216. 10 Cf. Enc. of Islam, III, 191 £. 

11 Curcton, p. 5, adds "of the Believers." 

12 Cf. al-Tabarl, Annates, I, 94 ff.; al-Baytfawi, Anwar al-Tanzil, I, 49. 



THE LAST HOUR i6 9 

The Mu'tazilites, the Philosophers, and some of the Ash'arites 18 took the 
position that angels are more excellent, and maintain it by the following 
arguments. First, the angels are pure spirits (arwah mujarrada)> actually 
perfect and free from the principles of evils and defects like lust, anger, and 
the obscurities of matter and form, capable of doing wonderful things and 
knowing the things that come into being, their past and future, without 
error. The answer to this position is that it is based on philosophical founda- 
tions and not on Islamic ones. The second argument is that the prophets, 
although they are the most excellent of mankind, learned from angels and 
were benefited by them. The proof of this is in the statements of Allah, "The 
strong in power taught" (Qur'an 53:5), and, "The faithful spirit brought 
it down" (Qur'an 26:193). There is no doubt [they claim] that the teacher 
is more excellent than the learner. The answer is that the learning process 
is from Allah, and the angels [are only intermediaries who] pass on the 
information. The third argument is that there are many cases where the 
angels are mentioned before the prophets in the Book and the Sunna. Their 
being mentioned first is only, [according to the argument], because they arc 
advanced in honor and dignity. The answer to this is that they were placed 
first because their existence was prior to that of man or because it is more 
of a mystery, so Belief in them is [to be emphasized] more and [Belief] 
in [their] having preceded [man in time] is more fitting. The fourth argu- 
ment is the statement of Allah, "Al-Maslh never disdains being a creature of 
Allah, nor do the angels who are nigh to Him" (Qur'an 4:170). The lexi- 
cographers understand by this that the angels are more excellent than Jesus, 
since the analogy in such cases of exaltation is to proceed from the lower to 
the higher. The following is the usage, "The vizier does not disdain this 
thing, nor does the Sultan," but not the opposite order, "The Sultan does 
not, nor does the vizier." Then no one says [that this verse has to do with 
the question] whether Jesus is more excellent than others of the prophets. 
The answer is that Christians {al-Nasdra) so magnified the Messiah that 
he is exalted above being one of the creatures of Allah; rather, they even 
held that he must be a son of Allah — who is praised — only because he had no 
father. Allah said, "He heals the blind and the leper, and raises the dead" 14 
in contrast to other creatures of Allah among the children of Adam. So 
Allah refuted them by saying that al-Maslh did not disdain being a creature 

Sec also al-Razi, Mafdtih, I, 299 ff.; al-Tjl, al-Mawaqif, p. 237; al-Fag*alI, Kifayat al- 
'Awamm, p. 69; Diet, of Tech. Terms, p. 1337; Ibn Hazm, Kitab al-Fisal, V, 20 ff. 

14 This is a paraphrase of two Qur'an verses; 3:43 is in the first person, 5:110 in the 
second. 



170 



THE LAST HOUR 



of Allah, nor did the one who is more exalted than he in this respect, that is, 
the angels who have neither father r»or mother and who arc able with the 
permission of Allah to perform greater and more wonderful acts than heal- 
ing the blind and the leper and reviving the dead. Their exaltation and 
eminence is only in being born without father and mother and in manifest- 
ing powerful signs, not in absolute honor and perfection. So there is no indi- 
cation that the angels are more excellent. 16 Allah knows better and to Him is 
the recompense and the return. 

15 Al-Ghazzali (lhya\ III, 165) argues in commenting on Qur. 37:164 that Allah has 
granted angels fixed ranks, while men are elevated from rank to rank. Elsewhere (lhyd\ 
VIII, 263 f.) he tells of a mystic who asked the two recording angels about a matter. 
They did not know, but the mystic asked his heart, which answered in such a marvelous 
manner that it proved that men may be more excellent than angels. 



Bibliography 



Abu Dawud. Sunan. 2 vols. Cairo, a.h. 1292. 

Abu Hanifa. Al-Fiqh al-Akbar (I). With a commentary (spurious) by 
al-Maturidl. Haydarabad, a.h. 1321. 

Al-Fiqh al-Akbar (II). With a commentary by Abu 'l-Muntaha. Hay- 
darabad, a.h. 1 32 1. 

Commentary on al-Fiqh al-Akbar (II). By 'Ali al-Qarl. Cairo, a.h. 

1323. 

Kitab al-WasIya. With a commentary by Molla Husayn b. Iskander 

al-Hanafl. Haydarabad, a.h. 1321. (Al-Fiqh al-Akbar (II) and Kitab 
al-Wasiya, though considered spurious, reflect the school of Abu 
Hanifa.) 

Ash'ari, Al- (Abu 'l-Hasan). Kitab Maqalat al-Islamiyyln. Ed. H. Ritter. 

2 vols. Stambul, 1929-30. 
Kitab a 1 -I ban a 'an Usui al-Diyana. Haydarabad, a.h. 1323. Translation 

by W. C. Klein, Al-lbanah 'an Usui ad-Diyanah {The Elucidation of 

Islam's Foundation). New Haven, 1940. 
Babu '1-HadT 'Ashar, A1-. By Hasan b. Yusuf b. 4 Ali Ibnu 'l-Mutahhar al- 

Hilli, with commentary by Miqdad-i-Fadil al-Hilli. Trans, from the Arabic 

by W. M. Miller. Oriental Translation Fund, N.S., Vol. XXIX. London, 

1928. 

Baghdad!, Al- (Ibn Tahir b. Muhammad). Al-Farq bayn al-Firaq. Cairo 
(undated). 

Baydawl, Al- (Abu Sa'Id *Abdallah b. 'Umar). Anwar al-Tanzil wa Asrar 
al-Ta'wil (commentary on Qur'an). Ed. H. O. Fleischer. 2 vols. Leipzig, 
1846-48. 

Boer, T. J. dc. The History of Philosophy in Islam. Trans. Edward R. Jones. 
London, 1903. 

Brockelmann, Karl. Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur. 2 vols. Weimar, 
1898, 1902. 

Bukharl, Al- (Abu 'Abdallah Muhammad b. Isma'Il). Al-Sahlh. Ed. M. L. 

Krehl and Th. W. Juynboll. 4 vols. Leiden, 1862-68, 1908. 
Caetani, L. Annali dcir Islam. Vol. I. Milan, 1905. 
Concordantiae Corani Arabicae. By Gustavus Fliigcl. Leipzig, 1875. 



i7i BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Dictionary of Technical Terms in the Sciences of the Mussalmans. Ed. under 
superintendence of A, Sprenger and W. Nassau Lees. Calcutta, 1862. 

Dozy, R. Supplement aux dictionnaires arabes. 2 vols. Leiden, 1881. 

Dictionnairc des noms des vfitcments chez les Arabes. Amsterdam, 1845. 

Encyclopaedia of Islam, The , . . Prepared by a Number of Leading Orien- 
talists. Leiden, 1913-38. 

Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics. Ed. James Hastings. Edinburgh and 
New York, 1908-22. 

Fadall, Al- (Muhammad). Kifayat al-'Awamm fi 'Ilm al-Kalam. With a 
commentary by Ibrahim al-Bayjurl. Cairo, a.h. 1328. 

Fath al-Rahman li Talib Ayat al-Qur an. Beirut, a.h. 1323. 

Ghazzall, Al- (Abu Hamid Muhammad b. Muhammad). Ihya' 'Ulum al- 
Dln. With a commentary by Sayyid Murtada. 10 vols. Cairo, a.h. 131 i. 

Maqasid al-Falasifa. Ed. Muhyi '1-Dln Sabri al-Kurdl. Cairo, a.h. 1355. 

Mi'yar al-'Ilm. Ed. Muhyi '1-Dln Sabri al-Kurdl. Cairo, a.h. 1346. 

Worship in Islam. Translation of the Book of Worship from the Ihya' 

by E. E. Calverley. Madras, 1925. 

Goldsack, Wm. Selections from Muhammadan Traditions Taken from 
Mish\dtu 'UMasdblh. Madras, 1923. 

Goldziher, I. Muhammedanische Studien. 2 vols. Halle, 1889-90. 

Vorlesungen iiber den Islam. Heidelberg, 19 10. 

Die Zahiriten. Leipzig, 1884. 

Guillaume, A. The Traditions of Islam. Oxford, 1924. 

Horten, M. Die philosophischen Ansichten von Razi und Tusi. Bonn, 1910. 

Die philosophischen Systeme der spekulativen Theologen im Islam. 

Bonn, 191 2. 

Die spekulative und positive Theologie des Islam. Leipzig, 1912. 

Hughes, T. P. The Dictionary of Islam. London, 1885. 

Ibn Hajar. A Biographical Dictionary of Persons Who Knew Mohammad. 

4 vols. Calcutta, 1856. 
Ibn Hazm. Kitab al-Fisal fi '1-Milal wa '1-Ahwa' wa 'l-Nihal. 5 vols. Cairo, 

a.h. 1320. 

Ibn Hisham ('Abd al-Malik). Slrat Rasul Allah. Ed. Ferdinand Wustenfeld. 

2 vols. Gottingen, 1858. 
Ibn Khaldun (Abu Zayd *Abd al-Rahman). Al-Muqaddima. 3 vols. Paris, 

1858. 

Ibn Khallikan. Biographical Dictionary. Trans, from the Arabic by Bn. Mac 
Guckin de Slane. 4 vols. Paris, 1842, 1871. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY m 

Ibn Maja. Sunan. 2 vols. Cairo, a.h. 1313. 

Ibn Qutayba. Kitab al-Ma'arif . By Abu Muhammad 'Abd Allah (Handbuch 

der Geschichte, cd. Ferdinand Wiistenfeld). Gottingen, 1850. 
Ibn Sa'd. Biographicn Muhammeds, seiner Gcfahrtcn und der spateren 

Trager des Islams, bis zum Jahrc 230 der Flucht. Ed. Eduard Sachau. 

9 vols. Leiden, 1904-1909. 
Ibn Sina. Al-Najat Cairo, a.h. 1331. 

Rasa'il fi 'l-Hikma wa 'l-Tabflyat. Cairo, a.h. 1326. 

Ijl, Al- (al-Qadl 'Adud al-Dln). Al-Mawaqif. With the commentary by 'All 

b. Muhammad al-Jurjam. Parts V and VI ed. Th. Soerensen. Leipzig, 1848. 
Jacut (Yaqut ibn 'Abd Allah). Geographisches Worterbuch. Ed. Ferdinand 

Wiistenfeld. 6 vols. Leipzig, 1866-70. 
Moschtarik: Lexicon geographischer Homonyme. Ed. Ferdinand 

Wiistenfeld. Gottingen, 1846. 
Kitab ahwal al-Qiyama (Muhammedanische Eschatologie). Ed. M. Wolff. 

Leipzig, 1872. This book is also published in Cairo, under the tide of 

Daqaiq al-A\hbar fi dhi^r al-Janna wa 'l-Nar, by 'Abd al-Rahman b. 

Ahmad al-Qadl. Cairo, a.h. 1333. 
Lane, E. W. An Arabic-English Lexicon. London, 1863-93. 
Lisan al-*Arab. 20 vols. Cairo, a.h. 1300-1308. 

Macdonald, D. B. "Continuous Re-creation and Atomic Time," Isis, IX, 2. 

Also in The Moslem World, XVIII, 6 ff. 
Development of Muslim Theology, Jurisprudence and Constitutional 

Theory. New York, 1903. 

The Religious Attitude and Life in Islam. Chicago, 1909. 

"Wahm and its Cog n ates,'' Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1Q22 

Maimonidcs. Lc Guide des egar&, par Moise Ben Maimoun. Trans. S. Munk 

Paris, 1856. 

The Guide for the Perplexed. Trans. M. Friedlander. London, 1928. 

Margoliouth, D. S. Mohammed and the Rise of Islam. New York, 1905. 
Mawardl, Al- (Abu 1-Hasan *Ali). Al-Ahkam al-Sultanlya. Bonn, 1855. 
Mohammed Abdou, Cheikh. Rissalat al-Tawhld. Paris, 1925. 
Muir, Sir Wm. The Caliphate, Its Rise, Decline and Fall. New and revised 

edition by T. H. Weir. Edinburgh, 191 5. 
The Life of Mohammad. New and revised edition by T. H. Weir. 

Edinburgh, 1912. 

Miiller, M. J. Philosophic und Theologie des Averroes. Arabic text. Munich, 
1859. 



174 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Muslim (al-Imam Abu l-Husayn). al-Sahlh. 2 vols. Cairo, a.h. 1327. 
Musnad. Abu Abd 'Allah Ahmad Muhammad b. Hanbal. 6 vols. Cairo, a.h. 
1313. 

Nawawl, Al- (Abu Zakarija Jahja). Ucbcr das Leben und die Schriftcn. Ed. 

Ferdinand Wustenfeld. Gottingen, 1849. 
Nicholson, R. A. A Literary History of the Arabs. London, 1907. 
Palmer, E. H., trans. The Koran. World's Classics. Oxford, 1928. 
Pines, S. Beitrage zur islamischen Atomenlehre. Berlin, 1936. 
Rawda al-Bahlya fi ma bayn al-Asha 4 ira wa 'l-Maturldlya, A1-. Al-Hasan b. 

4 Abd al-Muhsin Abu 'Udhba. Hydarabad, a.h. 1322. 
RazI, Al- (Fakhr al-Din Muhammad b. 4 Umar). Mafatlh al-Ghayb. 8 vols. 

Cairo, a.h. 1308. 

Muhassal Afkar al-Mutaqaddimin wa '1-Muta'akhkhirin min al-Falasifa 

wa '1-Mutakallimtn. With notes by Nasir al-Din al-TusI. On the margin is 

the Ma'alim usul al-Din, also by al-RazI. Cairo, a.h. 1323. 
Risala al-ShamsIya, A1-. Al-Qazwlnl. Translated under the tide "The Logic 

of the Arabians' 1 as the first appendix to the Dictionary of Technical Terms, 

by A. Sprenger. Calcutta, 1854. 
Rodwell, J. M. The Koran Translated from the Arabic. Everyman's Library. 

New York, 19 13. 
Sa'adya al-Fayyuml. Kitab al-Amanat wa 'l-Ftiqadat. Leiden, 1881, 
Sale, G. The Koran with Preliminary Discourse. 2 vols. Philadelphia, 1833. 
Sanusi, Al- (Muhammad). Sharh Umm al-Barahln. With supercommen- 

tary by Muhammad al-Dasuql. Cairo, a.h. 1330. 
Shahrastanl, Al- (Muhammad). Al-Milal wa l-Nihal (Book of Religious 

and Philosophical Sects). Ed. W. Cureton. London, 1842. 
Kitab Nihayatu 1-Iqdam fi 'Ilm al-Kalam. Ed. A. Guillaume. Oxford, 

1934. 

Suyuti, Al- (Jalal al-Din). Tarlkh al-Khulafa'. Calcutu, 1857. 

Tabarl, A1-. Annalcs quos scripsit Abu Djafar Mohammed Ibn Djarir. Ed. 

M. J. Dc Goeje et al. 3 parts. Leiden, 1879-1901. 
Taj al-'Arus. Sharh al-Qamus al-Musamma. By Sayyid Muhammad MurtadS. 

Cairo, a.h. 1306. 

Ta'rifat, A1-. 'All b. Muhammad al-Jurjanl. Ed. Gustavus Flugel. Leipzig, 
1845. 

ThalabT, Al- (Abu IshSq Ahmad b. Muhammad). Qisas al-Anbiya'. Cairo, 
a.h. 1298. 

Tirmidhl, A1-. §ahih. 2 vols. Cairo, a.h. 1292. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 175 

Wcnsinck, A. J. Concordance et indices de la tradition musulmane. Leiden, 
1935- 

A Handbook of Early Muhammadan Tradition. Leiden, 1927. 

The Muslim Creed; Its Genesis and Historical Development. Cam- 
bridge, 1932. 

Wolfson, H. A. "The Amphibolous Terms in Aristode, Arabic Philosophy 

and Maimonides," Harvard Theological Review, XXXI (1938), 151 ff. 
"The Aristotelian Predicables and Maimonides' Division of Attributes," 

Essays and Studies in Memory of Linda R. Miller. New York, 1938. 
"The Internal Senses in Latin, Arabic and Hebrew Philosophic Texts," 

Harvard Theological Review, XXXIII (1935), 93 ff. 

The Philosophy of Spinoza. Cambridge, Mass., 1934. 

Zamakhsharl, Al- (Abu Qasim). Al-Kashshaf 'an Haqa'iq al-TanzIl. Ed. 

Lees. 2 vols. Calcutta, 1856. 
Al-Mufassal, ed. J. P. Broch. Christianiae, 1879. 



Index 



'Abbasid Khalifas, xiv, xxii, 144, 146 

Ability: action accompanied by, 88; real 
essence o£ power, 88 f.; an accident, 89; 
its application, 91 

Abraham, 122/?, \2$n 

Abu Bakr, the Very Veracious, 142, 143 

Abu Hanlfa, xvi-xviii passim; attitude 
toward mystics, xxiv; statement on Be- 
lief, xxviiif.; teachings on Messengers 
and Prophets, xxx 

Abu Hurayra, great sins listed by, 107 

Abu Shujja (al-Sayyid), 99 

Abu Jalib ('Ali b.)» claims to Khalifate by 
family of, x, 146; great sins listed by, 107; 
"the Approved," 142-44; quoted on wip- 
ing on inner shoes, 155 

Abu Talib (Ja'far b.)> 139 

Abu Yusuf, xv 

Accidents: in atomic theory, xxv; descriptive 
terms as, 11; world consists of accidents 
and substances, 29; subsistence of, 32; 
Allah not an accident, 41; letters and 
sounds are originated accidents, 59; ex- 
istence, origination, possibility, common 
to, 75«; ability an accident, 88 f.; deeds 
are accidents, 102 

Acquisition, a key word in Ash'arite doc- 
trine, xxvii; the expending of power and 
will in action by creature, 86; difference 
between creating and acquisition, 86 

Action: Allah as creator of, xxvii; Maturi- 
dite and Ash'arite views, xviii; ability 
the cause of, 88 f.; as resulting by way of 
immediate or mediate causality, 93 

Adam: the first prophet, 130 

Adoration of the Creator, 81 

Adultery: one of great sins, 107 

Agnosticism, xxxi 

Agnostics, 13 

Agreement of the Muslim Community, x; 
doctrine on Messengers and Prophets de- 
veloped out of, xxx; as a basis for future 
change, xxxii; narrative of, 23, 24; proof 
of attribute of speech established in, 59, 
62, 65; agreement on Beatific Vision, 78; 
on the disobedient as Believer, 109; on 
worship, 153 



Ahmad b. tianbal, xv 
Akhjal, A1-, 5811 

Al-Fiqh al-Akbar (I) (Abu tfanifa), xvii 
Allah: His purpose revealed through Mu- 
hammad, ix; final destiny of individual 
rests with, xi; attributes and essence of, 
xii, xiii, 41, 41 »; as Creator, xxiv; ortho- 
dox position on attributes of, xxvi; as 
Creator of all actions, xxvii, 80; the effi- 
cient cause of all knowledge, 17; Origi- 
nator of the world, 36-48; unity of, 37 f.; 
knowledge and power of, 37, 46; He is 
not an accident, or a body, or an atom, 
41, 42; does not come to an end in Him- 
self, 43; is not compounded, 43; is not 
placed in place, 43; is not described by 
quality, 44; unaffected by time, 45; noth- 
ing resembles Him, 47; omniscience and 
omnipotence of, 48; analysis of attributes 
of, 49-57; attribute of speech, analyzed, 
58-66; attribute of creating, analyzed, 67- 
73; Willing an attribute of, 73; Knowl- 
edge and Will of, made universal, 85; 
ability created within creature by, 89; to 
do what is best for creature not incum- 
bent on, 97; joining of another to Him 
not forgiven by, no; pardons whomso- 
ever He wills, in; no alteration in attri- 
butes of, 126; books of, 135; despair of, 
and feeling secure from, considered 
Unbelief, 161; prayers answered by, 
164 

Almsgiving, 163 

Analogies: a source of guidance, ix, x 
Angels: questioning by, 99; the creatures 

of Allah, 134; messengers of, 168 f. 
Animals, speech of: traditions concerning, 

139 

Anthropomorphic ideas, xiii; debated by 
Early Theologians, 158a; see also Pan- 
theism; Polytheism 

Anthropomorphists, 133^ 

Anti-Christ, coming of, 165*1; tee also 
Dajjal 

Antinomians, 158 

Apologetics, need for: as a reason for de- 
velopment of Muslim dogmatics, xi 



17« 



INDEX 



Appointed Sustenance, 95; Allah's relation- 
ships to, 96 

Approved Way, teaching of, see Sunna 

A'rad, see Accidents 

Asaf b. Barakhyi, 138 

Ascension of the Messenger, 136 f. 

Ash'ari, Al- (Abu '1 -Hasan), doctrinal posi- 
tion of orthodox Islam formulated by, ix; 
comment on beliefs of various sects, xii; 
adopted dialectic of Mu'tazilites in de- 
fending orthodoxy, xv; statement of 
creed, xviii; question on obedience and 
disobedience, 9 

Ash'aritcs: position on way of the mystic, 
xxiv; acceptance of atomic theory, xxv; 
on attributes of Allah, xxvi f.; interpreta- 
tion of Belief, x xviii; views on actions of 
individual, xxviii; on responsibility of in- 
dividual, xxviii; on use of words "if 
Allah wills," xxix; on destiny of the 
happy and unhappy, xxix; sanction for 
fatalism found in teachings of, xxxi; defi- 
nition of shay', \\n\ views on attributes 
and essence of Allah, 53, 5341; position on 
angels, 169 

Assent: essence of, 117 ff. 

Atom: term explained by al-Nasafi, xxiv f.; 
definitions, 13a; boundaries of, 29; views 
on, held by Philosophers and Early Theo- 
logians, 31, 32, 45; defined, 30; indivisi- 
bility of, 30-32; known by observation, 
and proof, 33; Allah is not an atom, 42; 
has boundaries but not dimension, 44 

Atomic philosophy, its development into 
one of fundamentals of scholastic theol- 
ogy, xvi; a unique contribution of Islam, 
xxiv; propositions of Mutakallim atomists 
as given by Maimonides, summary of, 
xxv; effect of modern Western atomic 
speculation on, xxvi; interpretation of 
term substance, 13 

Attributes of Allah, xii, xiii; position of 
orthodox Islam on, xxvi; plurality of eter- 
nal, 40; of Allah, 41, 4113; analysis of, 
49-57; subsistent in His essence, 51; 
ability is an attribute created by Al- 
lah, 89 

Baghdad!, Al- (Ibn Tahir b. Muhammad), 
xx 

BaqillanI, Al-, xvi; exponent of atomic the- 
ory, xxiv 

Barahima (Brahmins), 21, 128 

Beast of the earth: last Hour to be preceded 
by, 165, 166 



Beatific Vision of Allah: denial of, by 
Mu'tazilites, xiii, 7412; meaning of, 74- 
79; Muhammad's ascension, 137 

Belief: statement of, unnecessary during 
Muhammad's lifetime, ix; distinction be- 
tween Belief and Unbelief, x; al-Nasafi's 
articles of Belief and al-Taftazanfs com- 
mentary, xx ; varying opinions on, xxviii; 
science of, 7; the subject matter of 
\aldm, 10; a great sin does not remove 
creature from, 108; assent of the heart 
is real essence of, 108, 109; definition of, 
116-20; as assent and confession, 118; 
real essence of, H9f.; neither increases 
nor decreases, 120 f.; Islam and Belief 
synonymous, 123; see also KalSm; Un- 
belief 

Belief of the Muslim Community: articles 
of, xviii 

Believer: identification of, xi, xiii, xiv; Allah 
the Creator of actions of, 80 ; punishment 
of the grave for disobedient, 99; the term 
applied to the disobedient, 109; does not 
remain forever in Fire even if he has 
committed a great sin, 114; "in reality/' 
and "if Allah wills," 125; see also Un- 
believer 

Biddy a, al- (al-Bukharl), 26*1, 47 

Bliss of the obedient: in the grave, 99; en- 
joyment of, 1 01 

Body, the: term not applicable to Allah, 42; 
ability of members of, 91 

Books of Allah, 103, 135 

Books of deeds: weighing of, 103 

Bridge: reality of, 104 

Bukharl, Al- (Nur al-DIn Ahmad), 26/1; 
knowledge defined by, 47 

Canon laws and judgments: science of, 6 
Causes, soundness of: ability applies to, 91 
Certainties and non-certainties, 16 
Chain, endless, see Endless chain 
Christian philosophy, Muslim contacts with, 

xi; Mu'tazilites influenced by, xiv 
Christians, xi; their narrative concerning 
crucifixion of Jesus, 20, 20 n; doctrine on 
corporeality of Deity, 4212; three eternal 
beings established by, 51; prophetic office 
of Muhammad confined to Arabs, as- 
serted by, 131 ; Jesus exalted above Allah's 
creatures by, 169 
Church councils: their importance in evo- 
lution of Christian doctrine and their ab- 
sence in Muslim development, ix 
Cognition, 27, 123 



INDEX 



*79 



Collective opinions: value of, 20, 21 
Colors, original, 32 

Commentaries, xvi; al-Taftazanl's treatise 
the subject of numerous supercommen- 
taries, xx; method used by al-Taftazanl, 
xxii, xxiii 

Companions of the Prophet, x, 6«; differ- 
ences of opinion on Beatific Vision, 79; 
succession to Khalifate settled by, 143; 
only good concerning them is to be men- 
tioned, 153 

Comparers, 45; belief in Beatific Vision, 74a 

Compulsion: inevitability of, 85 

Confession of Belief, 118 

Corporealizers, 42, 45; belief in Beatific 
"Vision, 74» 

Corruption of the heavens and earth, 38, 
39 

Cosmos, interpretation of: in modern Mus- 
lim reform movements, xxvi 
Council of Nicaea, ix 

Creating: as an attribute of Allah, xxvi; 
Ash'arite view stated by al-Taftazanl, 
xxvii; definition of, 28*2; as an attribute 
of Allah, 57; analysis of, 67-73; specific 
meaning of takwtn, 67*1; relationship to 
Power and Willing, 68; its continuance 
from eternity to eternity, 69; distinction 
between deed and the thing done, 71; in 
the sense of decreeing, 82; an action 
brought into existence by Allah, 86; dif- 
ference between creating and acquisition, 
86; Allah as creator of acts of going astray 
and being guided, 96 

Creation (created beings) in contrast to 
Creator: knowledge for, 16; creature has 
no part in, 94 

Creator: knowledge belongs to essence of, 
16; proof of existence of, 22 

Creature: differing views on acts of, 80 fT.; 
actions of, are by Will, Desire, judgment 
and ruling of Allah, 82; actions of choice: 
obedience and disobedience, 84; actions 
of: the good is by pleasure of Allah; the 
vile is not by His pleasure, 87; ability 
created by Allah within, 89; extent of 
legal responsibility imposed upon, 92; has 
no part in creation, 94; Allah not obliged 
to do what is best for, 97; his right to say 
"I am a Believer in reality," 124, 125; 
angels are the creatures of Allah, 134; 
command and prohibition always apply 
to, 158 

Creed -making: development of, xvii-xx; 
early forms, xvii; first three stages, xix; 



importance of al-NasatTs statement of 
creed, xix, xx 
Cursing: permitting of, 154 

Dah rites, 48 

Dajjal, al-, coming of: last Hour to be pre- 
ceded by, 165, 166; see also Anti-Christ 
Parir, Al- (al-Imam Hamld al-DIn), 40 
Dead: reality of quickening of, 10 1; prayers 
for, 163 

Death, time appointed for: Allah's mind 
remains unchanged, 94; death created by 
Allah, 95 

Deeds, books of: weighing of, 103 

Desiring: as an attribute of Allah, 41, 56; 
connected with all actions, 87 

Deductive knowledge, 22, 23; acquired 
nature of, 26 

Dialectics, Muslim, x, xiv; see also Theol- 
ogy, Muslim 

Dimension, meaning of, 44 

Disobedience: persistence in, classified as 
a great sin, 107; as an act of denial, 108; 
making lawful of, classified as Unbelief, 
159 

Diviner, narration of: acceptance of, con- 
sidered Unbelief, 162 

Doctrine, evolution of, x 

Dogma: discussion of, discouraged by Mu- 
hammad, x; foundations for science of, 
laid by Christian teachers, xi; written and 
interpreted by learned men, ix; rise of 
theological disputation, x, xi; funda- 
mental and doctrinal legal judgments, 5; 
definition of Qur'in in, 64 

Doing: as an attribute of Allah, 57 

Early Theologians, xvi; 13/j; method of, 
17; views held on: pure atom, 31; mean- 
ing of accident, atom, body, 45, 46; attri- 
butes and essence of Allah, 50, 53-55; 
Qur'an as uncreated speech of Allah, 61, 
65; relationships of Creating, 70; actions 
of the creature, 81; Allah's guidance, 96, 
97; assent and Belief, 122; meaning of 
terms Belief and Islam, 123; anthropo- 
morphic ideas of Qur'an, 158*1; prayers 
of Unbeliever, 164; see also Later Theo- 
logians; Philosophers 

Ecclesiastical authority, ix 

Endless chain, theory of, 36, 68 

Enneads (Plotinus), xiv 

Essence: of Allah, xii, xiii; of things, 11; 
reality of existence of, 12; Allah the 
Necessarily Existent, 36; plurality of 



i8o 



INDEX 



Essence (Continued) 

eternal, 40; varying views on essence of 
Allah, 50 ff.; attributes of Allah sub- 
sistent in His, 51 

Eternal, the: as synonymous with the Nec- 
essarily Existent, 39, 43, 45; essence of, 52 

Eternity, 33, 34, 35; Allans attributes are 
from, 51; attribute of Creating is from, 
67 

Evidentiary miracle: defined, 21, 21 n\ rea- 
sons for, 129; manifested by Muhammad, 
130; claim to prophetic office accom- 
panied by, 138; distinguished from Grace 
of a Wall, 140 

Existence: definition of, 11, \\n\ proof of, 
13; kinds of, 64; common to Maker and 
that made by Him, 75 

Experience, 17 

Facial!, Al- (Muhammad), xix 

Faith, xiv 

Faribl, A1-, xiv 

Fatalism, xxxi 

Vat awl (Qatfl Khan), 151 

Fathers, the: committed interpretations of 

statutes to Allah, 46 
Fatima: claims to Khalifate by family of, 

x; the mistress of women in the Garden, 

155 

FayyumT, Al- (Sa'adya), xx 

Fiqh, xvi, xxi, 7, 47, 132, 153 

Fire, the, xi; reality of, 104; present exist- 
ence of, 105; Believer does not remain 
forever in, 114; knowledge of, brought 
by Messengers, 128 

Five senses, definitions of: similarity be- 
tween al-Taftazanl and other commenta- 
tors, xxi; see also Senses 

Followers: defined, 6n 

Form (sura), 31, 32, 43 

Free will: Muslim doctrines concerning, 
xiii, xiv; Allah as creator of all action, 
xxvii; problem of, xxxi; see also Predesti- 
nation 

Garden, the, xiii; tradition concerning peo- 
ple of, 102; reality of, 104; present exist- 
ence of, 105; knowledge of, brought by 
Messengers, 128; names of those in, 155 

Ghazzali, Al- (Abu H5mid Muhammad 
b. Muhammad), xiv; a leader of later 
scholastics, xvi; statement of creed by, 
xix; quoted on worship, 152ft; on rank 
of angels, 170 

Graces: of the Walls, 137 fT.; distinguished 



from evidentiary miracle of a prophet, 
140 

Grave, the: punishment of, for Unbelievers 
and disobedient Believers, 99; states of, 
101 

Greek philosophy, Muslim contacts with, 
xi; Mu'tazilites influenced by, xiv; trans- 
lations of texts, xiv; adapted to use of 
Christianity, xv; adoption of formal logic 
in Muslim thinking, xvi 

Guidance, 96 

Guide for the Perplexed, The (Maimon- 
ides), xxiv; propositions of Mutakallim 
atomists as given in, summary of, xxv 

Hadtth, xviii; see also Traditions 
Hanbalites, views on attribute of speech, 59, 
62 

Hasan al-Basri, al-, 9 
Hayuli, see Primary matter 
Hearing: as an attribute and essence of Al- 
lah, xii, xxvi, 41, 56 
Heresy: defined, 159 
Hour, the last: signs of, 165 f. 
Hukjm, see Judgment 
Hypocrite, 109 

Ibn Khaldun (Abu Zayd 4 Abd al-Rahman), 

xi, xvi, xxi 
Ibn 'Umar, great sins listed by, 107 
Idea: existence of, 40, 41 ; attributes of Allah 

point to, 49; the Qur'an as an eternal 

idea, 63 

Ijl, Al- (al-QaclI 4 Ao!ud al-DIn), xx; al- 
Taftazani a pupil of, xxi 

Jjmff, see Agreement 

Ijtihad, 144; defined, 166, 167 

Illumination (al-ilham), xxiv; not a cause 
of cognition, 27 

Imam: al-TaftazanVs reference to, xxii; 
need for, 145; duties of, 145; require- 
ments of, 146; distinction between Kha- 
lifa and Imam, 146; stipulations and non- 
stipulations concerning, 148 rT.; may not 
be removed for evil-doing or tyranny, 
150; see also Khalifate 

Im&n, see Belief 

Inanimate objects, speech of: traditions 
concerning, 139 

Indian philosophy, xv 

Individual, the, importance of: in formu- 
lating Muslim creed, ix 

Infidelity, xii 

Infinite, idea of: in atomic theory, xxv 
Injll (Gospel): a book of Allah, 135 



INDEX 



181 



Innovations: rise of, 6; denial of Muham- 
mad's ascension considered as one of, 
136; disapproval of wiping on inner shoes 
a mark of, 156 

Instruments, soundness of: ability applies 
to, 91 

Intel lectualism, xiv 

Intelligences, 34 

Intercession of the Messengers, 113 

Internal senses, 17; see also Senses 

Intoxicants, 156, 160 

Intuitive knowledge, xx 

Islam, inseparability of theology and politi- 
cal theory in, x; rapid expansion of, xi; 
as a more general term than itnan, xxix; 
Belief and Islam are one, 123 

Jabrites, xxvii; believers in predestination, 

82/?, 84 
Jahm b. §afwan, io6« 
Jahmlya, 106 
Jawhar, see Atom 

Jesus: narrative concerning crucifixion of, 
20, 20«; tradition of His descending, 132; 
"excellent of mankind after the Prophet," 
141 f.; Mahdi's resemblance to, 147; de- 
scent of, from Heaven, to precede last 
Hour, 165, 166; exalted above Allah's 
creatures by Christians, 169 

Jews, xi; their narrative concerning religion 
of Moses, 20; angels may commit sin of 
Unbelief, stated by, 134 

J ism, see Body 

John of Damascus, xi; opinion on relation 
of unity and plurality in God, xii 

Jubba'I, Al- (Abu 'AH), answers al-Ash'arl 
on obedience and disobedience, 9 

Judgment, 5« ; as reality corresponding with 
actual fact, 10; actions of creatures are by 
Allah's, 82; knowledge of, brought by 
Messengers, 128 

JurjanI, Al- (al-Sayyid al-Sharlf), xxi, xxii 

Justice of Allah, xiii 

Kalam, xiv, xv; in the writings of al- 
Ash'ari, xviii, xix; wide enough to in- 
clude many shades of doctrine, xxiii; sci- 
ence of, 7 ff.; as an attribute of Allah, 
analyzed, 58-66; see also Belief; Speech 

Kalm, see Wound, the 

Karramites: views on eternity of attributes, 
53» 53«; on attribute of Speech, 59; be- 
lief in Beatific Vision, 74/2; Walls rated 
higher than prophets by, 157 

Kawn, 1 in, 33; see also under Existence 



Khalifate: claimed by families of 'All and 
Fafima, x; al-Taftazani's reference to, 
xxii; order of the, 142, 143; followed by 
kingdom and principality, 144; distinc- 
tion between Khalifate and Imamate, 
146; varying views on, 145/1; w also 
Imam 

Kharijites, x; doctrines concerning sin 
closely resemble Christian, xi; Unbeliever 
as defined by, xiii; punishment of the 
grave denied by, 99/1; views on commit- 
ting a sin, 108 ff.; disagreement on Imam, 
M7 

Kifdya, al-, 108 

Kitab al-lbana 'an Usui al-Diydna (al- 
Ash'arl), xviii 

Knowledge: sources of, xx, xxiv; as an at- 
tribute of Allah, xxvi, 55; of the real 
essences, 12; types of, 13; causes of: five 
senses, 15-19; true narrative, 19-24; Rea- 
son, 24-27; necessary knowledge con- 
trasted with acquired, 26; as established 
by narrative of Messenger and by neces- 
sity, 22; kinds of originated knowledge: 
necessary and acquired, 26; illumination 
not a cause of knowledge, 27; of Allah, 
37, 46, 48; as an attribute from eternity, 
50 ; assent one of divisions of, 1 22 

Knowing, the: as an attribute of Allah, 41 

Later Theologians: \alam of, 10; interpre- 
tations of the statutes, 46; see also Early 
Theologians; Philosophers 

Law, the: codification of, unnecessary dur- 
ing Muhammad's lifetime, ix; broad us- 
age implied in term, 50; ridicule of, 
classified as Unbelief, 160 

Leading astray: meaning of, 96 

Learned from beyond the River, the, 72 

Legal Judgments, 5, 5«; \alam the founda- 
tion of, 10; the meaning of Qur'an in, 64 

Legal responsibility, validity of: depends 
upon ability, 91; extent of: imposed upon 
creature, 92; see also Responsibility 

Life: as an attribute and essence of Allah, 
xii, xxvi, 56 

Living, the: as an attribute of Allah, 41 

Logic: attitude of orthodoxy toward, xv 

Logical contradictions, xxv 

Magians, xi, 81 

Magic: one of great sins, 107 

Mahdl, 132; doctrine of coming of, 147;; 

Maimonides, xxiv; propositions of Muta- 
kallim atomists as given by: summary of, 
xxv; on the incorporeality of. Allah, 42/1 



INDEX 



Ma'juj, see Ya'juj and Ma'juj 
Malik b. Anas, quoted, xiii 
Manslaughter, unlawful: classified as a 

great sin, 107 
Maqdldt al-lsldmiyin (al-Ash'ari), xviii 
Mary am, 138 

Mashayikh, see Early Theologians 
Material atoms, xxiv 

Maturidi, Al- (Abu Mansur), xv, xix; his 
position in dogmatic theology, 64/?; posi- 
tion on Belief and assent, 118 

Maturidites, theological viewpoint of: given 
by al-Nasafl in his statement of creed, 
xix; al-Nasafi a disciple of school of, 
xxiif.; accepted as orthodox, xxiii; on 
attributes of Allah, xxvif.; position on 
free will, xxvii; interpretation of Belief, 
xxviii; views on actions of individual, 
xxviii; on responsibility of individual, 
xxviii; on use of words "if Allah wills," 
xxix; on the destiny of the happy and 
unhappy, xxix 

Measurement: laws of, 32 

Messengers: little consideration given to, in 
Qur'an and Traditions, xxx; later devel- 
opment of doctrine in reference to, xxx; 
narrative of, 21; definition of, and as dis- 
tinguished from prophet, 21, 21 «; inter- 
cession of, 113; reasons for, and Allah's 
wisdom in sending, 127 ff.; meaning of 
office of, 131, 133; their preservation 
from error and sin, 133; of mankind and 
of angels: their relative rank to one an- 
other and to mankind, 168 f. 

Might: as an attribute of Allah, 56 

Miracle, evidentiary, see Evidentiary miracle 

Moon, eclipses of: last Hour to be preceded 
by, 166 

Moses, xxvi; narrative concerning perpe- 
tuity of religion of, 20; sound heard by, 
65; a vision requested by, 76, 77, 79 

. Motion and rest, 34, 35; time as the measure 
of, 45 

Muhammad: his writings lack systematic 
arrangement, ix; theocentric nature of 
his message, ix; Companions and Suc- 
cessors depended on authority of, x; dis- 
couraged discussion of dogma, x; his 
Beatific Vision of Allah, 7911; Belief as 
acceptance of message of, 117; the last 
prophet, 130; manifested the evidentiary 
miracle, 130 £.; numerous traditions 
about, 131 f.j his great accomplish- 
ments, 131; the most excellent of proph- 
ets, 134; reality of his ascension, 136 f.; 



quoted on: similarity, 47; Qur'an as un- 
created speech of Allah, 62; punishment, 
100; questioning by Allah, 103; the 
Tank, 104; intercession, 113; worship, 
153 

Muhammad 'Abdu, xxiii, xxvi; 86», 87a 
Mujtahid: definition of, 270; their proof 

and judgment not always correct, 166, 

167 

Mu\hta$ar al-Ma'ani (al-Taftazanl), xxi 
Multitude, the: views on ability as a condi- 
tion for performance of action, 89 
Munkar, questioning by, 99 
Murji'ites, xi; close resemblance between 
writings of John of Damascus and doc- 
trines of, xi;^ doctrine of delayed judg- 
ment, xiii, xiv 
Muslim Community, Agreement of, see 

Agreement of the Muslim Community 
Muslim Creed, The (A. J. Wcnsinck), xvii 
Muslims: their division into sects, xi 
Mutakallims, xiv; propositions of Muta- 
kallim atomists as given by Maimonides, 
xxv; "existence" defined by, i\n\ mean- 
ing of self-subsistence, 29; boundary de- 
fined by, 35; their proof of unity of 
Allah, 37; on plurality of eternal attri- 
butes and essences, 40; on variety of 
forms of speech, 6on; on Creating as 
attribute of Allah, 68; "originated" de- 
fined by, 70 
Mutawatir narrative, see under True narra- 
tive 

Mutawwal (al-Taftazanl), xxi 

Mu'tazilites: refutation of, marks maturity 
of orthodox Islam, xi, xii; meaning of 
their name, xii; beliefs of, xii, xiii, xiv; 
influenced by Christian thought and 
Greek philosophy, xiv; denial of the 
Beatific Vision, xiii, 74»; 'Abbasid Khali- 
fas supported teachings of, xiv; dialectic 
of, used by al-Ash 4 ari in defending ortho- 
doxy, xv ; decline of, xvi; position on 
Allah as creator of all action, xxvii; inter- 
pretation of Belief, xxix; opinions on 
sins of prophets, xxx; origin of, 8«, 9; 
controversies about eU~\alam, 8; defini- 
tion of shay', n«; on power of Allah, 
48; on attributes and essence of Allah, 
49-51; on attribute of Speech, 59 f.; 
views on Qur'an as speech of Allah, 62; 
creature the creator of his actions asserted 
by, 80 f.; power connected with action 
before its existence asserted by, 88/1; 
ascribed some actions to something other 



INDEX 



183 



than Allah, 93; views on appointed time 
of death, 94; interpretation of forbidden 
thing, 95 f.; views on Allah's guidance, 
97; on Allah's obligation to do what is 
best for creature, 970; punishment of the 
grave denied by, 9911, 100; Weighing de- 
nied by, 102; the Book denied by, 103; 
belief in future creation of the Garden 
and the Fire, 105; position on great sin, 
108 f.; views on pardon and intercession, 
in, 113; a great sin impossible for 
prophets, asserted by, 133; Graces of the 
Walis, denied by, 140; disagreement on 
Imam, 147; their views on worship, 
152 f.; views on Belief and Unbelief, 
161 f.; value of prayer for the dead re- 
jected by, 163; position on angels, 169 
Mystics, xxiv 

Nabidh of dates, 156 
Nakir, questioning by, 99 
Narrative of the Messenger, see under True 
narrative 

Narrative, true, see True narrative 
Nasafi, Al- (Abu tfaf? *Umar), his Creed 
makes no mention of Mu'tazilites, xii; 
importance of his statement of creed, xix; 
analysis of his statement of faith, xx; al- 
Taftazani's commentary on, xx; his text 
written from viewpoint of al-Maturidl, 
xxii; cited on sources of knowledge, xxiv; 
relative positions of al-Nasafl and al- 
Taftazani, xxiv-xxxi; Speech and Qur'an 
distinguished by, xxvi; statement on Be- 
lief, xxviii; makes no mention of sins of 
prophets, xxx 
Natural law: in atomic theory, xxv 
Nawadir, al- (Al-TirmidhI), 151 
Necessarily Existent, as synonymous with 
the. Eternal, 39, 43, 45; as related to at- 
tributes of Allah, 49, 52 
Non-existent: a synonym of negation, 163 

Obstinate, the, 13 
Odors, 33 

Omnipotence of Allah, 48 

Omniscience of Allah, 48 

Opinioners, the, 13 

Oriental philosophy, xv 

Origination: distinguished from creating, 
2871; substances and accidents are origi- 
nated, 29; meaning of term, 75 

Originator: Allah as the, 36 

Orphans: devouring property of, classified 
as one of great sins, 107 



Pain, 93, 101; see also Punishment 

Pantheism, xxiv; see also Anthropomorphic 
ideas; Polytheism 

Pardon: meaning of word, and its relation 
to forgiveness, 112 

Parents (Muslim): disobedience to, classi- 
fied as one of great sins, 107 

People of Agreement, see Agreement of the 
Muslim Community 

People of Loosing and Binding, 144 

People of Reality: definition of term, yn\ 
reality the judgment corresponding with 
actual fact, 10; possibility of the Vision 
demonstrated by, 75; views regarding a 
creature's acts, 80 

People of the Approved Way, xviii, xix; 
defined, 7/j; dissension between them 
and Shi'ites over Imamate, 144 

People of the Inner Meaning, 159 

People of Unity and Justice, see Mu'tazilites 

Perception, xx; types of, 13 

Permission (jawaz), $n 

Personal desires, people of, 6n 

Philosophers, the: their use of term "being 
originated," 28, 29; meaning of subsist- 
ence of a thing, 30; views on the atom, 
31; on motion, 35; on the incorporeality 
of Allah, 42; time as the measure of 
motion, 45; on power of Allah, 48; on 
attributes and essence of Allah, 50; views 
on "eternal" and "originated," 70; denial 
of Beatific Vision, 74/j; views on ap- 
pointed time of death, 95; quickening of 
dead denied by, 101; denial of Muham- 
mad's ascension, 136; position on angels, 
169; see also Early Theologians; Later 
Theologians 

Philosophy: attitude of orthodoxy toward, 
xv ; atomic theory a unique contribution 
of Islam to, xxiv; meaning of term as 
used by al-Taftazani, gn; see also Chris- 
tian philosophy; Greek philosophy; In- 
dian philosophy; Oriental philosophy; 
Theology, Muslim 

Plotinus, xiv 

Plurality: relation of unity and, in God, 
xii; impossibility of, in Deity, 38; see 
also Unity 

Political theory: inseparable from theology 
in Islam, x 

Polytheism, 81; one of the great sins, 107; 
Belief according to the uses of language, 
but not according to the Law, 117, 118; 
see also Anthropomorphic ideas; Pan- 
theism 



INDEX 



Porphyry of Tyre, xiv 

Possibility: meaning of term, 75, 77 

Power: as an attribute and essence of Allah, 
xii, xxvi, 37, 41, 46, 48, 56; ability the 
real essence of, 88 f.; sameness of, 
whether spent in Belief or Unbelief, 91 

Practice and commands of Muhammad: the 
source of guidance, ix 

Prayers, for the dead, 163; Allah answers, 
164 

Predestination: Christian doctrine of, in- 
fluence on Muslim thought, xiii; Allah as 
creator of all action, xxvii; problem of, 
xxxi; Jabritcs believers in, 82», 84; see 
also Fatalism; Free Will 

Preserved Tablet, the, 6$n 

Primary matter (hayult), 3 in, 32 

Primitive Theologians, 30; see also Early 
Theologians; Later Theologians 

Prophet, the, see Muhammad 

Prophets: distinguished from Messengers, 
2i, 21 n\ questioning of, in the grave, 99; 
Adam the first, Muhammad the last, 130; 
meaning of office of, 131, 133; their 
preservation from error and sin, 133; 
statements as to their number, 132; Mu- 
hammad the most excellent, 134; rank 
of, higher than Walls, 157 

Pscudo-Dionysius, xii 

Punishment: debates about, xiii; of the 
grave: for Unbelievers and disobedient 
Believers, 99; of a small sin, 112; see also 
Pain 

Qadarites: close resemblance between writ- 
ings of John of Damascus and doctrines 
of, xi, xi«; accepted doctrine of free will, 
xiii; position on Allah as creator of all 
action, xxvii; views held on Belief, 122 

Qatfi Khan, 151 

Qihla, people of, xi, 109, 153, 154, 161, 

162; see also Believer 
Questioning: reality of, 103 
Quiddity: Allah not described by, 44 
Qur'an: systematic arrangement lacking in, 
ix; obscurities in, gave rise to theological 
disputation, xi; early reverence for, xii; 
earliest statements of creed found in, xvii; 
its teaching on Allah as Creator, xxiv; the 
use of words Belief and Islam in, xxix; 
gives little consideration to Messengers 
and Prophets, xxx; as the speech of Al- 
lah, 58, 61-66; references to the Garden 
and the Fire in, i04»; the most excellent 
book of Allah, 135; to be interpreted 



literally, 158; citations from, on: unity 
of Allah, 37, 38; Beatific Vision, 76, 77; 
possibility of Vision, 78, 79; choice of 
action, 85; legal responsibility of creature, 
92; Allah's guidance, 96, 97; punish- 
ment, 100; resurrection, 101; Weighing, 
102; reality of the Book, and Questioning, 
103; the disobedient, 109; Believer's stay 
in the Fire and entry into the Garden, 
114; Belief and good deeds, 120 

Quraysh, tribe of, 147 

Qutb al-DIn, xxi 

Rawafio 1 , 100 

RazI, Al- (Fakhr al-DIn), xvi, xx; views 
on sins of prophets, xxx; non-committal 
on atom, 32 

Reality: the judgment corresponding with 
actual fact, 10; verification of existence 
of essences, 12 

Reality of the great Assembly, 101 

Reason: as source of knowledge, xx, xxiv; 
comprehension by, 15; as a cause of 
knowledge, 16-18, 24-27; disagreement 
concerning, among heretics, 24; Allah as 
Creator, in agreement with, 67; Vision 
of Allah, allowed by, 74; Weighing not 
comprehended by, 102; Messengers pro- 
vide knowledge unobtainable through, 
128, 129 

Repentance, xiii 

Responsibility: debates about, xiii; views 

held by Ash'aritcs and Maturidites, xxviii; 

see also Legal responsibility 
Resurrection: Christian emphasis on, xiii; 

Day of, 10 1 
Ruling: actions of creatures are by Allah's, 

82 

Sacred territory: contravening ordinances 
concerning, classified as one of great sins, 
107 

SanusI, Al- (Muhammad), xix; on sins of 
the prophets, xxxi; attributes of Allah as 
classified by, 49», 5o» 
Sarakhsi, Al- (Al-Imam), 160, i6on 
Sarakhsl, Al- (Luqman), 139 
Schisms: inherent wickedness of, x 
Scholasticism, xv, xvi; Early Theologians 
and later scholastics, xvi; attitude toward 
atomic theory, xvi; opinions on Belief, 
xxviii; possibility of its replacement by 
agnosticism, xxxi; see also Theology, 
Muslim 

Seeing: as an attribute and essence of Al- 



INDEX 



lah, xii, xxvi, 41, 56; one of five senses, 
18 

Sense perception, 13, 14; as a cause of 
knowledge, 17 

Senses: as source of knowledge, xxiv, 16-19; 
in atomic theory, xxv; comprehension 
by, 15; five kinds of, 18, 19; Messen- 
gers provide knowledge unobtainable 
through, 128, 129 

Sensibility, 17 

Shafi'i, A1-, quoted, xv; i20» 
Shar', 5/2; canon law, 6, 41 
Shay', see Thing 

Shi'ites: 'All and Fatima family claims to 
Khalifate accepted by, x; opinions on 
sins of prophets, xxx; views on attributes 
of Allah, 49«, 50*2; denial of Beatific 
Vision, 74»; views regarding a creature's 
acts, 80; dissension between them and 
People of the Approved Way over Ima- 
mate, 144; Khalifa a more general term 
than Imam, asserted by, 146 

S'tjat, see Attributes 

Sight: Beatific Vision is by the sense of, 78; 

see also Seeing 
Sin: doctrines of, Muslim and Christian, xi; 
delayed judgment on, xiii, xiv; varying 
doctrines on sins of prophets, xxx; dif- 
fering traditions on meaning and number 
of great sins, 107 f.; relative terms: small 
and great sin, 107, 108; pardoning by 
Allah, in; punishment of a small sin, 
112; preservation of prophets and Mes- 
sengers from, 133 
Slander of a chaste woman: classified as a 

great sin, 107 
Smelling: one of five senses, 18 
Smoke, the: to precede last Hour, 166 
Sophists: on existence of real essences of 
things, 12 f.; views on knowledge, 16, 21 
Sound senses, see Senses 
Speculation, 17, 24, 25 
Speech: as an attribute and essence of Allah, 
xii, xxvi; Ash'arite and Maturidite posi- 
tion on, xxvi; the subject of controversy, 
7; attribute of, analyzed, 58-66; as dis- 
tinguished from other attributes, 58; in- 
compatible with silence and defect, 60; 
a single attribute with a variety of forms, 
60 f.; as narrative, 61; conflict over non- 
creation of speech of Allah, 620; see also 
Belief; Kalim 
Spheres, heavenly: motion of, 32 
States of coming into being, 33, 57 
Substance: in atomic theory, xxv; as op- 



posed to accident, 1319; self -subsistence 
of, 29; compounded, as, a body, 30; not 
compounded, as, the atom, 30; not free 
from originated things, 33-35; existence, 
origination, possibility, common to, 75a 

Successors of the Companions of the 
Prophet, x 

Sufastd, defined, 14 

Sumaniya, 21, 128 

Sun, rising of, in the West: last Hour to be 

preceded by, 165, 166 
Sunna, 8»; statutes of, to be interpreted 

literally, 158; see also Traditions 
Sunnites: 'All and Fatima family claims to 

Khalifate rejected by, x; followers of al- 

Maturidi, xxiii 
$tira, see Form 
Surmise, 17 

Sustaining: as an attribute of Allah, 57 

Taftazani, Al- (Sa'd al-Din), refutes 
Mu'tazilites, xii; reviews rise of kalam, 
xiv; author of outstanding commentary 
on al-Nasafi's articles of Muslim Belief, 
xx f.; his life and environment, xxi, xxii; 
method used in his commentary, xxii f . ; 
an Ash'arite, while al-Nasafi wrote from 
viewpoint of al-Maturidi, xxii, xxiii; rela- 
tive positions of al-Nasafi and al-Taf- 
tazani, xxiv-xxxi; accepted atomic the- 
ory, xxv; his position on attribute of 
Speech, xxvi; accepted Maturidite views 
on good and evil actions, and on responsi- 
bility, xxviii; follows Maturidite position 
on Belief, xxviii; on sins of prophets, 
xxx f. 

fahawi, Al- (Abu Ja'far Ahmad), xv, xix, 

xixw, 90 
Ta\win, see Creating 
Talwth (al -TaftazanI), xxi 
Tank, the: reality of, 104 
Taste, 18, 33 

Tawatur, 23 ; see also under Traditions 

Tawra: a book of Allah, 135 

Testament (Wasiya) (Abu Hanifa), xviii 

Theology, Christian: adapted Greek phi- 
losophy to its use, xv 

Theology, Muslim: system of theology re- 
jected by Muhammad, x; early contro- 
versies, x; inseparable from political 
theory, x; use of negative terms in de- 
fining relationship between essence and 
attributes of Allah, xii, xiii; amalgama- 
tion of theology and philosophy, xvi; 
al-Taftazani's treatise a standard text- 



INDEX 



Theology (Continued) 

book of, xx; al-Ash'ari considered 
founder of orthodox, xxiii; schools of 
al-MSturidl and al-Ash'ari both ortho- 
dox, xxiii; tendency of modern writers 
toward liberalism, xxiii; relative positions 
of al-Nasafi and al-Taftazanl, xxiv-xxxi; 
atomic philosophy, xxiv £.; Allah as crea- 
tor of all actions, xxvii; varying opinions 
held on Belief, xxviii; development of 
doctrine in reference to Messengers and 
Prophets, xxx; element of fatalism in, 
xxxi; future of, xxxi; subjects covered 
by, 8a; method of Early Theologians, 
17; differing opinions on Beatific Vision, 
74«; differences on meaning of a great 
sin, 107; varying views on preservation 
of prophets from sin, 133; varying opin- 
ions on angels and their messengers, 
168 ff.; see also Early Theologians; Later 
Theologians; Philosophy 
"Theology of Aristotle, The," xiv 
Thing (shay'), essence of, 11 f., 11 »; the 

world as a thing originated, 28 
Time: Allah not affected by, 45 
Time atoms, xxiv; see also Atom; Atomic 

philosophy 
Timur, xxi, xxii 
Touch: one of five senses, 19 
Traditions: systematic arrangement lacking 
in, ix; wickedness of schisms taught by, 
x; Muslim and other religious sects listed 
by, xi; earliest statements of creed found 
in, xvii; cited on Belief, xxix; litde con- 
sideration to Messengers and Prophets 
given in, xxx; distinction between those 
traced to Muhammad and to Compan- 
ions, 25/1; proof of attribute of Speech 
found in, 59, 62; Allah as Creator, in 
agreement with, 67; Beatific Vision, nec- 
essary by, 77; on the subject of punish- 
ment, 100; concerning people of the 
Garden, 102; concerning the Tank, 
1041a; differences of opinion on mean- 
ing of a great sin, 107; Muhammad 
described in numerous, 131 f.; many in- 
dividual traditions concerning Muham- 
mad's ascension, 137; cursing as per- 
mitted by, 154; prayer for the dead and 
almsgiving upheld by, 163; numerous 
traditions concerning last Day, 166; see 
also True narrative 
Transmigration, 102 

True narrative: as source of knowledge, 
xxiv, 16; kinds of: mutaw&tir narrative, 



19-21; narrative of the Messenger, 21-24; 
other possible sources of, 23; speech as, 
61 £.; intercession of the Messengers es- 
tablished by, 113; see also Traditions 

'Umar the Divider, 142, 143, 144 
Ummayyad rulers: attitude of Murji'ites 
toward, xi 

Unbelief: distinction between Belief and 
Unbelief, x; commission of a great sin 
does not lead into, 108; as the absolutely 
great sin, 108; can not be pardoned, 112; 
prophets preserved from, 133; enumera- 
tion of acts of, 159-62; see also Belief 

Unbeliever: identification of, xiii, xiv; 
Allah the Creator of actions of, 80; no 
compulsion in his choice, 83; blamed for 
inability to hear, 89; possesses power to 
believe, 91; created by Allah, 97; punish- 
ment of the grave for, 99; definition of, 

V 7 

Unity: relation of plurality and, in Deity, 
xii; science of, 6; of Allah, 37; see also 
Plurality 

Universe, origin of: Allah as Creator, xxiv; 

atomic theory of, xxiv 
Unseen, diviner's narration of: acceptance 

of, considered Unbelief, 162 
Usury: classified as a great sin, 107 
'Uthman of the two lights, 142-44 
Utterances of Muhammad: as the instru- 
ment of revelation, x 

Vacuum: existence of, 44a 
Verifiers, 65, 68, 111, 118, 122, 125 
Vision (of Allah), see Beatific Vision 

Wahm, 17 

Walls: Graces of the, 137 ff.; graces dis- 
tinguished from evidentiary miracle of a 
prophet, 140; rank of, not equal to that 
of prophets, 157 

War against Unbelievers, fleeing from: 
classified as a great sin, 107 

Wasil b. 'A**', 8, 9 

Weighing of deeds: reality of, 102 f. 

Wensinck, A. J., xvii 

Willing: as an attribute and essence of Al- 
lah, xii, xxvi, 41, 56, 73; actions of crea- 
tures are by Allah's, $2; connected with 
all actions, 87 

Wine drinking: classified as a great sin, 107 

Wiping on the inner shoes, 155 

Withdrawers, or Secessionists, see Mu'tazi- 
lites 



INDEX 



Witnessing formula, xvii, 119 

Works: as acts of obedience, 120 

World, the: totality of its parts, 28; origin 

of, 39-35 
Worship, 152 f. 
Wound, the («/-*«/m), 8 



Ya'juj and Ma'juj, appearance of: last Hour 
to be preceded by, 165, 166 



Zabur: a book of Allah, 135 
Zindiq, xv 



