| Averroes’ 
Tahafut 


-Al-Tahafut 


(The Incoherence of the Incoherence) 


Volumes | and Il 


Translated by 
Simon Van Den Bergh 





The Incoherence of the Incoherence 


AVERROES 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Preface 
INTRODUCTION 


THE FIRST DISCUSSION: Concerning the Eternity of the World 
THE FIRST PROOF 

THE SECOND PROOF 

THE THIRD PROOF 

THE FOURTH PROOF 


THE SECOND DISCUSSION: The Refutation of their Theory of the Incorruptibility of the 
World and of Time and Motion 


THE THIRD DISCUSSION: The demonstration of their confusion in saying that God is the 
agent and the maker of the world and that the world in His product and act, and the 
demonstration that these expressions are in their system only metaphors without any real 
sense 


THE FOURTH DISCUSSION: Showing that they are unable to prone the existence of a 
creator of the world 


THE FIFTH DISCUSSION: To show their incapacity to prove God’s unity and the 
impossibility of two necessary existents both without a cause 


THE SIXTH DISCUSSION: To refute their denial of attributes 


THE SEVENTH DISCUSSION: To refute their claim that nothing cars share with the First 
its genus and be differentiated from it through a specific difference, and that with respect 
to its intellect the division into genus and specific difference cannot be applied to it 


THE EIGHTH DISCUSSION: To refute their theory that the existence of the First is simple, 
namely that it is pure existence and that its existence stands in relation to no quiddity 
and to no essence, but stands to necessary existence as do other beings to their quiddity 


THE NINTH DISCUSSION: To refute their proof that the First is incorporeal 


THE TENTH DISCUSSION: To prove their incapacity to demonstrate that the world has a 
creator and a cause, and that in fact they are forced to admit atheism 


THE ELEVENTH DISCUSSION: To show the incapacity of those philosophers who believe 
that the First knows other things besides its own self and that it knows the genera and the 
species in a universal way, to prone that this is so 


THE TWELFTH DISCUSSION: About the impotence of the philosophers to prone that Cod 
knows Himself 


THE THIRTEENTH DISCUSSION: To refute those who arm that Gad is ignorant of the 
individual things which are divided in time into present, past, and future 


THE FOURTEENTH DISCUSSION: To refute their proof that heaven is an animal mowing 
in a circle in obedience to God 

THE FIFTEENTH DISCUSSION: To refute the theory of the philosophers about the aim 
which moves heaven 


THE SIXTEENTH DISCUSSION: To refute the philosophical theory that the souls of the 
heavens observe all the particular events of this world 


ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 
THE FIRST DISCUSSION: The denial of a logical necessity between cause and effect 


THE SECOND DISCUSSION: The impotence of the philosophers to show by demonstrative 
proof that the soul is a spiritual substance 


THE THIRD DISCUSSION: Refutation of the philosophers’ proof for the immortality of the 
soul 


THE FOURTH DISCUSSION: Concerning the philosophers’ denial of bodily resurrection 
The End 


PREFACE 


I wish to express my warmest thanks to the Trustees of the Gibb Memorial Fund for making 
the publication of this work possible, and especially to Professor Sir Hamilton Gibb, who 
asked me to undertake the work and who has not only read the proofs but has continually 
given me his interest and encouragement. I am also deeply indebted to Dr. R. Walzer, who has 
read the proofs, carefully checked the references in my notes, and composed the indexes and 
the Greek-Arabic and Arabic-Greek vocabularies. I have also to thank Dr. S. M. Stern for his 
help in completing the subject-index. Finally, I wish to pay a tribute to one who is no longer 
amongst us, Father Maurice Bouyges, without whose admirable text the work could never 
have been undertaken. 


The marginal numbers in Vol. I refer to the text of Father Bouyges’s edition of the Tahafut 
al Tahafut in his Bibliotheca Arabica Scholasticorum, vol. iii, Beyrouth, 1930. 


The asterisks indicate different readings from those to be found in Bouyges’s text: cf. the 
Appendix, Vol. I, pp, 364 ff. 


INTRODUCTION 


If it may be said that Santa Maria sopra Minerva is a symbol of our 
European culture, it should not be forgotten that the mosque also was built on 
the Greek temple. But whereas in Christian Western theology there was a 
gradual and indirect infiltration of Greek, and especially Aristotelian ideas, so 
that it may be said that finally Thomas Aquinas baptized Aristotle, the impact 
on Islam was sudden, violent, and short. The great conquests by the Arabs 
took place in the seventh century when the Arabs first came into contact with 
the Hellenistic world. At that time Hellenistic culture was still alive; 
Alexandria in Egypt, certain towns in Syria-Edessa for instance-were centres 
of Hellenistic learning, and in the cloisters of Syria and Mesopotamia not only 
Theology was studied but Science and Philosophy also were cultivated. In 
Philosophy Aristotle was still ‘the master of those who know, and especially 
his logical works as interpreted by the Neoplatonic commentators were 
studied intensively. But also many Neoplatonic and Neopythagorean writings 
were still known, and also, very probably, some of the old Stoic concepts and 
problems were still alive and discussed. 


The great period of translation of Greek into Arabic, mostly through the 
intermediary of Christian Syrians, was between the years 750 and 850, but 
already before that time there was an impact of Greek ideas on Muslim 
theology. The first speculative theologians in Islam are called Mu'tazilites 
(from about A. D. 723), an exact translation of the Greek word (the general 
name for speculative theologians is Mutakallimun, dialecticians, a name often 
given in later Greek philosophy to the Stoics). Although they form rather a 
heterogeneous group of thinkers whose theories are syncretistic, that is taken 
from different Greek sources with a preponderance of Stoic ideas, they have 
certain points in common, principally their theory, taken from the Stoics, of 
the rationality of religion (which is for them identical with Islam), of a lumen 
naturale which burns in the heart of every man, and the optimistic view of a 
rational God who has created the best of all possible worlds for the greatest 
good of man who occupies the central place in the universe. They touch upon 
certain difficult problems that were perceived by the Greeks. The paradoxes of 


Zeno concerning movement and the infinite divisibility of space and time 
hold their attention, and the subtle problem of the status of the nonexistent, a 
problem long neglected in modern philosophy, but revived by the school of 
Brentano, especially by Meinong, which caused an endless controversy 
amongst the Stoics, is also much debated by them. 


A later generation of theologians, the Ash‘arites, named after Al Ash‘ari, 
born A. D. 873, are forced by the weight of evidence to admit a certain 
irrationality in theological concepts, and their philosophical speculations, 
largely based on Stoicism, are strongly mixed with Sceptical theories. They 
hold the middle way between the traditionalists who want to forbid all 
reasoning on religious matters and those who affirm that reason unaided by 
revelation is capable of attaining religious truths. Since Ghazali founds his 
attack against the philosophers on Ash‘arite principles, we may consider for a 
moment some of their theories. The difference between the Ash‘arite and 
Muttazilite conceptions of God cannot be better expressed than by the 
following passage which is found twice in Ghazali (in his Golden Means of 
Dogmatics and his Vivification of Theology) and to which by tradition is 
ascribed the breach between Al Ash‘ari and the Mu‘tazilites. 


‘Let us imagine a child and a grown-up in Heaven who both died in the 
True Faith, but the grown-up has a higher place than the child. And the 
child will ask God, “Why did you give that man a higher place?” And God 
will answer, “He has done many good works.” Then the child will say, 
“Why did you let me die so soon so that I was prevented from doing 
good?” God will answer, “I knew that you would grow up a sinner, 
therefore it was better that you should die a child.” Then a cry goes up 
from the damned in the depths of Hell, “Why, O Lord, did you not let us 


die before we became sinners?” ” 


Ghazali adds to this: ‘the imponderable decisions of God cannot be weighed 
by the scales of reason and Mu‘tazilism’. 


According to the Ash‘arites, therefore, right and wrong are human concepts 
and cannot be applied to God. ‘Cui mali nihil est nec esse potest quid huic 
opus est dilectu bonorum et malorum? is the argument of the Sceptic 
Carneades expressed by Cicero (De natura deorum, iii. 15. 38). It is a 


dangerous theory for the theologians, because it severs the moral relationship 


between God and man and therefore it cannot be and is not consistently 
applied by the Ash‘arites and Ghazali. 


The Ash‘arites have taken over from the Stoics their epistemology, their 
sensationalism, their nominalism, their materialism. Some details of this 
epistemology are given by Ghazali in his autobiography: the clearness of 
representations is the criterion for their truth; the soul at birth is a blank on 
which the sensations are imprinted; at the seventh year of a man’s life he 
acquires the rational knowledge of right and wrong. Stoic influence on Islamic 
theology is overwhelming. Of Stoic origin, for instance, are the division of the 
acts of man into five classes; the importance placed on the motive of an act 
when judging its moral character; the theory of the two categories of 
substance and accident (the two other categories, condition and relation, are 
not considered by the Muslim theologians to pertain to reality, since they are 
subjective); above all, the fatalism and determinism in Islam which is often 
regarded as a feature of the Oriental soul. In the Qur’an, however, there is no 
definite theory about free will. Muhammad was not a philosopher. The 
definition of will in man given by the Ash‘arites, as the instrument of 
unalterable fate and the unalterable law of God, is Stoic both in idea and 
expression. (I have discussed several other theories in my notes.) 


Sometimes, however, the theologians prefer to the Stoic view the view of 
their adversaries. For instance, concerning the discussion between 
Neoplatonism and Stoicism whether there is a moral obligation resting on 
God and man relative to animals, Islam answers with the Neoplatonists in the 
affirmative (Spinoza, that Stoic Cartesian, will give, in his Ethica, the negative 


Stoic answer). 


The culmination of the philosophy of Islam was in the tenth and eleventh 
centuries. This was the age also of the great theologians. It was with Greek 
ideas, taken in part from Stoics and Sceptics, that the theologians tried to 
refute the ideas of the philosophers. The philosophers themselves were 
followers of Aristotle as seen through the eyes of his Neoplatonic 
commentators. This Neoplatonic interpretation of Aristotle, although it gives 
a mystical character to his philosophy which is alien to it, has a certain 
justification in the fact that there are in his philosophy many elements of the 


theory of his master Plato, which lend themselves to a Neoplatonic 
conception. Plotinus regarded himself as nothing but the commentator of 
Plato and Aristotle, and in his school the identity of view of these two great 
masters was affirmed. In the struggle in Islam between Philosophy and 
Theology, Philosophy was defeated, and the final blow to the philosophers was 
given in Ghazali’s attack on Philosophy which in substance is incorporated in 
Averroés’ book and which he tries to refute. 


Ghazali, who was born in the middle of the eleventh century, is one of the 
most remarkable and at the same time most enigmatic figures in Islam. Like 
St. Augustine, with whom he is often compared, he has told us in his 
autobiography how he had to pass through a period of despair and scepticism 
until God, not through demonstration but by the light of His grace, had given 
him peace and certitude. This divine light, says Ghazali, is the basis of most of 
our knowledge and, he adds, profoundly, one cannot find proofs for the 
premisses of knowledge; the premisses are there and one looks for the 
reasons, but they cannot be found. Certitude is reached, he says, not through 
scholastic reasoning, not through philosophy, but through mystical 
illumination and the mystical way of life. Still Ghazali is not only a mystic, he 
is a great dogmatist and moralist. He is regarded as Islam’s greatest 
theologian and, through some of his books, as a defender of Orthodoxy. It is 
generally believed that the Tahafut, the book in which he criticizes 
Philosophy, was written in the period of his doubts. The book, however, is a 
Defence of Faith, and though it is more negative than positive, for it aims to 
destroy and not to construct, it is based on the theories of his immediate 
predecessors, many of whose arguments he reproduces. Besides, he promises 
in this book to give in another book the correct dogmatic answers. The 
treatise to which he seems to refer does not contain anything but the old 
theological articles of faith and the Ash‘arite arguments and solutions. But we 
should not look for consistency in Ghazali; necessarily his mysticism comes 
into conflict with his dogmatism and he himself has been strongly influenced 
by the philosophers, especially by Avicenna, and in many works he comes 
very near to the Neoplatonic theories which he criticizes. On the whole it 
would seem to me that Ghazali in his attack on the philosophers has taken 
from the vast arsenal of Ash‘arite dialectical arguments those appropriate to 


the special point under discussion, regardless of whether they are destructive 
also of some of the views he holds. 


Averroés was the last great philosopher in Islam in the twelfth century, and 
is the most scholarly and scrupulous commentator of Aristotle. He is far 
better known in Europe than in the Orient, where few of his works are still in 
existence and where he had no influence, he being the last great philosopher 
of his culture. Renan, who wrote a big book about him, Averroes et 
l’Averro’asme, had never seen a line of Arabic by him. Lately some of his 
works have been edited in Arabic, for instance his Tahafut al Tahafut, in a 
most exemplary manner. Averroés’ influence on European thought during the 
Middle Ages and the Renaissance has been immense. 


The name of Ghazali’s book in which he attacks the philosophers is Tahafut 
al Falasifa, which has been translated by the medieval Latin translator as 
Destructio Philosophorum. The name of Averroés’ book is Tahafut al Tahafut, 
which is rendered as Destructio Destructionis (or destructionum). This 
rendering is surely not exact. The word ‘Tahafut has been translated by 
modern scholars in different ways, and the title of Ghazali’s book has been 
given as the breakdown, the disintegration, or the incoherence, of the 
philosophers. The exact title of Averroés’ book would be The Incoherence of 


the Incoherence. 


In the Revue des Deux Mondes there was an article published in 1895 by 
Ferdinand Brunetiere, ‘La Banqueroute de la Science’, in which he tried to 
show that the solutions by science, and especially by biology, of fundamental 
problems, solutions which were in opposition to the dogmas taught by the 
Church, were primitive and unreasonable. Science had promised us to 
eliminate mystery, but, Brunetiere said, not only had it not removed it but we 
saw clearly that it would never do so. Science had been able neither to solve, 
nor even to pose, the questions that mattered: those that touched the origin of 
man, the laws of his conduct, his future destiny. What Brunetiere tried to do, 
to defend Faith by showing up the audacity of Science in its attempt to solve 
ultimate problems, is exactly the same as Ghazali tried to do in relation to the 
pretensions of the philosophers of his time who, having based themselves on 


reason alone, tried to solve all the problems concerning God and the world. 


Therefore a suitable title for his book might perhaps be ‘The Bankruptcy of 
Philosophy’. 


In the introduction to his book Ghazali says that a group of people hearing 
the famous names Socrates, Hippocrates, Plato, and Aristotle, and knowing 
what they had attained in such sciences as Geometry, Logic, and Physics, have 
left the religion of their fathers in which they were brought up to follow the 
philosophers. The theories of the philosophers are many, but Ghazali will 
attack only one, the greatest, Aristotle; Aristotle, of whom it is said that he 
refuted all his predecessors, even Plato, excusing himself by saying ‘amicus 
Plato, amica veritas, sed magis amica veritas’. I may add that this well-known 
saying, which is a variant of a passage in Plato’s Phaedo and in Aristotle’s 
Nicomachean Ethics, is found in this form first in Arabic. One of the first 
European authors who has it in this form is Cervantes (Don Quijote, ii, c. 52). I 
quote this saying-Ghazali adds-to show that there is no surety and evidence in 
Philosophy. According to Ghazali, the philosophers claim for their 
metaphysical proofs the same evidence as is found in Mathematics and Logic. 
But all Philosophy is based on supposition and opinion. If Metaphysics had 
the same evidence as Mathematics all philosophers would agree just as well in 
Philosophy as in Mathematics. According to him the translators of Aristotle 
have often misunderstood or changed the meaning and the different texts 
have caused different controversies. Ghazali considers Farabi and Avicenna to 
be the best commentators on Aristotle in Islam, and it is their theories that he 


will attack. 


Before entering into the heart of the matter I will say a few words about 
Ghazali’s remark that Metaphysics, although it claims to follow the same 
method as Mathematics, does not attain the same degree of evidence. Neither 
Aristotle nor his commentators ever asked the question whether there is any 
difference between the methods of Mathematics and Metaphysics (it is a 
significant fact that most examples of proof in the Posterior Analytics are 
taken from Mathematics) and why the conclusions reached by Metaphysics 
seem so much less convincing than those reached by Mathematics. It would 
seem that Metaphysics, being the basis of all knowledge and having as its 
subject the ultimate principles of things, should possess, according to 
Aristotle, the highest evidence and that God, as being the highest principle, 


should stand at the beginning of the system, as in Spinoza. In fact, Aristotle 
could not have sought God if he had not found Him. For Aristotle all 
necessary reasoning is deductive and exclusively based on syllogism. 
Reasoning-he says-and I think this is a profound and true remark-cannot go 
on indefinitely. You cannot go on asking for reasons infinitely, nor can you 
reason about a subject which is not known to you. Reason must come to a 
stop. There must be first principles which are immediately evident. And 
indeed Aristotle acknowledges their existence. When we ask, however, what 
these first principles are, he does not give us any answer but only points out 
the Laws of Thought as such. But from the Laws of Thought nothing can be 
deduced, as Aristotle acknowledges himself. As a matter of fact Aristotle is 
quite unaware of the assumption on which his system is based. He is what 
philosophers are wont to call nowadays a naive realist. He believes that the 
world which we perceive and think about with all it contains has a reality 
independent of our perceptions or our thoughts. But this view seems so 
natural to him that he is not aware that it could be doubted or that any reason 
might be asked for it. Now I, for my part, believe that the objectivity of a 
common world in which we all live and die is the necessary assumption of all 
reasoning and thought. I believe indeed, with Aristotle, that there are primary 
assumptions which cannot be deduced from other principles. All reasoning 
assumes the existence of an objective truth which is sought and therefore is 
assumed to have an independent reality of its own. Every thinking person is 
conscious of his own identity and the identity of his fellow beings from whom 
he accepts language and thoughts and to whom he can communicate his own 
ideas and emotions. Besides, all conceptual thought implies universality, i.e. 
belief in law and in objective necessity. I can only infer from Socrates being a 
man that he is mortal when I have assumed that the same thing (in this case 
man in so far as he is man) in the same conditions will always necessarily 


behave in the same way. 


In his book Ghazali attacks the philosophers on twenty points. Except for 
the last two points which are only slightly touched by Averroés, Averroés 
follows point for point the arguments Ghazali uses and tries to refute them. 
Ghazali’s book is badly constructed, it is unsystematic and repetitive. If 
Ghazali had proceeded systematically he would have attacked first the 


10 


philosophical basis of the system of the philosophers-namely their proof for 
the existence of God, since from God, the Highest Principle, everything else is 
deduced. But the first problem Ghazali mentions is the philosphers’ proof for 
the eternity of the world. This is the problem which Ghazali considers to be 
the most important and to which he allots the greatest space, almost a quarter 
of his book. He starts by saying rather arbitrarily that the philosophers have 
four arguments, but, in discussing them, he mixes them up and the whole 
discussion is complicated by the fact that he gives the philosophical 
arguments and theological counter arguments in such an involved way that 
the trend is sometimes hard to follow. He says, for instance, page 3, that to the 
first arguments of the philosophers there are two objections. The first 
objection he gives on this page, but the second, after long controversy 
between the philosophers and theologians, on page 32. I will not follow here 
Ghazali and Averroés point for point in their discussions but will give rather 
the substance of their principal arguments (for a detailed discussion I refer to 
my notes). 


The theory of the eternity of the world is an Aristotelian one. Aristotle was, 
as he says himself, the first thinker who affirmed that the world in which we 
live, the universe as an orderly whole, a cosmos, is eternal. All the 
philosophers before him believed that the world had come into being either 
from some primitive matter or after a number of other worlds. At the same 
time Aristotle believes in the finitude of causes. For him it is impossible that 
movement should have started or can continue by itself. There must be a 
principle from which all movement derives. Movement, however, by itself is 
eternal. It seems to me that this whole conception is untenable. If the world is 
eternal there will be an infinite series of causes and an infinite series of 
movers; there will be an infinite series, for instance, of fathers and sons, of 
birds and eggs (the example of the bird and egg is first mentioned in 
‘Censorinus, De die natali, where he discusses the Peripatetic theory of the 
eternity of the world), and we will never reach a first mover or cause, a first 
father or a first bird. Aristotle, in fact, defends the two opposite theses of 
Kant’s first antinomy. He holds at the same time that time and movement are 
infinite and that every causal series must be finite. The contradiction in 
Aristotle is still further accentuated in the Muslim philosophers by the fact 


11 


that they see in God, not only as Aristotle did, the First Mover of the 
movement of the universe, but that they regard Him, under the influence of 
the Plotinian theory of emanation, as the Creator of the universe from whom 
the world emanates eternally. However, can the relation between two existing 
entities qua existents be regarded as a causal one? Can there be a causal 
relation between an eternally unchangeable God and an eternally revolving 
and changing world, and is it sense to speak of a creation of that which exists 
eternally? Besides, if the relation between the eternal God and the eternal 
movement of the world could be regarded as a causal relation, no prior 
movement could be considered the cause of a posterior movement, and 
sequences such as the eternal sequence of fathers and sons would not form a 
causal series. God would not be a first cause but the Only Cause of everything. 
It is the contradiction in the idea of an eternal creation which forms the chief 
argument of Ghazali in this book. In a later chapter, for instance, when he 
refutes Avicenna’s proof for God based on the Aristotelian concepts 
‘necessary by itself, i.e. logical necessity, and ‘necessary through another’, i.e. 
ontological necessity, in which there is the usual Aristotelian confusion of the 
logical with the ontological, Ghazali’s long argument can be reduced to the 
assertion that once the possibility of an infinite series of causes is admitted, 


there is no sense in positing a first cause. 


The first argument is as follows. If the world had been created, there must 
have been something determining its existence at the moment it was created, 
for otherwise it would have remained in the state of pure possibility it was in 
before. But if there was something determining its existence, this determinant 
must have been determined by another determinant and so on ad infinitum, 
or we must accept an eternal God in whom eternally new determinations may 


arise. But there cannot be any new determinations in an eternal God. 


The argument in this form is found in Avicenna, but its elements are 
Aristotelian. In Cicero’s Academics we have a fragment of one of Aristotle’s 
earlier and more popular writings, the lost dialogue De philosophia, in which 
he says that it is impossible that the world could ever have been generated. 
For how could there have been a new decision, that is a new decision in the 
mind of God, for such a magnificent work? St. Augustine knows this argument 
from Cicero and he too denies that God could have a novum consilium. St. 


12 


Augustine is well aware of the difficulty, and he says in his De civilate dei that 
God has always existed, that after a certain time, without having changed His 
will, He created man, whom He had not wanted to create before, this is indeed 
a fact too profound for us. It also belongs to Aristotle’s philosophy that in all 
change there is a potentiality and all potentiality needs an actualizer which 
exists already. In the form this argument has in Avicenna it is, however, taken 
from a book by a late Greek Christian commentator of Aristotle, John 
Philoponus, De aeternitate mundi, which was directed against a book by the 
great Neoplatonist Proclus who had given eighteen arguments to prove the 
eternity of the world. Plato himself believed in the temporal creation of the 
world not by God Himself but by a demiurge. But later followers of Plato 
differed from him on this point. Amongst the post-Aristotelian schools only 
the Stoics assumed a periodical generation and destruction of the world. 
Theophrastus had already tried to refute some of the Stoic arguments for this 
view, and it may well be that John Philoponus made use of some Stoic sources 
for his defence of the temporality of the world. 


The book by Proclus is lost, but John Philoponus, who as a Christian believes 
in the creation of the world, gives, before refuting them, the arguments given 
by Proclus. The book by Philoponus was translated into Arabic and many of 
its arguments are reproduced in the Muslim controversies about the problem 
(arguments for the temporal creation of the world were also given by 
Philoponus in a work against Aristotle’s theory of the eternity of the world, 
arguments which are known to us through their quotation and refutation by 
Simplicius in his commentary on Physics viii; one of these arguments by 
Philoponus was well known to the Arabs and is also reproduced by Ghazali, 
see note 3. 3). The argument I have mentioned is the third as given by Proclus. 
Philoponus’ book is extremely important for all medieval philosophy, but it 
has never been translated into a modern language and has never been 
properly studied. On the whole the importance of the commentators of 
Aristotle for Arabic and medieval philosophy in general has not yet been 
sufficiently acknowledged. 


To this argument Ghazali gives the following answer, which has become the 
classic reply for this difficulty and which has been taken from Philoponus. 
One must distinguish, says Philoponus, between God’s eternally willing 


13 


something and the eternity of the object of His Will, or, as St. Thomas will say 
later, ‘Deus voluit ab aeterno mundus esset sed non ut ab aeterno esset’. God 
willed, for instance, that Socrates should be born before Plato and He willed 
this from eternity, so that when it was time for Plato to be born it happened. It 
is not difficult for Averroés to refute this argument. In willing and doing 
something there is more than just the decision that you will do it. You can 
take the decision to get up tomorrow, but the actual willing to get up can be 
done only at the moment you do it, and there can be no delay between the 
cause and the effect. There must be added to the decision to get up the 
impulse of the will to get up. So in God there would have to be a new impulse, 
and it is just this newness that has to be denied. But, says Averroés, the whole 
basis of this argument is wrong for it assumes in God a will like a human will. 
Desire and will can be understood only in a being that has a need; for the 
Perfect Being there can be no need, there can be no choice, for when He acts 
He will necessarily do the best. Will in God must have another meaning than 


human will. 


Averroés therefore does not explicitly deny that God has a will, but will 
should not be taken in its human sense. He has much the same conception as 
Plotinus, who denies that God has the power to do one of two contraries (for 
God will necessarily always choose the best, which implies that God 
necessarily will always do the best, but this in fact annuls the ideas of choice 
and will), and who regards the world as produced by natural necessity. 
Aristotle also held that for the Perfect Being no voluntary action is possible, 
and he regards God as in an eternal blissful state of self-contemplation. This 
would be a consequence of His Perfection which, for Averroés at least, 
involves His Omniscience. For the Perfect the drama of life is ended: nothing 
can be done any more, no decision can be taken any more, for decisions 
belong to the condition of man to whom both knowledge and ignorance are 
given and who can have an hypothetical knowledge of the future, knowing 
that on his decisions the future may depend and to whom a sure knowledge 
of the future is denied. But an Omniscient Being can neither act nor decide; 
for Him the future is irremediable like the past and cannot be changed any 
more by His decisions or actions. Paradoxically the Omnipotent is impotent. 
This notion of God as a Self-contemplating Being, however, constitutes one of 


14 


the many profound contradictions in Aristotle’s system. And this profound 
contradiction is also found in all the works of Aristotle’s commentators. One 
of Aristotle’s proofs for the existence of God-and according to a recent 
pronouncement of the Pope, the most stringent -is the one based on 
movement. There cannot be an infinite series of movers; there must be a 
Prime Agent, a Prime Mover, God, the originator of all change and action in 
the universe. According to the conception of God as a Self-Contemplating 
Being, however, the love for God is the motive for the circular motion of 
Heaven. God is not the ultimate Agent, God is the ultimate Aim of desire 
which inspires the Heavens to action. It is Heaven which moves itself and 
circles round out of love for God. And in this case it is God who is passive; the 
impelling force, the efficient cause, the spring of all action lies in the world, 
lies in the souls of the stars. 


Let us now return to Ghazali. We have seen that his first argument is not 
very convincing, but he now gives us another argument which the Muslim 
theologians have taken from John Philoponus and which has more strength. It 
runs: if you assume the world to have no beginning in time, at any moment 
which we can imagine an infinite series must have been ended. To give an 
example, every one of us is the effect of an infinite series of causes; indeed, 
man is the finite junction of an infinite past and an infinite future, the effect 
of an infinite series of causes, the cause of an infinite series of effects. But an 
infinite series cannot be traversed. If you stand near the bed of a river waiting 
for the water to arrive from an infinitely distant source you will never see it 
arriving, for an infinite distance cannot be passed. This is the argument given 
by Kant in the thesis of his first antimony. The curious fact is that the wording 
in Kant is almost identical with that of John Philoponus. 


The answers Averroés gives are certainly not convincing. He repeats the 
Aristotelian dictum that what has no beginning has no end and that therefore 
there is never an end of time, and one can never say that at any moment an 
infinite time is ended: an infinite time is never ended. But this is begging the 
question and is surely not true, for there are certainly finite times. He denies 
that an infinite time involves an infinite causal series and the negation of a 
First Cause. The series involved is but a temporal sequence, causal by 
accident, since it is God who is its essential cause. Averroés also bases his 


15 


answer on the Aristotelian theory that in time there is only a succession. A 
simultaneous infinite whole is denied by Aristotle and therefore, according to 
Aristotle, the world must be limited in space; but in time, according to him, 
there is never a whole, since the past is no longer existent and the future not 


yet. 


But the philosophers have a convincing argument for the eternity of the 
world. Suppose the world had a beginning, then before the world existed there 
was empty time; but in an empty time, in pure emptiness, there cannot be a 
motive for a beginning and there could be nothing that could decide God to 
start His creation. This is Kant’s antithesis of his first antinomy. It is very old 
and is given by Aristotle, but it is already found in the pre-Socratic 
philosopher Parmenides. Ghazali’s answer is that God’s will is completely 
undetermined. His will does not depend on distinctions in outside things, but 
He creates the distinctions Himself. The idea of God’s creative will is of Stoic 
origin. According to the Neoplatonic conception God’s knowledge is creative. 
We know because things are; things are because God knows them. This idea of 
the creative knowledge of God has a very great diffusion in philosophy (just as 
our bodies live by the eternal spark of life transmitted to us by our ancestors, 
so we rekindle in our minds the thoughts of those who are no more); it is 
found, for instance, in St. Augustine, Thomas Aquinas, Spinoza, and Kant-who 
calls it intellektuelle Anschauung, intellectual intuition, and it is also used by 
the Muslim philosophers when it suits them. Against Ghazali’s conception, 
however, Averroés has the following argument: If God creates the world 
arbitrarily, if His Will establishes the distinctions without being determined 
by any reason, neither wisdom nor goodness can be attributed to Him. We 
have here a difficulty the Greeks had seen already. Either God is beyond the 
laws of thought and of morals and then He is neither good nor wise, or He 
Himself stands under their dominion and then He is not omnipotent. 


Another argument for the eternity of the world is based on the eternity of 
time: God cannot have a priority to time, as the theologians affirm, because 
priority implies time and time implies movement. For the philosophers God’s 
priority to the world consists solely in His being its simultaneous cause. Both 
parties, however, seem to hold that God’s existence does not imply time, since 
He exists in timeless eternity. But in this case, what neither of the parties has 


16 


seen, no causal relation between God and the world can exist at all, since all 


causation implies a simultaneous time. 


We come now to the most important argument which shows the basic 
difference between the philosophical and theological systems. For Aristotle 
the world cannot have come to be because there is no absolute becoming. 
Everything that becomes comes from something. And, as a matter of fact, we 
all believe this. We all believe more or less unconsciously (we are not fully 
aware of our basic principles: a basement is always obscure) in the dictum 
rien ne se crée, rien ne se perd. We believe that everything that comes to be is 
but a development, an evolution, without being too clear about the meaning 
of these words (evolution means literally ‘unrolling’, and Cicero says that the 
procession of events out of time is like the uncoiling of a rope-quasi rudentis 
explicatio), and we believe that the plant lies in the seed, the future in the 
present. For example: when a child is born we believe it to have certain 
dispositions; it may have a disposition to become a musician, and when all the 
conditions are favourable it will become a musician. Now, according to 
Aristotle, becoming is nothing but the actualization of a potentiality, that is 
the becoming actual of a disposition. However, there is a difficulty here. It 
belongs to one of the little ironies of the history of philosophy that Aristotle’s 
philosophy is based on a concept, i.e. potentiality, that has been excluded by a 
law that he was the first to express consciously. For Aristotle is the first to 
have stated as the supreme law of thought (or is it a law of reality?) that there 
is no intermediary between being and non-being. But the potential, i.e. the 
objective possible, is such an intermediary; it is namely something which is, 
still is not yet. Already the Eleatics had declared that there is no becoming, 
either a thing is or it is not. If it is, it need not become. If it is not-out of 
nothing nothing becomes. Besides, there is another difficulty which the 
Megarians have shown. 


You say that your child has a disposition to become a musician, that he can 
become a musician, but if he dies as a child, or when conditions are 
unfavourable, he cannot become a musician. He can only become one when 
all the conditions for his being a musician are fulfilled. But in that case it is 
not possibly that he will be a musician, necessarily he will be one. There is in 
fact no possibility of his being a musician before he actually is one. There is 


17 


therefore no potentiality in nature and no becoming of things out of 
potencies. Things are or are not. This Megarian denial of potentiality has been 
taken over by the Ash‘arites, and Ghazali in this book is on the whole, 
although not consistently, in agreement with them. I myself regard this 
problem as one of the cruces of philosophy. The Ash‘arites and Ghazali 
believed, as the Megarians did, that things do not become and that the future 
does not lie in the present; every event that occurs is new and unconnected 
with its predecessor. The theologians believed that the world is not an 
independent universe, a self-subsistent system, that develops by itself, has its 
own laws, and can be understood by itself. They transferred the mystery of 
becoming to the mystery of God, who is the cause of all change in the world, 
and who at every moment creates the world anew. Things are or are not. God 
creates them and annihilates them, but they do not become out of each other, 
there is no passage between being and non-being. Nor is there movement, 
since a thing that moves is neither here nor there, since it moves-what we call 
movement is being at rest at different space-atoms at different time-atoms. It 
is the denial of potentiality, possibility in rerum natura, that Ghazali uses to 
refute the Aristotelian idea of an eternal matter in which the potentialities are 
found of everything that can or will happen. For, according to Aristotle, 
matter must be eternal and cannot have become, since it is, itself, the 


condition for all becoming. 


It maybe mentioned here that the modern static theory of movement is akin 
to the Megarian-Ash‘arite doctrine of the denial of movement and becoming. 
Bertrand Russell, for instance, although he does not accept the Megarian 
atomic conception, but holds with Aristotle that movement and rest take 
place in time, not in the instant, defines movement as being at different places 
at different times. At the same time, although he rejects the Megarian 
conception of ‘jumps’, he affirms that the moving body always passes from 
one position to another by gradual transition. But ‘passing’ implies, just as 
much as ‘jumping’, something more than mere being, namely, the movement 


which both theories deny and the identity of the moving body. 


On the idea of possibility another argument for the eternity of the world is 
based. It is affirmed that if the world had been created an infinite number of 
possibilities of its creation, that is, an eternal duration of its possibility, would 


18 


have preceded it. But nothing possible can be eternal, since everything 
possible must be realized. The idea that everything possible has to be realized 
is found in Aristotle himself, who says that if there could be an eternal 
possible that were not realized, it would be impossible, not possible, since the 
impossible is that which will never be realized. Aristotle does not see that this 
definition is contrary to the basic idea of his own philosophy-the reality of a 
possibility which may or may not become real-and that by declaring that the 
possible will have to happen he reduces it to a necessity, and by admitting that 
everything that happens had to happen he denies that the possibility of its not 
happening could precede it, i.e. he accepts, in fact, the Megarian conception of 
possibility which he himself had tried to refute. Averroés, who agrees with his 
master on this point, is not aware either of the implication of the definition. 
On the other hand, the Ash‘arites, notwithstanding their denial of potentiality, 
maintain that for God everything is possible, a theory which implies objective 
possibility (the same inconsistency was committed by the Stoics). Both 
philosophers and theologians, indeed, hold about this difficult problem 
contradictory theories, and it is therefore not astonishing that Ghazali’s and 
Averroés’ discussion about it is full of confusion (for the details I refer to my 
notes). 


In the second chapter Ghazali treats the problem of the incorruptibility of 
the world. As Ghazali says himself; the problem of the incorruptibility of the 
world is essentially the same as that of its being uncreated and the same 
arguments can be brought forward. Still, there is less opposition amongst the 
theologians about its incorruptibility than about its being uncreated. Some of 
the Mu‘tazilites argued, just as Thomas Aquinas was to do later, that we can 
only know through the Divine Law that this world of ours will end and there is 
no rational proof for its annihilation. Just as a series of numbers needs a first 
term but no final term, the beginning of the world does not imply its end. 
However, the orthodox view is that the annihilation of the world, including 
Heaven and Hell, is in God’s power, although this will not happen. Still, in the 
corruptibility of the world there is a new difficulty for the theologians. If God 
destroys the world He causes ‘nothingness’, that is, His act is related to 
‘nothing’. But can an act be related to ‘nothing’? The question as it is posed 
seems to rest on a confusion between action and effect but its deeper sense 


19 


would be to establish the nature of God’s action and the process by which His 
creative and annihilating power exercises itself. As there cannot be any 
analogy with the physical process through which our human will performs its 
function, the mystery of His creative and annihilating action cannot be solved 
and the naive answers the theologians give satisfy neither Averroés nor 
Ghazali himself. Averroés argues that there is no essential difference between 
production and destruction and, in agreement with Aristotle, he affirms that 
there are three principles for them: form, matter, and privation. When a thing 
becomes, its form arises and its privation disappears; when it is destroyed its 
privation arises and its form disappears, but the substratum of this process, 
matter, remains eternally. I have criticized this theory in my notes and will 
only mention here that for Aristotle and Averroés this process of production 
and destruction is eternal, circular, and reversible. Things, however, do not 
revolve in an eternal cycle, nor is there an eternal return as the Stoics and 
Nietzsche held. Inexorably the past is gone. Every ‘now is new. Every flower in 
the field has never been, the up-torn trees are not rooted again. ‘Thou’ll come 
no more, Never, never, never, never, never!’ Besides, Averroés, holding as he 
does that the world is eternally produced out of nothing, is inconsistent in 
regarding with Aristotle production and destruction as correlatives. 


In the third chapter Ghazali maintains that the terms acting and agent are 
falsely applied to God by the philosophers. Acting, according to him, can be 
said only of a person having will and choice. When you say that fire burns, 
there is here a causal relation, if you like, but this implies nothing but a 
sequence in time, just as Hume will affirm later. So when the philosophers say 
that God’s acting is like the fire’s burning or the sun’s heating, since God acts 
by natural necessity, they deny, according to Ghazali, His action altogether. 
Real causation can only be affirmed of a willing conscious being. The 
interesting point in this discussion is that, according to the Ash‘arites and 
Ghazali, there is no causation in this world at all, there is only one extra- 
mundane cause which is God. Even our acts which depend on our will and 
choice are not, according to the Ash‘arites, truly performed by ourselves. We 
are only the instruments, and the real agent is God. But if this is true, how can 
we say that action and causation depend on will and choice? How can we come 
to the idea of any causal action in God depending on His Will if we deny 


20 


generally that there is a causal relation between will and action? The same 
contradiction is found in modern philosophy in Mach. Mach holds that to 
speak of causation or action in material things-so to say that fire burns-is a 
kind of fetishism or animism, i.e. that we project our will and our actions into 
physical lifeless things. However, at the same time he, as a follower of Hume, 
says that causation, even in acts caused by will, is nothing but a temporal 
sequence of events. He denies causation even in voluntary actions. Therefore 
it would follow that the relation of willing and acting is not different from the 
relation of fire and burning and that there cannot be any question of fetishism 
or animism. According to such a theory there is no action at all in the 
universe but only a sequence of events. 


Then, after a second argument by which Ghazali sets out to show that an 
eternal production and creation are contradictions in terms, since production 
and creation imply the generation of something after its non-existence, he 
directs a third argument against the Neoplatonic theory, held by the 
philosophers, of the emanation of the world from God’s absolute Oneness. 


Plotinus’ conception of God is prompted by the problem of plurality and 
relation. All duality implies a relation, and every relation establishes a new 
unity which is not the simple addition of its terms (since every whole is more 
than its parts) and violates therefore the supreme law of thought that a thing 
is what it is and nothing else. Just as the line is more than its points, the stone 
more than its elements, the organism transcending its members, man, 
notwithstanding the plurality of his faculties, an identical personality, so the 
world is an organized well-ordered system surpassing the multitude of the 
unities it encloses. According to Plotinus the Force binding the plurality into 
unity and the plurality of unities into the all-containing unit of the Universe is 
the Archetype of unity, the ultimate, primordial Monad, God, unattainable in 
His supreme Simplicity even for thought. For all thought is relational, knitting 
together in the undefinable unity of a judgement a subject and a predicate. 
But in God’s absolute and highest Unity there is no plurality that can be 
joined, since all joining needs a superior joining unit. Thus God must be the 
One and the Lone, having no attribute, no genus, no species, no universal that 
He can share with any creatures of the world. Even existence can be only 
referred to Him when it expresses not an attribute, but His very Essence. But 


21 


then there is no bridge leading from the stable stillness of His Unity to the 
changing and varied multiplicity of the world; all relation between Him and 
the world is severed. If the One is the truly rational, God’s rationality can be 
obtained only by regarding His relation to the world as irrational, and all 
statements about Him will be inconsistent with the initial thesis. And if God is 
unattainable for thought, the very affirmation of this will be self- 
contradictory. 


Now, the philosophers in Islam hold with Plotinus that although absolutely 
positive statements are not admissible about God, the positive statements 
made by them can be all reduced to negative affirmations (with the sole 
exception, according to Averroés, of His possessing intellect) and to certain 
relative statements, for neither negations nor external relations add anything 
to His essence. 


In this and several following chapters Ghazali attacks the philosophers from 
two sides: by showing up the inanity of the Plotinian conception of God as 
pure unity, and by exposing their inconsistency in attributing to Him definite 
qualities and regarding Him as the source of the world of variety and 
plurality. 


The infinite variety and plurality of the world does not derive directly from 
God according to the philosophers in Islam, who combine Aristotle’s 
astronomical view of animate planets circling round in their spheres with the 
Neoplatonic theory of emanation, and introduce into the Aristotelian 
framework Proclus’ conception of a triadic process, but through a series of 
immaterial mediators. From God’s single act-for they with Aristotle regard 
God as the First Agent-only a single effect follows, but this single effect, the 
supramundane Intellect, develops in itself a threefoldness through which it 
can exercise a threefold action. Ghazali objects in a long discussion that if 
God’s eternal action is unique and constant, only one single effect in which no 
plurality can be admitted will follow (a similar objection can be directed 
against Aristotle, who cannot explain how the plurality and variety of 
transitory movements can follow from one single constant movement). The 


plurality of the world according to Ghazali cannot be explained through a 


22 


series of mediators. Averroés, who sometimes does not seem very sure of the 


validity of mediate emanation, is rather evasive in his answer on this point. 


In a series of rather intricate discussions which I have tried to elucidate in 
my notes, Ghazali endeavours to show that the proofs of the philosophers for 
God’s uniqueness, for their denial of His attributes, for their claims that 
nothing can share with Him His genus and species, that He is pure existence 
which stands in no relation to an essence, and that He is incorporeal, are all 
vain. The leading idea of the philosophers that all plurality needs a prior 
joining principle, Ghazali rejects, while Averroés defends it. Why-so Ghazali 
asks, for instance-since the essence in temporal things is not the cause of 
their existence, should this not be the case in the Eternal? Or why should 
body, although it is composite according to the philosophers, not be the First 
Cause, especially as they assume an eternal body, since it is not impossible to 
suppose a compound without a composing principle? From the incorporeality 
of God, the First Principle, Avicenna had tried to infer, through the 
disjunction that everything is either matter or intellect, that He is intellect 
(since the philosophers in Islam hold with Aristotle and in opposition to 
Plotinus that God possesses self-consciousness). Ghazali does not admit this 
disjunction and, besides, argues with Plotinus that self-consciousness implies 
a subject and an object, and therefore would impede the philosophers’ thesis 


of God’s absolute unity. 


The Muslim philosophers, following Aristotle’s Neoplatonic commentators, 
affirm that God’s self-knowledge implies His knowledge of all universals (a 
line of thought followed, for instance, by Thomas Aquinas and some moderns 
like Brentano). In man this knowledge forms a plurality, in God it is unified. 
Avicenna subscribes to the Qur’anic words that no particle in Heaven or Earth 
escapes God’s knowledge, but he holds, as Porphyry had done before, that God 
can know the particular things only in a universal way, whatever this means. 
Ghazali takes it to mean that God, according to Avicenna, must be ignorant of 
individuals, a most heretical theory. For Averroés God’s knowledge is neither 
universal nor particular, but transcending both, in a way unintelligible to the 


human mind. 


23 


One thing, however, God cannot know according to Avicenna (and he agrees 
here with Plato’s Parmenides) and that is the passing of time, for in the 
Eternal no relation is possible to the fleeting ‘now’. There are two aspects of 
time: the sequence of anteriority and posteriority which remains fixed for 
ever, and the eternal flow of the future through the present into the past. It 
will be eternally true that I was healthy before I sickened and God can know 
its eternal truth. But in God’s timeless eternity there can be no ‘now 
simultaneous with the trembling present in which we humans live and change 
and die, there is no ‘now’ in God’s eternity in which He can know that I am 
sickening now. In God’s eternal stillness the fleeting facts and truths of human 
experience can find no rest. Ghazali objects, erroneously, I think, that a 
change in the object of thought need not imply a change in the subject of 


consciousness. 


In another chapter Ghazali refutes the philosophers’ proof that Heaven is 
animated. He does not deny its possibility, but declares that the arguments 
given are insufficient. He discusses also the view that the heavens move out of 
love for God and out of desire to assimilate themselves to Him, and he asks 
the pertinent question-already posed by Theophrastus in his Metaphysics, but 
which scandalizes Averroés by its prosaicness-why it is meritorious for them 
to circle round eternally and whether eternal rest would not be more 
appropriate for them in their desire to assimilate themselves to God’s eternal 
stability. 


In the last chapter of this part Ghazali examines the philosophers’ 
symbolical interpretation of the Qur’anic entities “The Pen’ and ‘The Tablet’ 
and their theories about dreams and prophecy. It is interesting to note that, 
although he refutes them here, he largely adopts them in his own Vivification 
of Theology. [?] 


In the last part of his book Ghazali treats the natural sciences. He 
enumerates them and declares that there is no objection to them according to 
religion except on four points. The first is that there exists a logical nexus 
between cause and effect; the second, the selfsubsistent spirituality of the soul; 
the third, the immortality of this subsistent soul; the fourth, the denial of 
bodily resurrection. The first, that there exists between cause and effect a 


24 


logical necessity, has to be contested according to Ghazali, because by denying 
it the possibility of miracles can be maintained. The philosophers do not deny 
absolutely the possibility of miracles. Muhammad himself did not claim to 
perform any miracles and Hugo Grotius tried to prove the superiority of 
Christianity over Islam by saying ‘Mahumetis se missum ait non cum 
miraculis sed cum armis’. In later times, however, Muhammad’s followers 
ascribed to him the most fantastic miracles, for instance the cleavage of the 
moon and his ascension to Heaven. These extravagant miracles are not 
accepted by the philosophers. Their theory of the possibility of miracles is 
based on the Stoic-Neoplatonic theory of ‘Sympathia’, which is that all parts of 
the world are in intimate contact and related. In a little treatise of Plutarch it 
is shown how bodily phenomena are influenced by suggestion, by emotion 
and emotional states, and it is claimed by him, and later also by Plotinus, that 
the emotions one experiences cannot only influence one’s own body but also 
other bodies, and that one’s soul can exercise an influence on other bodies 
without the intermediary of any bodily action. The phenomena of telepathy, 
for instance the fascination which a snake has on other animals, they 
explained in this way. Amulets and talismans can receive through 
psychological influences certain powers which can be realized later. This 
explanation of occult phenomena, which is found in Avicenna’s Psychology, a 
book translated in the Middle Ages, has been widely accepted (for instance, by 
Ghazali himself in his Vivification of Theology), and is found in Thomas 
Aquinas and most of the writers about the occult in the Renaissance, for 
instance Heinricus Cornelius Agrippa, Paracelsus, and Cardanus. It may be 
mentioned here that Avicenna gives as an example of the power of suggestion 
that a man will go calmly over a .plank when it is on the ground, whereas he 
will hesitate if the plank be across an abyss. This famous example is found in 
Pascal’s Pensées, and the well-known modern healer, Coué, takes it as his chief 
proof for the power of suggestion. Pascal has taken it from Montaigne, 
Montaigne has borrowed it from his contemporary the great doctor Pietro 
Bairo, who himself has a lengthy quotation from the Psychology of Avicenna. 
Robert Burton in his Anatomy of Melancholy also mentions it. In the Middle 
Ages this example is found in Thomas Aquinas. Now the philosophers limit 
the possibility of miracles only to those that can be explained by the power of 


the mind over physical objects; for instance, they would regard it as possible 


25 


that a prophet might cause rain to fall or an earthquake to take place, but they 
refuse to accept the more extravagant miracles I have mentioned as authentic. 


The theologians, however, base their theory of miracles on a denial of 
natural law. The Megarian-Ash‘arite denial of potentiality already implies the 
denial of natural law. According to this conception there is neither necessity 
nor possibility in rerum natura, they are or they are not, there is no nexus 
between the phenomena. But the Greek Sceptics also deny the rational 
relation between cause and effect, and it is this Greek Sceptical theory which 
the Ash‘arites have copied, as we can see by their examples. The theory that 
there is no necessary relation between cause and effect is found, for instance, 
in Galen. Fire burns but there is, according to the Greek Sceptics, no necessary 
relation between fire and burning. Through seeing this happen many times we 
assume that it will happen also in the future, but there is no necessity, no 
absolute certainty. This Sceptical theory is quasi-identical with the theory of 
Hume and is based on the same assumptions, that all knowledge is given 
through sense-impression; and since the idea of causation cannot be derived 
from sense experience it is denied altogether. According to the theory of the 
theologians, God who creates and re-creates the universe continually follows a 
certain habit in His creation. But He can do anything He desires, everything is 
possible for Him except the logically impossible; therefore all logically 
possible miracles are allowed. One might say that, for the theologians, all 
nature is miraculous and all miracles are natural. Averroés asks a good 
question: What is really meant by habit, is it a habit in man or in nature? I do 
not know how Hume would answer this question. For if causation is a habit in 
man, what makes it possible that such a habit can be formed? What is the 
objective counterpart of these habits? There is another question which has 
been asked by the Greek opponents of this theory, but which is not mentioned 
by Averroés: How many times must such a sequence be observed before such 
a habit can be formed? There is yet another question that might be asked: 
Since we cannot act before such a habit is formed-for action implies 
causation-what are we doing until then? What, even, is the meaning of ‘I act’ 
and ‘I do”? If there is nothing in the world but a sequence of events, the very 
word ‘activity’ will have no sense, and it would seem that we would be doomed 


to an eternal passivity. Averroés’ answer to this denial of natural law is that 


26 


universals themselves imply already the idea of necessity and law. I think this 
answer is correct. When we speak, for instance, of wood or stone, we express 
by those words an hypothetical necessity, that is, we mean a certain object, 
which in such-and-such circumstances will necessarily behave in a certain 
way that the behaviour of wood, for example, is based on its nature, that is, on 
the potentialities it has. 


I may remark here that it seems to me probable that Nicholas of Autrecourt, 
‘the medieval Hume’, was influenced by Ghazali’s Ash‘arite theories. He denies 
in the same way as Ghazali the logical connexion between cause and effect: “ex 
eo quod aliqua res est cognita esse, non potest evidenter evidentia reducta in 
primum principium vel in certitudinem primi principii inferri, quod alia res 
sit’ (cf. Lappe, ‘Nicolaus von Autrecourt’, Beitr. z. Gesch. d. Phil. d. M. B.vi, H.2, 
p. 11); he gives the same example of ignis and stupa, he seems to hold also the 
Ash‘arite thesis of God as the sole cause of all action (cf. op. cit., p. 24), and he 
quotes in one place Ghazali’s Metaphysics (cf. N. of Autrecourt, ‘Exigit ordo 
executionis’, in Mediaeval Studies, vol. i, ed. by J. Reginald O'Donnell, 
Toronto, 1931, p. 208). Now Nicholas’s works were burnt during his lifetime in 
Paris in 1347, whereas the Latin translation of the Tahafut al Tahafut by Calo 
Calonymus was terminated in Arles in 1328. 


The second point Ghazali wants to refute are the proofs for the 
substantiality and the spirituality of the soul as given by the philosophers. He 
himself does not affirm that the soul is material, and as a matter of fact he 
holds, in other books, the contrary opinion, but the Ash‘arites largely adopted 
the Stoic materialism. The ten arguments of the philosophers for the 
spirituality of the soul derive all from arguments given by the Greeks. It would 
seem to me that Ghazali’s arguments for the soul’s materiality may be based 
on the Stoic answers (which have not come down to us) against the proofs of 
Aristotle and the later Platonists for the immateriality of the soul. There is in 
the whole discussion a certain confusion, partly based on the ambiguity of the 
word ‘soul’. The term ‘soul’ both in Greek and Arabic can also mean ‘life’. 
Plants and animals have a ‘soul’. However, it is not affirmed by Aristotle that 
life in plants and animals is a spiritual principle. ‘Soul’ is also used for the 
rational part, the thinking part, of our consciousness. It is only this thinking 
part, according to Aristotle, that is not related to or bound up with matter; 


27 


sensation and imagination are localized in the body, and it is only part of our 
thinking soul that seems to possess eternity or to be immortal. Now, most of 
the ten arguments derive from Aristotle and mean only to prove that the 
thinking part of our soul is incorporeal. Still the Muslim philosophers affirm 
with Plato and Plotinus that the whole soul is spiritual and incorruptible, and 
that the soul is a substance independent of the body, although at the same 
time they adopt Aristotle’s physiological explanations of all the non-rational 
functions of the soul and accept Aristotle’s definition of the ‘soul’ as the first 
entelechy of an organic body. On the other hand, the Muslim philosophers do 
not admit the Platonic theory of the pre-existence of the soul. Aristotle’s 
conception of a material and transitory element in the soul and an immaterial 
and immortal element destroys all possibility of considering human 
personality as a unity. Although he reproaches Plato with regarding the 
human soul as a plurality, the same reproach can be applied to himself. 
Neither the Greek nor the Muslim philosophers have ever been able to uphold 
a theory that does justice to the individuality of the human personality. That it 
is my undefinable ego that perceives, represents, wills, and thinks, the 
mysterious fact of the uniqueness of my personality, has never been 
apprehended by them. It is true that there is in Aristotle’s psychology a faint 
conception of a functional theory of our conscious life, but he is unable to 


harmonize this with his psycho-physiological notions. 


I have discussed in my notes the ten arguments and will mention here only 
two because of their importance. Ghazali gives one of these arguments in the 
following form: How can man’s identity be attributed to body with all its 
accidents? For bodies are continually in dissolution and nutrition replaces 
what is dissolved, so that when we see a child, after separation from its 
mother’s womb, fall ill a few times, become thin and then fat again, and grow 
up, we may safely say that after forty years no particle remains of what there 
was when its mother was delivered of it. Indeed, the child began its existence 
out of parts of the sperm alone, but nothing of the particles of the sperm 
remains in it; no, all this is dissolved and has changed into something else and 
then this body has become another. Still we say that the identical man 
remains and his notions remain with him from the beginning of his youth 
although all bodily parts have changed, and this shows that the soul has an 


28 


existence outside the body and that the body is its organ. Now the first part of 
this argument, that all things are in a state of flux and that of the bodily life of 
man no part remains identical, is textually found in Montaigne’s Apologv of 
Raymond de Sebond. Montaigne has taken it from Plutarch, and the Arabic 
philosophers may have borrowed it from the same source from which 
Plutarch has taken it. The argument of the philosophers that matter is 
evanescent, but the soul a stable identity, which is also given by the Christian 
philosopher Nemesius in his De natura hominis (a book translated into 
Arabic), who ascribes it to Ammonius Saccas and Numenius, is basically 
Platonic and Neoplatonic, and strangely enough, although he refutes it here, it 
is adduced by Ghazali himself in his Vivification of Theology. Socrates says in 
the Platonic dialogue Cratylus: ‘Can we truly say that there is knowledge, 
Cratylus, if all things are continually changing and nothing remains? For 
knowledge cannot continue unless it remains and keeps its identity. But if 
knowledge changes its very essence, it will lose at once its identity and there 
will be no knowledge.’ Plotinus (Enn. iv. 7. 3) argues that matter, in its 
continual changing, cannot explain the identity of the soul. And he says in a 
beautiful passage (En. iv. 7. 10) the idea of which Avicenna has copied: 


‘One should contemplate the nature of everything in its purity, since 
what is added is ever an obstacle to its knowledge. Contemplate therefore 
the soul in its abstraction or rather let him who makes this abstraction 
contemplate himself in this state and he will know that he is immortal 
when he will see in himself the purity of the intellect, for he will see his 
intellect contemplate nothing sensible, nothing mortal, but apprehending 
the eternal through the eternal.’ 


This passage bears some relation to Descartes’s dictum cogito ergo sum, but 
whereas Plotinus affirms the self-consciousness of a stable identity, Descartes 
states only that every thought has a subject, an ego. Neither the one, nor the 
other shows that this subject is my ego in the sense of my undefinable unique 
personality, my awareness who I am: that I am, for instance, John and not 
Peter, my consciousness of the continuity of my identity from birth to death, 
my knowledge that at the same time I am master and slave of an identical 


29 


body, whatever the changes may be in that body, and that as long as I live 1 am 
a unique and an identical whole of body and soul. Plautus’ Sosia, who was not 
a philosopher, expresses himself (Amphitruo, line 447) in almost the same way 
as Descartes-‘sed quom cogito, equidem certo idem sum qui fui semper’-but 
the introduction of the words semper and idem renders the statement 
fallacious; from mere consciousness the lasting identity of my personality 
cannot be inferred. 


Ghazali answers this point by saying that animals and plants also, 
notwithstanding that their matter is continually changing, preserve their 
identity, although nobody believes that this identity is based on a spiritual 
principle. Averroés regards this objection as justified. 


The second argument is based on the theory of universals. Since thought 
apprehends universals which are not in a particular place and have no 
individuality, they cannot be material, since everything material is individual 
and is in space. Against this theory of universals Ghazali develops, under Stoic 
influence, his nominalistic theory which is probably the theory held by the 
Ash‘arites in general. This theory is quasi-identical with Berkeley’s 
nominalistic conception and springs from the same assumption that thinking 
is nothing but the having of images. By a strange coincidence both Ghazali 
and Berkeley give the example of a hand: when we have an idea of a hand as a 
universal, what really happens is that we have a representation of a particular 
hand, since there are no universals. But this particular hand is capable of 
representing for us any possible hand, just as much a big black hand as a 
small white one. The fallacy of the theory lies, of course, in the word 
‘representing’, which as a matter of fact assumes what it tended to deny, 
namely, that we can think of a hand in general which has neither a particular 
shape, nor a particular colour, nor is localized in space. 


The next point Ghazali tries to refute is the argument of the philosophers for 
the immortality of the soul. According to the philosophers, the fact that it is a 
substance independent of a body and is immaterial shows that a corruption of 
the body cannot affect it. This, as a matter of fact, is a truism, since the 
meaning of substantiality and immateriality for the philosophers implies 
already the idea of eternity. On the other hand, if the soul is the form of the 


30 


body, as is also affirmed by them, it can only exist with its matter and the 
mortality of its body would imply its own mortality, as Ghazali rightly points 
out. The Arabic philosophers through their combination of Platonism and 
Aristotelianism hold, indeed, at the same time three theories inconsistent with 
each other, about the relation of body and soul: that the soul is the form of the 
body, that the soul is a substance, subsistent by itself and immortal, and that 
the soul after death takes a pneumatic body (a theory already found in 
Porphyry). Besides, their denial of the Platonic idea of pre-existence of the 
soul vitiates their statement that the soul is a substance, subsistent by itself, 
that is, eternal, ungenerated, and incorruptible. Although Averroés in his 
whole book tries to come as near to the Aristotelian conception of the soul as 
possible, in this chapter he seems to adopt the eschatology of the late Greek 
authors. He allows to the souls of the dead a pneumatic body and believes that 
they exist somewhere in the sphere of the moon. He also accepts the theory of 
the Djinn, the equivalent of the Greek Daimones. What he rejects, and what 
the philosophers generally reject, is the resurrection of the flesh. 


In his last chapter Averroés summarizes his views about religion. There are 
three possible views. A Sceptical view that religion is opium for the people, 
held by certain Greek rationalists; the view that religion expresses Absolute 
Truth; and the intermediate view, held by Averroés, that the religious 
conceptions are the symbols of a higher philosophical truth, symbols which 
have to be taken for reality itself by the non-philosophers. For the 
unphilosophical, however, they are binding, since the sanctity of the State 
depends on them. 


When we have read the long discussions between the philosophers and 
theologians we may come to the conclusion that it is sometimes more the 
formula than the essence of things which divides them. Both philosophers and 
theologians Arm that God creates or has created the world. For the 
philosophers, since the world is eternal, this creation is eternal. Is there, 
however, any sense in calling created what has been eternally? For the 
theologians God is the creator of everything including time, but does not the 
term ‘creation’ assume already the concept of time? Both the philosophers and 
theologians apply to God the theory that His will and knowledge differ from 
human will and knowledge in that they are creative principles and essentially 


31 


beyond understanding; both admit that the Divine cannot be measured by the 
standards of man. But this, in fact, implies an avowal of our complete 
ignorance in face of the Mystery of God. Still, for both parties God is the 
supreme Artifex who in His wisdom has chosen the best of all possible worlds; 
for although the philosophers affirm also that God acts only by natural 
necessity, their system, like that of their predecessors, the Platonists, 
Peripatetics, and Stoics, is essentially teleological. As to the problem of 
possibility, both parties commit the same inconsistencies and hold sometimes 
that the world could, sometimes that it could not, have been different from 
what it is. Finally, both parties believe in God’s ultimate Unity. 


And if one studies the other works of Ghazali the resemblance between him 
and the philosophers becomes still greater. For instance, he too believes in the 
spirituality of the soul, notwithstanding the arguments he gives against it in 
this book; he too sometimes regards religious concepts as the symbols of a 
higher philosophical or mystical truth, although he admits here only a literal 
interpretation. He too sometimes teaches the fundamental theory of the 
philosophers which he tries to refute so insistently in our book, the theory 
that from the one supreme Agent as the ultimate source through 
intermediaries all things derive; and he himself expresses this idea (in his 
Alchemy of Happiness and slightly differently in his Vivification of Theology) 
by the charming simile of an ant which seeing black tracings on a sheet of 
paper thinks that their cause is the pen, while it is the hand that moves the 
pen by the power of the will which derives from the heart, itself inspired by 
the spiritual agent, the cause of causes. The resemblances between Ghazali 
and Averroés, men belonging to the same culture, indeed, the greatest men in 
this culture, seem sometimes greater than their differences. 


Emotionally the difference goes deep. Averroés is a philosopher and a proud 
believer in the possibility of reason to achieve a knowledge of ‘was das Innere 
der Welt zusammenhilt’. He was not always too sure, he knew too much, and 
there is much wavering and hesitation in his ideas. Still, his faith in reason 
remains unshaken. Although he does not subscribe to the lofty words of his 
master that man because of the power of his intellect is a mortal God, he 
reproaches the theologians for having made God an immortal man. God, for 
him, is a dehumanized principle. But if God has to respond to the needs of 


32 


man’s heart, can He be exempt from humanity? Ghazali is a mu’min, that is a 
believer, he is a Muslim, that is he accepts his heart submits to a truth his 
reason cannot establish, for his heart has reasons his reason does not know. 
His theology is the philosophy of the heart in which there is expressed man’s 
fear and loneliness and his feeling of dependence on an understanding and 
loving Being to whom he can cry out from the depths of his despair, and 
whose mercy is infinite. It is not so much after abstract truth that Ghazali 
strives; his search is for God, for the Pity behind the clouds. 


SIMON VAN DEN BERGH 


IN THE NAME OF THE MERCIFUL AND COMPASSIONATE 


GOD: AND AFTER PRAISE TO GOD AND BENEDICTION UPON ALL HIS 
MESSENGERS AND PROPHETS: 


The aim of this book is to show the different degrees of assent and 
conviction attained by the assertions in The Incoherence of the Philosophers, 
and to prove that the greater part has not reached the degree of evidence and 
of truth. 


THE FIRST DISCUSSION 


Concerning the Eternity of the World 


Ghazali, speaking of the philosophers’ proofs for the eternity of the world, 


says: 


Let us restrict ourselves in this chapter to those proofs that 


make an impression on the mind. 


This chapter contains four proofs. 


33 








THE FIRST PROOF 








The philosophers say: It is impossible that the temporal 
should proceed from the absolutely Eternal. For it is clear if we 
assume the Eternal existing without, for instance, the world 
proceeding from Him, then, at a certain moment, the world 
beginning to proceed from Him-that it did not proceed before, 
because there was no determining principle for its existence, 
but its existence was pure possibility. When the world begins in 
time, a new determinant either does or does not arise. If it does 
not, the world will stay in the same state of pure possibility as 
before; if a new determinant does arise, the same question can 
be asked about this new determinant, why it determines now, 
and not before, and either we shall have an infinite regress or 
we shall arrive at a principle determining eternally. 


I say: This argument is in the highest degree dialectical and does not reach 
the pitch of demonstrative proof. For its premisses are common notions, and 
common notions approach the equivocal, whereas demonstrative premisses 


are concerned with things proper to the same genus. 


For the term ‘possible’ is used in an equivocal way of the possible that 
happens more often than not, of the possible that happens less often than not, 
and of the possible with equal chances of happening, and these three types of 
the possible do not seem to have the same need for a new determining 
principle. For the possible that happens more often than not is frequently 
believed to have its determining principle in itself, not outside, as is the case 
with the possible which has equal chances of happening and not happening. 
Further, the possible resides sometimes in the agent, i.e. the possibility of 
acting, and sometimes in the patient, i.e. the possibility of receiving, and it 
does not seem that the necessity for a determining principle is the same in 
both cases. For it is well known that the possible in the patient needs a new 
determinant from the outside; this can be perceived by the senses in artificial 
things and in many natural things too, although in regard to natural things 


34 


there is a doubt, for in most natural things the principle of their change forms 
part of them. Therefore it is believed of many natural things that they move 
themselves, and it is by no means self-evident that everything that is moved 
has a mover and that there is nothing that moves itself.; But all this needs to 
be examined, and the old philosophers have therefore done so. As concerns 
the possible in the agent, however, in many cases it is believed that it can be 
actualized without an external principle, for the transition in the agent from 
inactivity to activity is often regarded as not being a change which requires a 
principle; e.g. the transition in the geometer from non-geometrizing to 


geometrizing, or in the teacher from non-teaching to teaching. 


Further, those changes which are regarded as needing a principle of change 
can sometimes be changes in substance, sometimes in quality, or in quantity, 


or in place. 


In addition, ‘eternal’ is predicated by many of the eternal-by-itself and the 
eternal-through-another. According to some, it is permissible to admit certain 
changes in the Eternal, for instance a new volition in the Eternal, according to 
the Karramites, and the possibility of generation and corruption which the 
ancients attribute to primary matter, although it is eternal. Equally, new 
concepts are admitted in the possible intellect although, according to most 
authors, it is eternal. But there are also changes which are inadmissible, 
especially according to certain ancients, though not according to others. 


Then there is the agent who acts of his will and the agent which acts by 
nature, and the manner of actualization of the possible act is not the same for 
both agents, ic. so far as the need for a new determinant is concerned. 
Further, is this division into two agents complete, or does demonstration lead 
to an agent which resembles neither the natural agent nor the voluntary agent 


of human experience? 


All these are multifarious and difficult questions which need, each of them, 
a special examination, both in themselves and in regard to the opinions the 
ancients held about them. To treat what is in reality a plurality of questions as 
one problem is one of the well known seven sophisms, and a mistake in one of 
these principles becomes a great error by the end of the examination of 
reality. 


35 


Ghazali says: 


There are two objections to this. The first objection is to say: 
why do you deny the theory of those who say that the world has 
been created by an eternal will which has decreed its existence 
in the time in which it exists; that its non-existence lasts until 
the moment it ceases and that its existence begins from the 
moment it begins; that its existence was not willed before and 
therefore did not happen, and that at the exact moment it began 
it was willed by an eternal will and therefore began? What is the 
objection to this theory and what is absurd in it? 


I say: 


This argument is sophistical: although it is not allowable for him to admit 
the possibility of the actual effect being delayed after the actual cause, and ina 
voluntary agent, after the decision to act, he regards it as possible that the 
effect should be delayed after the will of the agent. It is possible that the effect 
should be delayed after the will of the agent, but its being delayed after the 
actual cause is impossible, and equally impossible is its being delayed after a 
voluntary agent’s decision to act. The difficulty is thus unchanged, for he must 
of necessity draw one of these two conclusions: either that the act of the agent 
does not imply in him a change which itself would need an external principle 
of change, or that there are changes which arise by themselves, without the 
necessity of an agent in whom they occur and who causes them, and that 
therefore there are changes possible in the Eternal without an agent who 
causes them. And his adversaries insist on these two very points: (1 ) that the 
act of the agent necessarily implies a change and that each change has a 
principle which causes it; (2) that the Eternal cannot change in any way. But 
all this is difficult to prove. 


The Ash’arites are forced to assume either a first agent or a first act of this 
agent, for they cannot admit that the disposition of the agent, relative to the 
effect, when he acts is the same as his disposition, when he does not act. This 
implies therefore a new disposition or a new relation, and this necessarily 
either in the agent, or in the effect, or in both? But in this case, if we posit as a 
principle that for each new disposition there is an agent, this new disposition 


36 


in the first agent will either need another agent, and then this first agent was 
not the first and was not on his own account sufficient for the act but needed 
another, or the agent of the disposition which is the condition of the agent’s 
act will be identical with the agent of the act. Then this act which we regarded 
as being the first act arising out of him will not be the first, but his act 
producing the disposition which is the condition of the effect will be anterior 
to the act producing the effect. This, you see, is a necessary consequence, 
unless one allows that new dispositions may arise in the agents without a 
cause. But this is absurd, unless one believes that there are things which 
happen at haphazard and by themselves, a theory of the old philosophers who 
denied the agent,; the falsehood of which is self-evident. 


In Ghazali’s objection there is a confusion. For our expressions ‘eternal will’ 
and ‘temporal will are equivocal, indeed contrary. For the empirical will is a 
faculty which possesses the possibility of doing equally one of two contraries 
and then of receiving equally one of the two contraries willed. For the will is 
the desire of the agent towards action. When the agent acts, the desire ceases 
and the thing willed happens, and this desire and this act are equally related 
to both the contraries. But when one says: ‘There is a Wilier who wills 
eternally one of two contraries in Himself, the definition of the will is 
abandoned, for we have transferred its nature from the possible to the 
necessary. If it is objected that in an eternal will the will does not cease 
through the presence of the object willed, for as an eternal will has no 
beginning there is no moment in it which is specially determined for the 
realization of the object willed, we answer: this is not obvious, unless we say 
that demonstrative proof leads to the existence of an agent endowed with a 
power which is neither voluntary nor natural, which, however, the Divine Law 
calls ‘will’, in the same way as demonstrative proof leads to middle terms 
between things which seemed at first sight to be contrary, without being really 
so, as when we speak of an existence which is neither inside nor outside the 
world. 


Ghazali answers, on behalf of the philosophers: 


The philosophers say: This is clearly impossible, for 
everything that happens is necessitated and has its cause, and 


37 


as it is impossible that there should be an effect without a 
necessitating principle and a cause, so it is impossible that there 
should exist a cause of which the effect is delayed, when all the 
conditions of its necessitating, its causes and elements are 
completely fulfilled. On the contrary, the existence of the effect, 
when the cause is realized with all its conditions, is necessary, 
and its delay is just as impossible as an effect without cause. 
Before the existence of the world there existed a Wilier, a will, 
and its relation to the thing willed. No new wilier arose, nor a 
new will, nor a new relation to the will-for all this is change; 
how then could a new object of will arise, and what prevented 
its arising before? The condition of the new production did not 
distinguish itself from the condition of the non-production in 
any way, in any mode, in any relation-on the contrary, 
everything remained as it was before. At one moment the object 
of will did not exist, everything remained as it was before, and 
then the object of will existed. Is not this a perfectly absurd 
theory? 


I say: 


This is perfectly clear, except for one who denies one of the premisses we 
have laid down previously. But Ghazali passes from this proof to an example 
based upon convention,’ and through this he confuses this defence of the 
philosophers. 


Ghazali says: 


This kind of impossibility is found not only in the necessary 
and essential cause and effect but also in the accidental and 
conventional. If a man pronounces the formula of divorce 
against his wife without the divorce becoming irrevocable 
immediately, one does not imagine that it will become so later. 
For he made the formula through convention and usage a cause 
of the judgement, and we do not believe that the effect can be 
delayed, except when the divorce depends on an ulterior event, 


e.g. on the arrival of tomorrow or on someone’s entering the 


38 


house, for then the divorce does not take place at once, but only 
when tomorrow arrives or someone enters the house; in this 
case the man made the formula a cause only in conjunction 
with an ulterior event. But as this event, the coming of 
tomorrow and someone’s entering the house, is not yet actual, 
the effect is delayed until this future event is realized. The effect 
only takes place when a new event, i.e. entering the house or the 
arrival of tomorrow, has actually happened. Even if a man 
wanted to delay the effect after the formula, without making it 
dependent on an ulterior event, this would be regarded as 
impossible, although it is he himself who lays down the 
convention and fixes its modalities. If thus in conventional 
matters such a delay is incomprehensible and inadmissible, 
how can we admit it in essential, rational, and necessary causal 
relations? In respect of our conduct and our voluntary actions, 
there is a delay in actual volition only when there is some 
obstacle. When there is actual volition and actual power and the 
obstacles are eliminated, a delay in the object willed is 
inadmissible.; A delay in the object willed is imaginable only in 
decision, for decision is not sufficient for the existence of the 
act; the decision to write does not produce the writing, if it is 
not, as a new fact, accompanied by an act of volition, ie. an 
impulse in the man which presents itself at the moment of the 
act. If there is thus an analogy between the eternal Will and our 
will to act, a delay of the object willed is inadmissible, unless 
through an obstacle, and an antecedent existence of the volition 
is equally inadmissible, for I cannot will to get up tomorrow 
except by way of decision. If, however, the eternal Will is 
analogous to our decision, it does not suffice to produce the 
thing decided upon, but the act of creation must be 
accompanied by a new act of volition, and this brings us again 
to the idea of a change. But then we have the same difficulty all 
over again. Why does this impulse or volition or will or 
whatever you choose to call it happen just now and not before? 
There remain, then, only these alternatives: either something 


39 


happening without a cause, or an infinite regress. This is the 
upshot of the discussion: There is a cause the conditions of 
which are all completely fulfilled, but notwithstanding this the 
effect is delayed and is not realized during a period to the 
beginning of which imagination cannot attain and for which 
thousands of years would mean no diminution; then suddenly, 
without the addition of any new fact, and without the 
realization of any new condition, this effect comes into 
existence and is produced. And this is absurd. 


I say: 


This example of divorce based on convention seems to strengthen the 
argument of the philosophers, but in reality it weakens it. For it enables the 
Ash’arites to say: In the same way as the actual divorce is delayed after the 
formula of divorce till the moment when the condition of someone’s entering 
the house, or any other, is fulfilled, so the realization of the world can be 
delayed after God’s act of creation until the condition is fulfilled on which this 
realization depends, i.e. the moment when God willed it. But conventional 
things do not behave like rational. The Literalists, comparing these 
conventional things to rational, say: This divorce is not binding and does not 
become effective through the realization of the condition which is posterior to 
the pronouncement of the divorce by the divorcer, since it would be a divorce 
which became effective without connexion with the act of the divorcer. But in 
this matter there is no relation between the concept drawn from the nature of 


things and that which is artificial and conventional. 
Then Ghazali says, on behalf of the Ash’arites: 


The answer is: Do you recognize the impossibility of 
connecting the eternal Will with the temporal production of 
anything, through the necessity of intuitive thought or through 
a logical deduction, or-to use your own logical terminology-do 
you recognize the clash between these two concepts through a 
middle term or without a middle term? If you claim a middle 
term-and this is the deductive method-you will have to produce 
it, and if you assert that you know this through the necessity of 


40 


thought, why do your adversaries not share this intuition with 
you? For the party which believes in the creation of the world in 
time through an eternal Will includes so many persons that no 
country can contain them and no number enumerate them, and 
they certainly do not contradict the logically minded out of 
obstinacy, while knowing better in their hearts. A proof 
according to the rules of logic must be produced to show this 
impossibility, as in all your arguments up till now there is only 
a presumption of impossibility and a comparison with our 
decision and our will; and this is false, for the eternal Will does 
not resemble temporal volitions, and a pure presumption of 
impossibility will not suffice without proof. 


I say: 


This argument is one of those which have only a very feeble persuasive 
power. It amounts to saying that one who claims the impossibility of delay in 
an effect, when its cause with all its conditions is realized, must assert that he 
knows this either by a syllogism or from first principles; if through a 
syllogism, he must produce it-but there is none; if from first principles, it 
must be known to all, adversaries and others alike. But this argument is 
mistaken, for it is not a condition of objective truth that it should be known to 
all. That anything should be held by all does not imply anything more than its 
being a common notion, just as the existence of a common notion does not 
imply objective truth. 


Ghazali answers on behalf of the Ash’arites: 


If it is said, ‘We know by the necessity of thought that, when 
all its conditions are fulfilled, a cause without effect is 
inadmissible and that to admit it is an affront to the necessity of 
thought,’ we answer: what is the difference between you and 
your adversaries, when they say to you, ‘We know by the 
necessity of thought the impossibility of a theory which affirms 
that one single being knows all the universals, without this 
knowledge forming a plurality in its essence or adding anything 
to it, and without this plurality of things known implying a 


41 


plurality in the knowledge’? For this is your theory of God, 
which according to us and our science is quite absurd. You, 
however, say there is no analogy between eternal and temporal 
knowledge. Some of you acknowledge the impossibility 
involved, and say that God knows only Himself and that He is 
the knower, the knowledge and the known, and that the three 
are one. One might object: The unity of the knowledge, the 
knower, and the known is clearly an impossibility, for to 
suppose the Creator of the world ignorant of His own work is 
necessarily absurd, and the Eternal-who is far too high to be 
reached by your words and the words of any heretics-could, if 
He knows only Himself, never know His work. 


I say 


This amounts to saying that the theologians do not gratuitously and without 
proof deny the admitted impossibility of a delay between the effect and its 
cause, but base themselves on an argument which leads them to believe in the 
temporal creation of the world, and that they therefore act in the same way as 
the philosophers, who only deny the well-known necessary plurality of 
knowledge and known, so far as it concerns their unity in God, because of a 
demonstration which, according to them, leads them to their theory about 
Him. And that this is still more true of those philosophers who deny it to 

be necessary that God should know His own work, affirming that He 
knows only Himself. This assertion belongs to the class of assertions whose 
contrary is equally false., For there exists no proof which refutes anything that 
is evidently true, and universally acknowledged. Anything that can be refuted 
by a demonstrative proof is only supposed to be true, not really true.] 
Therefore, if it is absolutely and evidently true that knowledge and known 
form a plurality, both in the visible and in the invisible world, we can be sure 
that the philosophers cannot have a proof of this unity in God; but if the 
theory of the plurality of knowledge and known is only a supposition, then it 
is possible for the philosophers to have a proof. Equally, if it is absolutely true 
that the effect of a cause cannot be delayed after the causation and the 
Ash’arites claim that they can advance a proof to deny it, then we can be 
absolutely sure that they cannot have such a proof. If there is a controversy 


42 


about questions like this, the final criterion rests with the sound 
understanding’ which does not base itself on prejudice and passion, when it 
probes according to the signs and rules by which truth and mere opinion are 
logically distinguished. Likewise, if two people dispute about a sentence and 
one says that it is poetry, the other that it is prose, the final judgment rests 
with the ‘sound understanding’ which can distinguish poetry from prose, and 
with the science of prosody. And as, in the case of metre, the denial of him 
who denies it does not interfere with its perception by him who perceives it, 
so the denial of a truth by a contradictor does not trouble the conviction of 


the men to whom it is evident. 


This whole argument is extremely inept and weak, and Ghazali ought not to 
have filled his book with such talk if he intended to convince the learned. 


And drawing consequences which are irrelevant and beside the point, 
Ghazali goes on to say: 


But the consequences of this argument cannot be overcome. 
And we say to them: How will you refute your adversaries, when 
they say the eternity of the world is impossible, for it implies an 
infinite number and an infinity of unifies for the spherical 
revolutions, although they can be divided by six, by four, and by 
two.’ For the sphere of the sun revolves in one year, the sphere 
of Saturn in thirty years, and so Saturn’s revolution is a thirtieth 
and Jupiter’s revolution-for Jupiter revolves in twelve years-a 
twelfth of the sun’s revolution. But the number of revolutions of 
Saturn has the same infinity as the revolutions of the sun, 
although they are in a proportion of one to thirty and even the 
infinity of the sphere of the fixed stars which turns round once 
in thirty-six thousand years is the same as the daily revolution 
which the sun performs in twenty-four hours. If now your 
adversary says that this is plainly impossible, in what does your 
argument differ from his? And suppose it is asked: Are the 
numbers of these revolutions even or uneven or both even and 
uneven or neither even nor uneven? If you answer, both even 


and uneven, or neither even nor uneven, you say what is 


43 


evidently absurd. If, however, you say ‘even’ or ‘uneven’, even 
and uneven become uneven and even by the addition of one 
unit and how could infinity be one unit short? You must, 
therefore, draw the conclusion that they are neither even nor 


uneven. 
I say: 


This too is a sophistical argument. It amounts to saying: In the same way as 
you are unable to refute our argument for the creation of the world in time, 
that if it were eternal, its revolutions would be neither even nor uneven, so we 
cannot refute your theory that the effect of an agent whose conditions to act 
are always fulfilled cannot be delayed. This argument aims only at creating 
and establishing a ; doubt, which is one of the sophist’s objectives. 


But you, reader of this book, you have already heard the arguments of the 
philosophers to establish the eternity of the world and the refutation of the 
Ash’arites. Now hear the proofs of the Ash’arites for their refutation and hear 
the arguments of the philosophers to refute those proofs in the wording of 
Ghazali! 


[Here, in the Arabic text, the last passage of Ghazali, which previously was given only in an abbreviated 


form, is repeated in full.] 
I say: 


This is in brief that, if you imagine two circular movements in one and the 
same finite time and imagine then a limited part of these movements in one 
and the same finite time, the proportion between the parts of these two 
circular movements and between their wholes will be the same. For instance, 
if the circular movement of Saturn in t the period which we call a year is a 
thirtieth of the circular movement of the sun in this period, and you imagine 
the whole of the circular movements of the sun in proportion to the whole of 
the circular movements of Saturn in one and the same period, necessarily the 
proportion between their wholes and between their parts will be the same. If, 
however, there is no proportion between two movements in their totality, 
because they are both potential, i.e. they have neither beginning nor end but 
there exists a proportion between the parts, because they are both actual, then 
the proportion between the wholes is not necessarily the same as the 


44 


proportion between the parts-although many think so, basing their proof on 
this prejudice -for there is no proportion between two magnitudes or 
quantities which are both taken to be infinite. When, therefore, the ancients 
believed that, for instance, the totality of the movements of the sun and of 
Saturn had neither beginning nor end, there could be no proportion between 
them, for this would have implied the finitude of both these totalities, just as 
this is implied for the parts of both. This is self-evident. Our adversaries 
believe that, when a proportion of more and less exists between parts, this 
proportion holds good also for the totalities, but this is only binding when the 
totalities are finite. For where there is no end there is neither ‘more’ nor ‘less’. 
The admission in such a case of the proportion of more and less brings with it 
another absurd consequence, namely that one infinite could be greater than 
another. This is only absurd when one supposes two things actually infinite, 
for then a proportion does exist between them. When, however, one imagines 
things potentially infinite, there exists no proportion at all. This is the right 
answer to this question, not what Ghazali says in the name of the 
philosophers. 


And through this are solved all the difficulties which beset our adversaries 
on this question, of which the greatest is that which they habitually formulate 
in this way: If the movements in the past are infinite, then no movement in 
the actual present can take place, unless an infinite number of preceding 
movements is terminated., This is true, and acknowledged by the 
philosophers, once granted that the anterior movement is the condition for 
the posterior movement’s taking place, i.e. once granted that the existence of 
one single movement implies an infinite number of causes. But no 
philosopher allows the existence of an infinite number of causes, as accepted 
by the materialists, for this would imply the existence of an effect without 
cause and a motion without mover. But when the existence of an eternal 
prime mover had been proved, whose act cannot be posterior to his being, it 
followed that there could as little be a beginning for his act as for his being; 
otherwise his act would be possible, not necessary, and he would not be a first 
principle.’ The acts of an agent who has no beginning have a beginning as 
little as his existence, and therefore it follows necessarily that no preceding act 
of his is the condition for the existence of a later, for neither of them is an 


45 


agent by itself and their sequence is accidental. An accidental infinite, not an 
essential infinite, is admitted by the philosophers; nay, this type of infinite is 
in fact a necessary consequence of the existence of an eternal first principle., 
And this is not only true for successive or continuous movements and the 
like, but even where the earlier is regarded as the cause of the later, for 
instance the man who engenders a man like himself. For it is necessary that 
the series of temporal productions of one individual man by another should 
lead upwards to an eternal agent, for whom there is no beginning either of his 
existence or of his production of man out of man. The production of one man 
by another ad infinitum is accidental, whereas the relation of before and after 
in it is essential. The agent who has no beginning either for his existence or 
for those acts of his which he performs without an instrument, has no first 
instrument either to perform those acts of his without beginning which by 


their nature need an instrument. 


But since the theologians mistook the accidental for the essential, they 
denied this eternal agent; the solution of their problem was difficult and they 
believed this proof to be stringent. But this theory of the philosophers is clear, 
and their first master Aristotle has explained that, if motion were produced by 
motion, or element by element, motion and element could not exists For this 
type of infinite the philosophers admit neither a beginning nor an end, and 
therefore one can never say of anything in this series that it has ended or has 
begun, not even in the past, for everything that has an end must have begun 
and what does not begin does not end. This can also be understood from the 
fact that beginning and end are correlatives. Therefore one who affirms that 
there is no end of the celestial revolutions in the future cannot logically 
ascribe a beginning to them, for what has a beginning has an end and what 
has no end has no beginning, and the same relation exists between first and 
last; i.e. what has a first term has also a last term, and what has no first term 
has no last term, and there is in reality neither end nor beginning for any part 
of a series that has no last term, and what has no beginning for any of its parts 
has no end for any of them either. When, therefore, the theologians ask the 
philosophers if the movements which precede the present one are ended, their 
answer is negative, for their assumption that they have no beginning implies 
their endlessness. The opinion of the theologians that the philosophers admit 


46 


their end is erroneous, for they do not admit an end for what has no 
beginning.’ It will be clear to you that neither the arguments of the 
theologians for the temporal creation of the world of which Ghazali speaks, 
nor the arguments of the philosophers which he includes and describes in his 
book, suffice to reach absolute evidence or afford stringent proof. And this is 
what we have tried to show in this book. The best answer one can give to him 
who asks where in the past is the starting-point of His acts, is: The starting- 
point of His acts is at the starting-point of His existence; for neither of them 
has a beginning. 


And here is the passage of Ghazali in which he sets forth the defence of the 
philosophers against the argument built on the difference in speed of the 
celestial spheres, and his refutation of their argument. 


Ghazali says: 


If one says, ‘The error in your argument consists in your 
considering those circular movements as an aggregate of units, 
but those movements have no real existence, for the past is no 
more and the future not yet; “aggregate” means units existing 
in the present, but in this case there is no existence.’ 


Then he says to refute this: 


We answer: Number can be divided into even and uneven; 
there is no third possibility, whether for the numbered 
permanent reality, or for the numbered passing event. 
Therefore whatever number we imagine, we must believe it to 
be even or uneven, whether we regard it as existent or non- 
existent; and if the thing numbered vanishes from existence, 
our judgement of its being even or uneven does not vanish or 


change. 
I say: 


This is the end of his argument. But this argument-that the numbered 
thing must be judged as even or uneven, whether it exists or not-is only valid 
so far as it concerns external things or things in the soul that have a beginning 
and an end. For of the number which exists only potentially, i.e. which has 


47 


neither beginning nor end, it cannot truly be said that it is even or uneven, or 
that it begins or ends; it happens neither in the past nor in the future, for what 
exists potentially falls under the law of non-existence. This is what the 
philosophers meant when they said that the circular movements of the past 
and the future are non-existent. The upshot of this question is: Everything 
that is called a limited aggregate with a beginning and an end is so called 
either because it has a beginning and end in the world exterior to the soul, or 
because it is inside, not outside, the soul. Every totality, actual and limited in 
the past, whether inside or outside the soul, is necessarily either even or 
uneven. But an unlimited aggregate existing outside the soul cannot be other 
than limited so far as it is represented in the soul, for the soul cannot 
represent unlimited existence. Therefore also this unlimited aggregate, as 
being limited in the soul, can be called even or uneven; in so far, however, as it 
exists outside the soul, it can be called neither even nor uneven. Equally, past 
aggregates which are considered to exist potentially outside the soul, ie. 
which have no beginning, cannot be called even or uneven unless they are 
looked upon as actual, i.e. as having beginning and end. No motion possesses 
totality or forms an aggregate, i.e. is provided with a beginning or an end, 
except in so far as it is in the soul, as is the case with time.’ And it follows 
from the nature of circular movement that it is neither even nor uneven 
except as represented in the soul. The cause of this mistake is that it was 
believed that, when something possesses a certain quality in the soul, it must 
possess this quality also outside the soul, and, since anything that has 
happened in the past can only be represented in the soul as finite, it was 
thought that everything that has happened in the past must also be finite 
outside the soul. And as the circular movements of the future are regarded by 
the imagination as infinite, for it represents them as a sequence of part after 
part, Plato and the Ash’arites believed that they might be infinite, but this is 
simply a judgement based on imagination, not on proof. Therefore those who 
believe-as many theologians have done-that, if the world is supposed to have 
begun, it must have an end, are truer to their principles and show more 


consistency. 


Ghazali says after this: 


48 


And we say moreover to the philosophers: According to 
your principles it is not absurd that there should be actual 
units, qualitatively differentiated, which are infinite in number; 
I am thinking of human souls, separated through death from 
their bodies. These are therefore realities that can neither be 
called even nor uneven. How will you refute the man who 
affirms that this is necessarily absurd in the same way as you 
claim the connexion between an eternal will and a temporal 
creation to be necessarily absurd? This theory about souls is 
that which Avicenna accented. and it is perhaps Aristotle’s. 


I say: 


This argument is extremely weak. It says, in brief, “You philosophers need 
not refute our assertion that what is a logical necessity for you is not 
necessary, as you consider things possible which your adversaries consider 
impossible by the necessity of thought. That is to say, just as you consider 
things possible which your adversaries consider impossible, so you consider 
things necessary which your adversaries do not consider so. And you cannot 
bring a criterion for judging the two claims.’ It has already been shown in the 
science of logic that this is a weak rhetorical or sophistical kind of argument., 
The answer is that what we claim to be necessarily true is objectively true, 
whereas what you claim as necessarily absurd is not as you claim it to be. For 
this there is no other criterion than immediate intuitive apprehension, just as, 
when one man claims that a line is rhythmical and another denies it, the 
criterion is the intuition of the sound understanding. 


As for the thesis of a numerical plurality of immaterial souls, this is not a 
theory acknowledged by the philosophers, for they regard matter as the cause 
of numerical plurality and form as the cause of congruity in numerical 
plurality. And that there should be a numerical plurality without matter, 
having one unique form, is impossible. For in its description one individual 
can only be distinguished from another accidentally, as there is often another 
individual who participates in this descriptions but only through their matter 
do individuals differ in reality. And also this: the impossibility of an actual 
infinite is an acknowledged axiom in philosophical theory, equally valid for 


49 


material and immaterial things. We do not know of any one who makes a 
distinction here between the spatial and the non-spatial, with the single 
exception of Avicenna. I do not know of any other philosopher who affirms 
this, it does not correspond with any of their principles and it makes no sense, 
for the philosophers deny the existence of an actual infinite equally for 
material and for immaterial things, as it would imply that one infinite could 
be greater than another. Perhaps Avicenna wanted only to satisfy the masses, 
telling them what they were accustomed to hear about the soul. But this 
theory is far from satisfactory. For if there were an actual infinite and it were 
divided in two, the part would equal the whole; e.g. if there were a line or a 
number actually infinite in both directions and it were divided in two, both 
the parts and the whole would be actually infinite; and this is absurd. All this 
is simply the consequence of the admission of an actual and not potential 
infinite. 
Ghazali says: 


If it is said, ‘The truth lies with Plato’s theory of one eternal 
soul which is only divided in bodies and returns after its 
separation from them to its original unity’, we answer: This 
theory is still worse, more objectionable and more apt to be 
regarded as contrary to the necessity of thought. For we say that 
the soul of Zaid is either identical with the soul of Amr or 
different from it; but their identity would mean something 
absurd, for everyone is conscious of his own identity and knows 
that he is not another, and, were they identical, their 
knowledge, which is an essential quality of their souls and 
enters into all the relations into which their souls enter, would 
be identical too. If you say their soul is unique and only divided 
through its association with bodies, we answer that the division 
of a unity which has no measurable volume is absurd by the 
necessity of thought. And how could the one become two, and 
indeed a thousand, and then return to its unity? This can be 
understood of things which have volume and quantity, like the 
water of the sea which is distributed into brooks and rivers and 
flows then back again into the sea, but how can that which has 


50 


no quantity be divided? We seek to show by all this that the 
philosophers cannot shake the conviction of their adversaries 
that the eternal Will is connected with temporal creation, except 
by claiming its absurdity by the necessity of thought, and that 
therefore they are in no way different from the theologians who 
make the same claim against the philosophical doctrines 
opposed to theirs. And out of this there is no issue. 


I say: 


Zaid and Amr are numerically different, but identical in form. If, for 
example, the soul of Zaid were numerically different from the soul of Amr in 
the way Zaid is numerically different from Amr, the soul of Zaid and the soul 
of Amr would be numerically two, but one in their form, and the soul would 
possess another soul. The necessary conclusion is therefore that the soul of 
Zaid and the soul of Amr are identical in their form. An identical form inheres 
in a numerical, i.e. a divisible, multiplicity, only through the multiplicity of 
matter. If then the soul does not die when the body dies, or if it possesses an 
immortal element, it must, when it has left the bodies, form a numerical unity. 
But this is not the place to go deeper into this subject. 


His argument against Plato is sophistical. It says in short that the soul of 
Zaid is either identical with the soul of Amr or different from it; but that the 
soul of Zaid is not identical with the soul of Amr and that therefore it is 
different from it. But ‘different’ is an equivocal term, and ‘identity’ too is 
predicated of a number of things which are also called ‘different’. The souls of 
Zaid and Amr are one in one sense and many in another; we might say, one in 
relation to their form, many in relation to their substratum. His remark that 
division can only be imagined of the quantitative is partially false; it is true of 
essential division, but not of accidental division, i.e. of those things which can 
be divided, because they exist in the essentially divisible. The essentially 
divisible is, for example, body; accidental division is, for instance, the division 
of whiteness, when the bodies in which it is present are divided, and in this 
way the forms and the soul are accidentally divisible, i.e. through the division 
of the substrate. The soul is closely similar to light: light is divided by the 
division of illuminated bodies, and is unified when the bodies are annihilated, 


51 


and this same relation holds between soul and bodies. To advance such 
sophistical arguments is dishonest, for it may be supposed that he is not a 
man to have overlooked the points mentioned. What he said, he said only to 
flatter the masses of his times, but how far removed is such an attitude from 
the character of those who seek to set forth the truth! But perhaps the man 
may be forgiven on account of the time and place in which he lived; and 
indeed he only proceeded in his books in a tentative way. 


And as these arguments carry no evidence whatsoever, Ghazali says: 


We want to show by all this that the philosophers cannot 
shake the conviction of their adversaries that the eternal Will is 
connected with temporal creation, by claiming its absurdity by 
the necessity of thought, and that therefore they do not 
distinguish themselves from the theologians, who make the 
same claim against the philosophical doctrines opposed to 
theirs. And out of this there is no issue. 


I say: 


When someone denies a truth of which it is absolutely certain that it is 
such-and-such, there exists no argument by which we can come to an 
understanding with him; for every argument is based on known premisses 
about which both adversaries agree. When each point advanced is denied by 
the adversary, discussion with him becomes impossible, but such people 
stand outside the pale of humanity and have to be educated. But for him who 
denies an evident truth, t because of a difficulty which presents itself to him 
there is a remedy, ie. the solution of this difficulty. He who does not 
understand evident truth, because he is lacking in intelligence, cannot be 
taught anything, nor can he be educated. It is like trying to make the blind 


imagine colours or know their existence. 
Ghazali says: 


The philosophers may object: This argument (that the 
present has been preceded by an infinite past) can be turned 
against you, for God before the creation of the world was able to 
create it, say, one year or two years before He did, and there is 


52 


no limit to His power; but He seemed to have patience and did 
not create. Then He created. Now, the duration of His inactivity 
is either finite or infinite. If you say finite, the existence of the 
Creator becomes finite; if you say infinite, a duration in which 
there is an infinite number of possibilities receives its 
termination. We answer: Duration and time are, according to 
us, created, but we shall explain the real answer to this question 
when we reply to the second proof of the philosophers. 


I say: 


Most people who accept a temporal creation of the world believe time to 
have been created with it. Therefore his assertion that the duration of His 
inactivity was either limited or unlimited is untrue. For what has no beginning 
does not finish or end. And the opponent does not admit that the inactivity 
has any duration at all. What one has to ask them about the consequences of 
their theory is: Is it possible, when the creation of time is admitted, that the 
term of its beginning may lie beyond the real time in which we live? If they 
answer that it is not possible, they posit a limited extension beyond which the 
Creator cannot pass, and this is, in their view, shocking and absurd. If, 
however, they concede that its possible beginning may lie beyond the moment 
of its created term, it may further be asked if there may not lie another term 
beyond this second. If they answer in the affirmative-and they cannot do 
otherwise-it will be said: Then we shall have here a possible creation of an 
infinite number of durations, and you will be forced to admit-according to 
your argument about the spherical revolutions-that their termination is a 
condition for the real age which exists since them. If you say what is infinite 
does not finish, the arguments you use about the spherical revolutions against 
your opponents your opponents will use against you on the subject of the 
possibility of created durations. If it is objected that the difference between 
those two cases is that these infinite possibilities belong to extensions which 
do not become actual, whereas the spherical revolutions do become actual, 
the answer is that the possibilities of things belong to their necessary 
accidents and that it does not make any difference, according to the 
philosophers, if they precede these things or are simultaneous with them, for 
of necessity they are the dispositions of things. If, then, it is impossible that 


53 


before the existence of the present spherical revolution there should have 
been infinite spherical revolutions, the existence of infinite possible 
revolutions is equally impossible. If one wants to avoid these consequences, 
one can say that the age of the world is a definite quantity and cannot be 
longer or shorter than it is, in conformity with the philosophical doctrine 
about the size of the world. Therefore these arguments are not stringent, and 
the safest way for him who accepts the temporal creation of the world is to 
regard time as of a definite extension and not to admit a possibility which 
precedes the possible; and to regard also the spatial extension of the world as 


finite. Only, spatial extension forms a simultaneous whole; not so time. 


Ghazali expounds a certain kind of argument attributed to the philosophers 
on this subject against the theologians when they denied that the impossibility 
of delay in the Creator’s act after His existence is known by primitive 


intuition: 


How will you defend yourselves, theologians, against the 
philosophers, when they drop this argument, based on the 
necessity of thought, and prove the eternity of the world in this 
way, saying that times are equivalent so far as the possibility 
that the Divine Will should attach itself to them is concerned, 
for what differentiates a given time from an earlier or a later 
time? And it is not absurd to believe that the earlier or the later 
might be chosen when on the contrary you theologians say 
about white, black, movement, and rest that the white is 
realized through the eternal Will although its substrate accepts 
equally black and white. Why, then, does the eternal Will attach 
itself to the white rather than to the black, and what 
differentiates one of the two possibles from the other for 
connexion with the eternal Will? But we philosophers know by 
the necessity of thought that one thing does not distinguish 
itself from a similar except by a differentiating principle, for if 
not, it would be possible that the world should come into 
existence, having the possibility both of existing and of not 
existing, and that the side of existence, although it has the same 
possibility as the side of non-existence, should be differentiated 


54 


without a differentiating principle. If you answer that the Will 
of God is the differentiating principle, then one has to inquire 
what differentiates the Will, ie. the reason why it has been 
differentiated in such or such way. And if you answer: One does 
not inquire after the motives of the Eternal, well, let the world 
then be eternal, and let us not inquire after its Creator and its 
cause, since one does not inquire after the motives of the 
Eternal! If it is regarded as possible that the Eternal should 
differentiate one of the two possibles by chance, it will be an 
extreme absurdity to say that the world is differentiated in 
differentiated forms which might just as well be otherwise, and 
one might then say that this has happened by chance in the 
same way as you say that the Divine Will has differentiated one 
time rather than another or one form rather than another by 
chance. If you say that such a question is irrelevant, because it 
refers to anything God can will or decide, we answer that this 
question is quite relevant, for it concerns any time and is 


pertinent for our opponents to any decision God takes. 


We answer: The world exists, in the way it exists, in its time, 
with its qualities, and in its space, by the Divine Will and will is 
a quality which has the faculty of differentiating one thing from 
another,’ and if it had not this faculty, power in itself would 
suffice But, since power is equally related to two contraries’ and 
a differentiating principle is needed to differentiate one thing 
from a similar, it is said that the Eternal possesses besides His 
power a quality which can differentiate between two similars. 
And to ask why will differentiates one of two similars is like 
asking why knowledge must comprehend the knowable, and the 
answer is that ‘knowledge’ is the term for a quality which has 
just this nature. And in the same way, ‘will’ is the term for a 
quality the nature or rather the essence of which is to 


differentiate one thing from another. 


The philosophers may object: The assumption of a quality 
the nature of which is to differentiate one thing from a similar 


55 


one is something incomprehensible, nay even contradictory, for 
‘similar’? means not to be differentiated, and ‘differentiated’ 
means not similar. And it must not be believed that two blacks 
in two substrates are similar in every way, since the one is in 
one place and the other in another, and this causes a 
distinction; nor are two blacks at two times in one substrate 
absolutely similar, since they are separated in time, and how 
could they therefore be similar in every way? When we say of 
two blacks that they are similar, we mean that they are similar 
in blackness, in their special relation to it-not absolutely. 
Certainly, if the substrate and the time were one without any 
distinction, one could not speak any more of two blacks or of 
any duality at all. This proves that the term ‘Divine Will’ is 
derived from our will, and one does not imagine that through 
our will two similar things can be differentiated.’ On the 
contrary, if someone who is thirsty has before him two cups of 
water, similar in everything in respect to his aim, it will not be 
possible for him to take either of them. No, he can only take the 
one he thinks more beautiful or lighter or nearer to his right 
hand, if he is right-handed, or act from some such reason, 
hidden or known. Without this the differentiation of the one 
from the other cannot be imagined. 


I say: 


The summary of what Ghazali relates in this section of the proofs of the 
philosophers for the impossibility of a temporal proceeding from an eternal 
agent is that in God there cannot be a will. The philosophers could only arrive 
at this argument after granting to their opponents that all opposites-opposites 
in time,b like anterior and posterior, as well as those in quality, like white and 
black-are equivalent in relation to the eternal Will. And also non-existence 
and existence are, according to the theologians, equivalent in relation to the 
Divine Will. And having granted their opponents this premiss, although they 
did not acknowledge its truth, they said to them: It is of the nature of will that 
it cannot give preponderance to one thing rather than to a similar one, except 
through a differentiating principle and a cause which only exist in one of 


56 


these two similar things; if not, one of the two would happen by chance-and 
the philosophers argued for the sake of discussion, as if they had conceded 
that, if the Eternal had a will, a temporal could proceed from an eternal. As 
the theologians were unable to give a satisfactory answer, they took refuge in 
the theory that the eternal Will is a quality the nature of which is to 
differentiate between two similar things, without there being for God a 
differentiating principle which inclines Him to one of two similar acts; that 
the eternal Will is thus a quality like warmth which gives heat or like 
knowledge which comprehends the knowable. But their opponents, the 
philosophers, answered: It is impossible that this should happen, for two 
similar things are equivalent for the wilier, and his action can only attach 
itself to the one rather than to the other through their being dissimilar, i.e. 
through one’s having a quality the other has not. When, however, they are 
similar in every way and when for God there is no differentiating principle at 
all, His will will attach itself to both of them indifferently and, when this is the 
case-His will being the cause of His act-the act will not attach itself to the one 
rather than to the other, it will attach itself either to the two contrary actions 
simultaneously or to neither of them at all, and both cases are absurd. The 
philosophers, therefore, began their argument, as if they had it granted to 
them that all things were equivalent in relation to the First Agent, and they 
forced them to admit that there must be for God a differentiating principle 
which precedes Him, which is absurd. When the theologians answered that 
will is a quality the nature of which is to differentiate the similar from the 
similar, in so far as it is similar, the philosophers objected that this is not 
understood or meant by the idea of will. They therefore appear to reject the 
principle which they granted them in the beginning.’ This is in short the 
content of this section. It waves the argument from the original question to 
the problem of the will; to shift one’s ground, however, is an act of sophistry. 


Ghazali answers in defence of the theological doctrine of the Divine Will: 


There are two objections: First, as to your affirmation that 
you cannot imagine this, do you know it by the necessity of 
thought or through deduction? You can claim neither the one 
nor the other. Your comparison with our will is a bad analogy, 
which resembles that employed on the question of God’s 


57 


knowledge. Now God’s knowledge is different from ours in 
several ways which we acknowledge. Therefore it is not absurd 
to admit a difference in the will. Your affirmation is like saying 
that an essence existing neither outside nor inside the world, 
neither continuous with the world nor separated from it, cannot 
be understood, because we cannot understand this according to 
our human measure; the right answer is that it is the fault of 
your imagination, for rational proof has led the learned to 
accept its truth. How, then, will you refute those who say that 
rational proof has led to establishing in God a quality the nature 
of which is to differentiate between two similar things? And, if 
the word ‘will’ does not apply, call it by another name, for let us 
not quibble about words! We only use the term ‘will by 
permission of the Divine Law. It may be objected that by its 
conventional meaning ‘will’ designates that which has desire, 
and God has no desire, but we are concerned here with a 
question not of words but of fact. Besides, we do not even with 
respect to our human will concede that this cannot be 
imagined. Suppose two similar dates in front of a man who has 
a strong desire for them, but who is unable to take them both. 
Surely he will take one of them through a quality in him the 
nature of which is to differentiate between two similar things. 
All the distinguishing qualities you have mentioned, like beauty 
or nearness or facility in taking, we can assume to be absent, 
but still the possibility of the taking remains. You can choose 
between two answers: either you merely say that an equivalence 
in respect to his desire cannot be imagined-but this is a silly 
answer, for to assume it is indeed possible or you say that if an 
equivalence is assumed, the man will remain for ever hungry 
and perplexed, looking at the dates without taking one of them, 
and without a power to choose or to will, distinct from his 
desire. And this again is one of those absurdities which are 
recognized by the necessity of thought. Everyone, therefore, 
who studies, in the human and the divine, the real working of 


58 


the act of choice, must necessarily admit a quality the nature of 
which is to differentiate between two similar things. 


I say: 


This objection can be summarized in two parts: In the first Ghazali concedes 
that the human will is such that it is unable to differentiate one thing from a 
similar one, in so far as it is similar, but that a rational proof forces us to 
accept the existence of such a quality in the First Agent. To believe that such a 
quality cannot exist would be like believing that there cannot exist a being 
who is neither inside nor outside the world. According to this reasoning, will, 
which is attributed to the First Agent and to man, is predicated in an 
equivocal way, like knowledge and other qualities which exist in the Eternal in 
a different way from that in which they exist in the temporal, and it is only 
through the prescription of the Divine Law that we speak of the Divine Will. It 
is clear that this objection cannot have anything more than a dialectical value. 
For a proof that could demonstrate the existence of such a quality, ie. a 
principle determining the existence of one thing rather than that of a similar, 
would have to assume things willed that are similar; things willed are, 
however, not similar, but on the contrary opposite, for all opposites can be 
reduced to the opposition of being and not being, which is the extreme form 
of opposition; and opposition is the contrary of similarity. The assumption of 
the theologians that the things to which the will attaches itself are similar is a 
false one, and we shall speak of it later. If they say: we affirm only that they 
are similar in relation to the First Wilier, who in His holiness is too exalted to 
possess desires, and it is through desires that two similar things are actually 
differentiated, we answer: as to the desires whose realization contributes to 
the perfection of the essence of the wilier, as happens with our desires, 
through which our will attaches itself to the things willed-those desires are 
impossible in God, for the will which acts in this way is a longing for 
perfection when there is an imperfection in the essence of the wilier; but as to 
the desires which belong to the essence of the things willed, nothing new 
comes to the wilier from their realization. It comes exclusively to the thing 
willed, for instance, when a thing passes into existence from non-existence, 
for it cannot be doubted that existence is better for it than non-existence. It is 
in this second way that the Primal Will is related to the existing things, for it 


59 


chooses for them eternally the better of two opposites, and this essentially and 
primally. This is the first part of the objection contained in this argument. 


In the second part he no longer concedes that this quality cannot exist in the 
human will, but tries to prove that there is also in us, in the face of similar 
things, a will which distinguishes one from the other; of this he gives 
examples. For instance, it is assumed that in front of a man there are two 
dates, similar in every way, and it is supposed that he cannot take them both 
at the same time. It is supposed that no special attraction need be imagined 
for him in either of them, and that nevertheless he will of necessity distinguish 
one of them by taking it. But this is an error. For, when one supposes such a 
thing, and a wilier whom necessity prompts to eat or to take the date, then it 
is by no means a matter of distinguishing between two similar things when, in 
this condition, he takes one of the two dates. It is nothing but the admission 
of an equivalence of two similar things; for whichever of the two dates he may 
take, his aim will be attained and his desire satisfied. His will attaches itself 
therefore merely to the distinction between the fact of taking one of them and 
the fact of leaving them altogether; it attaches itself by no means to the act of 
taking one definite date and distinguishing this act from the act of leaving the 
other (that is to say, when it is assumed that the desires for the two are equal); 
he does not prefer the act of taking the one to the act of taking the other, but 
he prefers the act of taking one of the two, whichever it may be, and he gives a 
preference to the act of taking over the act of leaving.’ This is self-evident. For 
distinguishing one from the other means giving a preference to the one over 
the other, and one cannot give a preponderance to one of two similar things 
in so far as it is similar to the other-although in their existence as individuals 
they are not similar since each of two individuals is different from the other 
by reason of a quality exclusive to it. If, therefore, we assume that the will 
attaches itself to that special character of one of them, then it can be imagined 
that the will attaches to the.-one rather than the other because of the element 
of difference existing in both. But then the will does not attach itself to two 
similar objects, in so far as they are similar. This is, in short, the meaning of 
Ghazali’s first objection. Then he gives his second objection against those who 
deny the existence of a quality, distinguishing two similar objects from one 
another. 


60 


Ghazali says: 


The second objection is that we say: You in your system also 
are unable to do without a principle differentiating between two 
equals, for the world exists in virtue of a cause which has 
produced it in its peculiar shape out of a number of possible 
distinct shapes which are equivalent; why, then, has this cause 
differentiated some of them? If to distinguish two similar things 
is impossible, it is irrelevant whether this concerns the act of 
God, natural causality, or the logical necessity of ideas. Perhaps 
you will say: the universal order of the world could not be 
different from what it is; if the world were smaller or bigger 
than it actually is, this order would not be perfect, and the same 
may be asserted of the number of spheres and of stars. And 
perhaps you will say: The big differs from the small and the 
many from the few, in so far as they are the object of the will, 
and therefore they are not similar but different; but human 
power is too feeble to perceive the modes of Divine Wisdom in 
its determination of the measures and qualities of things; only 
in some of them can His wisdom be perceived, as in the 
obliquity of the ecliptic in relation to the equator, and in the 
wise contrivance of the apogee and the eccentric sphere.’ In 
most cases, however, the secret is not revealed, but the 
differences are known, and it is not impossible that a thing 
should be distinguished from another, because the order of the 
world depends on it; but certainly the times are absolutely 
indifferent in relation to the world’s possibility and its order, 
and it cannot be claimed that, if the world were created one 
moment later or earlier, this order could not be imagined; and 
this indifference is known by the necessity of thought.-But then 
we answer: Although we can employ the same reasoning against 
your argument in the matter of different times, for it might be 
said that God created the world at the time most propitious for 
its creation, we shall not limit ourselves to this refutation, but 
shall assume, according to your own principle, a differentiation 


61 


in two points about which there can be no disagreement: (1) the 
difference in the direction of spherical movement; (2) the 
definite place of the poles in relation to the ecliptic in spherical 
movement. The proof of the statement relating to the poles is 
that heaven is a globe, moving on two poles, as on two 
immovable points, whereas the globe of heaven is homogeneous 
and simple, especially the highest sphere, the ninth, which 
possesses no stars at all, and these two spheres move on two 
poles, the north and the south. We now say: of all the opposite 
points, which are infinite, according to you philosophers, there 
is no pair one could not imagine as poles. Why then have the 
two points of the north and south pole been fixed upon as poles 
and as immovable; and why does the ecliptic not pass through 
these two poles, so that the poles would become the opposite 
points of the ecliptic? And if wisdom is shown in the size and 
shape of heaven, what then distinguishes the place of the poles 
from others, so that they are fixed upon to serve as poles, to the 
exclusion of all the other parts and points? And yet all the 
points are similar, and all parts of the globe are equivalent. And 


to this there is no answer. 


One might say: Perhaps the spot in which the point of the 
poles is, is distinguished from other points by a special quality, 
in relation to its being the place of the poles and to its being at 
rest, for it does not seem to change its place or space or position 
or whatever one wishes to call it; and all the other spots of the 
sphere by turning change their position in relation to the earth 
and the other spheres and only the poles are at rest; perhaps 
this spot was more apt to be at rest than the others. We answer: 
If you say so, you explain the fact through a natural 
differentiation of the parts of the first sphere; the sphere, then, 
ceases to be homogeneous, and this is in contradiction with 
your principle, for one of the proofs by which you prove the 
necessity of the globular shape of heaven, is that its nature is 
simple, homogeneous, and without differentiation, and the 


62 


simplest shape is the globe; for the quadrangle and the hexagon 
and other figures demand a salience and a differentiation of the 
angles,’ and this happens only when its simple nature is added 
to. But although this supposition of yours is in contradiction 
with your own theory, it does not break the strength of your 
opponents’ argument; the question about this special quality 
still holds good, namely, can those other parts accept this 
quality or not? If the answer is in the affirmative, why then is 
this quality limited to a few only of those homogeneous parts? If 
the answer is negative, we reply: the other parts, in so far as 
they constitute bodies, receiving the form of bodies, are 
homogeneous of necessity, and there is no justification for 
attributing this special quality to this spot exclusively on 
account of its being a part of a body and a part of heaven, for 
the other parts of heaven participate in this qualification. 
Therefore its differentiation must rest on a decision by God, or 
on a quality whose nature consists in differentiating between 
two similars. Therefore, just as among philosophers the theory 
is upheld that all times are equivalent in regard to the creation 
of the world, their opponents are justified in claiming that the 
parts of heaven are equivalent for the reception of the quality 
through which stability in position becomes more appropriate 
than a change of position. And out of this there is no issue. 


I say: 


This means in brief that the philosophers must acknowledge that there is a 
quality in the Creator of the world which differentiates between two similars, 
for it seems that the world might have had another shape and another 
quantity than it actually has, for it might have been bigger or smaller. Those 
different possibilities are, therefore, equivalent in regard to the determination 
of the existence of the world. On the other hand, if the philosophers say that 
the world can have only one special shape, the special quantity of its bodies 
and the special number of them it actually has, and that this equivalence of 
possibilities can only be imagined in relation to the times of temporal 


creation-since for God no moment is more suitable than another for its 


63 


creation-they may be told that it is possible to answer this by saying that the 
creation of the world happened at its most propitious moment. But we, the 
theologians say, want to show the philosophers two equivalent things of which 
they cannot affirm that there exists any difference between them; the first is 
the particular direction of the spherical movement and the second the 
particular position of the poles, relative to the spheres; for any pair whatever 
of opposite points, united by a line which passes through the centre of the 
sphere, might constitute the poles. But the differentiation of these two points, 
exclusive of all other points which might just as well be the poles of this 
identical sphere cannot happen except by a quality differentiating between 
two similar objects. If the philosophers assert that it is not true that any other 
place on the sphere might be the seat for these poles, they will be told: such an 
assertion implies that the parts of the spheres are not homogeneous and yet 
you have often said that the sphere is of a simple nature and therefore has a 
simple form, viz. the spherical. And again, if the philosophers affirm that 
there are spots on the sphere which are not homogeneous, it will be asked 
how these spots came to be of a heterogeneous nature; is it because they are a 
body or because they are a celestial body? But the absence of homogeneity 
cannot be explained in this way. Therefore-Ghazali says just as among 
philosophers the theory is upheld that all times are equivalent in regard to the 
creation of the world, the theologians are justified in claiming that the parts of 
heaven are equivalent in regard to their serving as poles, and that the poles do 
not seem differentiated from the other points through a special position or 
through their being in an immovable place, exclusive of all other places. 


This then in short is the objection; it is, however, a rhetorical one, for many 
things which by demonstration can be found to be necessary seem at first 
sight merely possible.’ The philosophers’ answer is that they assert that they 
have proved that the world is composed of five bodies: a body neither heavy 
nor light, i.e. the revolving spherical body of heaven and four other bodies, 
two of which are earth, absolutely heavy, which is the centre of the revolving 
spherical body, and fire, absolutely light, which is seated in the extremity of 
the revolving sphere; nearest to earth is water, which is heavy relatively to air, 
light relatively to earth; next to water comes air, which is light relatively to 
water, heavy relatively to fire. The reason why earth is absolutely heavy is that 


64 


it is farthest away from the circular movement, and therefore it is the fixed 
centre of the revolving body; the reason why fire is absolutely light is that it is 
nearest to the revolving sphere; the intermediate bodies are both heavy and 
light, because they are in the middle between the two extremes, i.e. the 
farthest point and the nearest. If there were not a revolving body, surely there 
would be neither heavy nor light by nature, and neither high nor low by 
nature, and this whether absolutely or relatively; and the bodies would not 
differ by nature in the way in which, for instance, earth moves by nature to its 
specific place and fire moves by nature to another place, and equally so the 
intermediary bodies. And the world is only finite, because of the spherical 
body, and this because of the essential and natural finiteness of the spherical 
body, as one single plane circumscribes it.’ Rectilinear bodies are not 
essentially finite, as they allow of an increase and decrease; they are only finite 
because they are in the middle of a body that admits neither increase nor 
decrease, and is therefore essentially finite. And, therefore, the body 
circumscribing the world cannot but be spherical, as otherwise the bodies 
would either have to end in other bodies, and we should have an infinite 
regress, or they would end in empty space, and the impossibility of both 
suppositions has been demonstrated. He who understands this knows that 
every possible world imaginable can only consist of these bodies, and that 
bodies have to be either circular-and then they are neither heavy nor light-or 
rectilinear-and then they are either heavy or light, ie. either fire or earth or 
the intermediate bodies; that these bodies have to be either revolving, or 
surrounded by a revolving periphery, for each body either moves from, 
towards, or round the centre; that by the movements of the heavenly bodies to 
the right and to the left all bodies are constituted and all that is produced 
from opposites is generated; and that through these movements the 
individuals of these four bodies never cease being in a continual production 
and corruption. Indeed, if a single one of these movements should cease, the 
order and proportion of this universe would disappear, for it is clear that this 
order must necessarily depend on the actual number of these movements-for 
if this were smaller or greater, either the order would be disturbed, or there 
would be another order-and that the number of these movements is as it is, 
either through its necessity for the existence of this sublunary world, or 
because it is the best . 


65 


Do not ask here for a proof for all this, but if you are interested in science, 
look for its proof, where you can find it. Here, however, listen to theories 
which are more convincing than those of the theologians and which, even if 
they do not bring you complete proof, will give your mind an inclination to 
lead you to proof through scientific speculation. You should imagine that each 
heavenly sphere is a living being, in so far as it possesses a body of a definite 
measure and shape and moves itself in definite directions, not at random. 
Anything of this nature is necessarily a living being; i.e. when we see a body of 
a definite quality and quantity move itself in space, in a definite direction, not 
at random, through its own power, not through an exterior cause, and move 
in opposite directions at the same time, we are absolutely sure that it is a 
living being, and we said only ‘not through an exterior cause’ because iron 
moves towards a magnet when the magnet is brought to it from the outside- 
and besides, iron moves to a magnet from any direction whatever., The 
heavenly bodies, therefore, possess places which are poles by nature, and 
these bodies cannot have their poles in other places, just as earthly animals 
have particular organs in particular parts of their bodies for particular 
actions, and cannot have them in other places, e.g. the organs of locomotion, 
which are located in definite parts. The poles represent the organs of 
locomotion in animals of spherical form, and the only difference in this 
respect between spherical and non-spherical animals is that in the latter these 
organs differ in both shape and power, whereas in the former they only differ 
in power. For this reason it has been thought on first sight that they do not 
differ at all, and that the poles could be in any two points on the sphere. And 
just as it would be ridiculous to say that a certain movement in a certain 
species of earthly animal could be in any part whatever of its body, or in that 
part where it is in another species, because this movement has been localized 
in each species in the place where it conforms most to its nature, or in the 
only place where this animal can perform the movement, so it stands with the 
differentiation in the heavenly bodies for the place of their poles. For the 
heavenly bodies are not one species and numerically many, but they form a 
plurality in species, like the plurality of different individuals of animals where 
there is only one individual in the species. 


66 


Exactly the same answer can be given to the question why the heavens move 
in different directions: that, because they are animals, they must move in 
definite directions, like right and left, before and behind, which are directions 
determined by the movements of animals, and the only difference between the 
movements of earthly animals and those of heavenly bodies is that in the 
different animals these movements are different in shape and in power, 
whereas in the heavenly animals they only differ in power. And it is for this 
reason that Aristotle thinks that heaven possesses the directions of right and 
left, before and behind, high and low. The diversity of the heavenly bodies in 
the direction of their movements rests on their diversity of species, and the 
fact that this difference in the directions of their movements forms the 
specific differentia of their species is something proper to them. Imagine the 
first heaven as one identical animal whose nature obliges it-either by necessity 
or because it is for the best-to move with all its parts in one movement from 
east to west. The other spheres are obliged by their nature to have the 
opposite movement. The direction which the body of the universe is 
compelled to follow through its nature is the best one, because its body is the 
best of bodies and the best among the moving bodies must also have the best 
direction. All this is explained here in this tentative way, but is proved 
apodictically in its proper place. This is also the manifest sense of the Divine 
Words, ‘There is no changing the words of God’, and ‘There is no altering the 
creation of God’. If you want to be an educated man, proceeding by proof, you 
should look for the proof of this in its proper place. 


Now if you have understood all this, it will not be difficult for you to see the 
faults in Ghazali’s arguments here about the equivalence of the two opposite 
movements in relation to each heavenly body and to the sublunary world. On 
first thoughts it might be imagined that the movement from east to west 
might also belong to other spheres besides the first, and that the first sphere 
might equally well move from west to east. You might as well say that the crab 
could be imagined as having the same direction of movement as man. But, as 
a matter of fact, such a thought will not occur to you about men and crabs, 
because of their difference in shape, whereas it might occur to you about the 
heavenly spheres, since they agree in shape. He who contemplates a product 
of art does not perceive its wisdom if he does not perceive the wisdom of the 


67 


intention embodied in it, and the effect intended. And if he does not 
understand its wisdom, he may well imagine that this object might have any 
form, any quantity, any configuration of its parts, and any composition 
whatever. This is the case with the theologians in regard to the body of the 
heavens, but all such opinions are superficial. He who has such beliefs about 
products of art understands neither the work nor the artist, and this holds 
also in respect of the works of God’s creation. Understand this principle, and 
do not judge the works of God’s creation hastily and superficially-so that you 
may not become one of those about whom the Qur’an says: ‘Say, shall we 
inform you of those who lose most by their works, those who erred in their 
endeavour after the life of this world and who think they are doing good 
deeds?? May God make us perspicacious and lift from us the veils of 
ignorance; indeed He is the bounteous, the generous! To contemplate the 
various actions of the heavenly bodies is like contemplating the kingdom of 
heaven, which Abraham contemplated, according to the words of the Qur’an: 
‘Thus did we show Abraham the kingdom of heaven and of the earth, that he 
should be of those who are sure.’ And let us now relate Ghazali’s argument 


about the movements. 
Ghazali says: 


The second point in this argument concerns the special 
direction of the movement of the spheres which move partially 
from east to west, partially in the opposite direction, whereas 
the equivalence of the directions in relation to their cause is 
exactly the same as the equivalence of the times. If it is said: If 
the universe revolved in only one direction, there would never 
be a difference in the configuration of the stars, and such 
relations of the stars as their being in trine, in sextile, and in 
conjunction would, never arise, but the universe would remain 
in one unique position without any change; the difference of 
these relations, however, is the principle of all production in the 
world-we answer: Our argument does not concern the 
difference in direction of movement; no, we concede that the 
highest sphere moves from east to west and the spheres beneath 
it in the opposite direction, but everything that happens in this 


68 


way would happen equally if the reverse took place, i.e. if the 
highest sphere moved from west to east and the lower spheres 
in the opposite direction. For all the same differences in 
configuration would arise just as well. Granted that these 
movements are circular and in opposite directions, both 
directions are equivalent; why then is the one distinguished 
from the other, which is similar to it? If it is said: as the two 
directions are opposed and contrary, how can they be similar?- 
we answer: this is like saying ‘since before and after are 
opposed in the existing world, how could it be claimed that they 
are equivalent?’ Still, it is asserted by you philosophers that the 
equivalence of times, so far as the possibility of their realization 
and any purpose one might imagine in their realization is 
concerned, is an evident fact. Now, we regard it as equally 
evident that spaces, positions, situations, and directions are 
equivalent so far as concerns their receiving movement and any 
purpose that might be connected with it. If therefore the 
philosophers are allowed to claim that notwithstanding this 
equivalence they are different, their opponents are fully 
justified in claiming the same in regard to the times. 


I say: 


From what I have said previously, the speciousness of this argument and the 
way in which it has to be answered will not be obscure to you. All this is the 
work of one who does not understand the exalted natures of the heavenly 
bodies and their acts of wisdom for the sake of which they have been created, 
and who compares God’s knowledge with the knowledge of ignorant man. 


Ghazali says: 


If it is said: as the two directions are opposed and contrary, 
how can they be similar?-we answer: this is like saying ‘since 
before and after in the existing world are opposed, how could it 
be claimed that they are equivalent?’ Still, it is asserted by you 
philosophers that the equivalence of times so far as the 
possibility of their realization, and any purpose one might 


69 


imagine in their realization is concerned, is an evident fact. 
Now, we regard it as equally evident that spaces, positions, 
situations, and directions are equivalent so far as concerns their 
receiving the movement and any purpose that might be 
connected with it. 


I say: 


The falsehood of this is self-evident. Even if one should admit that the 
possibilities of man’s existence and non-existence are equivalent in the matter 
out of which he has been created, and that this is a proof for the existence of a 
determining principle which prefers his existence to his non-existence, still it 
cannot be imagined that the possibilities of seeing and not seeing are 
equivalent in the eye. Thus no one can claim that the opposite directions are 
equivalent, although he may claim that the substratum for both is indifferent, 
and that therefore out of both directions similar actions result. And the same 
holds good for before and after: they are not equivalent, in so far as this event 
is earlier and that event later; they can only be claimed to be equivalent so far 
as their possibility of existence is concerned. But the whole assumption is 
wrong: for essential opposites also need essentially opposite substrata and a 
unique substratum giving rise to opposite acts at one and the same time is an 
impossibility. The philosophers do not believe that the possibilities of a 
thing’s existence and of its non-existence are equivalent at one and the same 
time; no, the time of the possibility of its existence is different from the time 
of the possibility of its non-existence, time for them is the condition for the 
production of what is produced, and for the corruption of what perishes. If 
the time for the possibility of the existence of a thing and the time for the 
possibility of its non-existence were the same, that is to say in its proximate 
matter, its existence would be vitiated, because of the possibility of its non- 
existence, and the possibility of its existence and of its non-existence would be 
dependent only on the agent, not on the substratum. 


Thus he who tries to prove the existence of an agent in this way gives only 
persuasive, dialectical arguments, not apodictic proof. It is believed that 
Farabi and Avicenna followed this line to establish that every act must have an 
agent, but it is not a proof of the ancient philosophers, and both of them 


70 


merely took it over from the theologians of our religion. In relation, however, 
to the temporal creation of the world-for him who believes in it-before and 
after cannot even be imagined, for before and after in time can only be 
imagined in relation to the present moment, and as, according to the 
theologians, there was before the creation of the world no time, how could 
there be imagined something preceding the moment when the world was 
created? A definite moment cannot be assigned for the creation of the world, 
for either time did not exist before it, or there was an infinite time, and in 
neither case could a definite time be fixed to which the Divine could attach 
itself. Therefore it would be more suitable to call this book ‘Incoherence’ 
without qualification rather than ‘The Incoherence of the Philosophers’, for 
the only profit it gives the reader is to make him incoherent. 


Ghazali says: 


If, therefore, the philosophers are allowed to claim that, 
notwithstanding this equivalence, they are different, their 
opponents are fully justified in claiming the same in regard to 


times. 
I say: 


He wants to say: If the philosophers are justified in claiming a difference in 
the direction of movement, the theologians have the right to assert a 
difference in times, notwithstanding their belief in their equivalence. This is 
only a verbal argument, and does not refer to the facts themselves, even if one 
admits an analogy between the opposite directions and the different times, 
but this is often objected to, because there is no analogy between this 
difference in times and directions. Our adversary, however, is forced to admit 
that there is an analogy between them, because they are both claimed to be 
different, and both to be equivalent! These, therefore, are one and all only 
dialectical arguments. 


Ghazali says: 


The second objection against the basis of their argument is 
that the philosophers are told: ‘You regard the creation of a 
temporal being by an eternal as impossible, but you have to 


71 


acknowledge it too, for there are new events happening in the 
world and they have causes. It is absurd to think that these 
events lead to other events ad infinitum, and no intelligent 
person can believe such a thing. If such a thing were possible, 
you need not acknowledge a creator and establish a necessary 
being on whom possible existences depend. If, however, there is 
a limit for those events in which their sequence ends, this limit 
will be the eternal and then indubitably you too acknowledge 
the principle that a temporal can proceed from an eternal 
being.’ 


I say: 


If the philosophers had introduced the eternal being into reality from the 
side of the temporal by this kind of argument, ie. if they had admitted that 
the temporal, in so far as temporal, proceeds from an eternal being, there 
would be no possibility of their avoiding the difficulty in this problem. But 
you must understand that the philosophers permit the existence of a temporal 
which comes out of a temporal being ad infinitum in an accidental way, when 
this is repeated in a limited and finite matter-when, for instance, the 
corruption of one of two things becomes the necessary condition for the 
existence of the other. For instance, according to the philosophers it is 
necessary that man should be produced from man on condition that the 
anterior man perishes so as to become the matter for the production of a 
third. For instance, we must imagine two men of whom the first produces the 
second from the matter of a man who perishes; when the second becomes a 
man himself, the first perishes, then the second man produces a third man out 
of the matter of the first, and then the second perishes and the third produces 
out of his matter a fourth, and so we can imagine in two matters an activity 
continuing ad infinitum, without any impossibility arising. And this happens 
as long as the agent lasts, for if this agent has neither beginning nor end for 
his existence, the activity has neither beginning nor end for its existence, as it 
has been explained before. And in the same way you may imagine this 
happening in them in the past: When a man exists, there must before him 
have been a man who produced him and a man who perished, and before this 
second man a man who produced him and a man who perished, for 


72 


everything that is produced in this way is, when it depends on an eternal 
agent, of a circular nature in which no actual totality can be reached. If, on the 
other hand, a man were produced from another man out of infinite matters, 
or there were an infinite addition of them, there would be an impossibility, for 
then there could arise an infinite matter and there could be an infinite whole. 
For if a finite whole existed to which things were added ad infinitum without 
any corruption taking place in it, an infinite whole could come into existence, 
as Aristotle proved in his Physics. For this reason the ancients introduce an 
eternal absolutely unchanging being, having in mind not temporal beings, 
proceeding from him in so far as they are temporal, but beings proceeding 
from him as being eternal generically, and they hold that this infinite series is 
the necessary consequence of an eternal agent, for the temporal needs for its 
own existence only a temporal cause. Now there are two reasons why the 
ancients introduce the existence of an eternal numerically unique being which 
does not suffer any change. The first is that they discovered that this revolving 
being is eternal, for they discovered that the present individual is produced 
through the corruption of its predecessor and that the corruption of this 
previous individual implies the production of the one that follows it, and that 
it is necessary that this everlasting change should proceed from an eternal 
mover and an eternal moved body, which does not change in its substance, 
but which changes only in place so far as concerns its parts, and approaches 
certain of the transitory things and recedes from certain of them, and this is 
the cause of the corruption of one half of them and the production of the 
other half. And this heavenly body is the being that changes in place only, not 
in any of the other kinds of change, and is through its temporal activities the 
cause of all things temporal; and because of the continuity of its activities 
which have neither beginning nor end, it proceeds from a cause which has 
neither beginning nor end. The second reason why they introduce an eternal 
being absolutely without body and matter is that they found that all the kinds 
of movement depend on spatial movement, and that spatial movement 
depends on a being moved essentially by a prime mover, absolutely unmoved, 
both essentially and accidentally, for otherwise there would exist at the same 
time an infinite number of moved movers, and this is impossible. And it is 
necessary that this first mover should be eternal, or else it would not be the 
first. Every movement, therefore, depends on this mover and its setting in 


73 


motion essentially, not accidentally. And this mover exists simultaneously 
with each thing moved, at the time of its motion, for a mover existing before 
the thing moved-such as a man producing a man-sets only in motion 
accidentally, not essentially; but the mover who is the condition of man’s 
existence from the beginning of his production till its end, or rather from the 
beginning of his existence till its end, is the prime mover. And likewise his 
existence is the condition for the existence of all beings and the preservation- 
of heaven and earth and all that is between them. All this is not proved here 
apodictically, but only in the way we follow here and which is in any case 
more plausible for an impartial reader than the arguments of our opponents. 


If this is clear to you, you certainly are in no need of the subterfuge by which 
Ghazali in his argument against the philosophers tries to conciliate them with 
their adversaries in this matter; indeed these artifices will not do, for if you 
have not understood how the philosophers introduce an eternal being into 
reality, you have not understood how they settle the difficulty of the rise of the 
temporal out of the eternal; they do that, as we said, either through the 
medium of a being eternal in its essence but generable and corruptible in its 
particular movements, not, however, in its universal circular movement, or 
through the medium of what is generically eternal-i.e. has neither beginning 


nor end-in its acts. 
Ghazali answers in the name of the philosophers: 


The philosophers may say, ‘we do not consider it impossible 
that any temporal being, whatever it may be, should proceed 
from an eternal being, but we regard it as impossible that the 
first temporal should proceed from the eternal, as the mode of 
its procession does not differ from that which precedes it, either 
in a greater inclination towards existence or through the 
presence of some particular time, or through an instrument, 
condition, nature, accident, or any cause whatever which might 
produce a new mode. If this therefore is not the first temporal, 
it will be possible that it should proceed from the eternal, when 
another thing proceeds from it, because of the disposition of 


74 


the receiving substratum, or because the time was propitious or 
for any other reason. 


Having given this reply on the part of the philosophers, Ghazali answers it: 


This question about the actualization of the disposition, 
whether of the time and of any new condition which arises in it, 
still holds good, and we must either come to an infinite regress 
or arrive at an eternal being out of which a first temporal being 


proceeds. 
I say: 


This question is the same question all over again as he asked the philosophers 
first, and this is the same kind of conclusion as he made them draw then, 
namely that a temporal proceeds from an eternal, and having given as their 
answer something which does not correspond with the question, i.e. that it is 
possible that a temporal being should proceed from the Eternal without there 
being a first temporal being, he turns the same question against them again. 
The correct answer to this question was given above: the temporal proceeds 
from the First Eternal, not in so far as it is temporal but in so far as it is 
eternal, i.e. through being eternal generically, though temporal in its parts. 
For according to the philosophers an eternal being out of which a temporal 
being proceeds essentially is not the First Eternal, but its acts, according to 
them, depend on the First Eternal; i.e. the actualization of the condition for 
activity of the eternal, which is not the First Eternal, depends on the First 
Eternal in the same way as the temporal products depend on the First Eternal 
and this is a dependence based on the universal, not on individuals. 


After this Ghazali introduces an answer of the philosophers, in one of the 
forms in which this theory can be represented, which amounts to this: A 
temporal being proceeding from an eternal can only be represented by means 
of a circular movement which resembles the eternal by not having beginning 
or end and which resembles the temporal in so far as each part of it is 
transient, so that this movement through the generation of its parts is the 
principle of temporal things, and through the eternity of its totality the 
activity of the eternal. 


75 


Then Ghazali argues against this view, according to which in the opinion of 
the philosophers the temporal proceeds from the First Eternal, and says to 
them: 


Is this circular movement temporal or eternal? If it is 
eternal, how does it become the principle for temporal things? 
And if it is temporal, it will need another temporal being and we 
shall have an infinite regress. And when you say that it partially 
resembles the eternal, partially the temporal, for it resembles 
the eternal in so far as it is permanent and the temporal in so 
far as it arises anew, we answer: Is it the principle of temporal 
things, because of its permanence, or because of its arising 
anew? In the former case, how can a temporal proceed from 
something because of its permanence? And in the latter case, 
what arises anew will need a cause for its arising anew, and we 


have an infinite regress. 
I say: 


This argument is sophistical. The temporal does not proceed from it in so 
far as it is eternal, but in so far as it is temporal; it does not need, however, 
for its arising anew a cause arising anew, for its arising anew is not a new 


fact, but is an eternal act, i.e. an act without 


o beginning or end. Therefore its agent must be an eternal agent, for an 
eternal act has an eternal agent, and a temporal act a temporal agent. Only 
through the eternal element in it can it be understood that movement has 
neither beginning nor end, and this is meant by its permanence, for 


movement itself is not permanent, but changing. 
And since Ghazali knew this, he said: 


In order to elude this consequence the philosophers have a 
kind of artifice which we will expose briefly. 


Ghazali says: 


76 


THE SECOND PROOF OF THE PHILOSOPHERS CONCERNING 


I say: 


THIS PROBLEM 


They assert that he who affirms that the world is posterior 
to God and God prior to the world cannot mean anything but 
that He is prior not temporally but essentially like the natural 
priority of one to two, although they can exist together in 
temporal existence, or like the priority of cause to effect, for 
instance the priority of the movement of a man to the 
movement of his shadow which follows him, or the movement 
of the hand to the movement of the ring, or the movement of 
the hand in the water to the movement of the water, for all these 
things are simultaneous, but the one is cause, the other effect, 
for it is said that the shadow moves through the movement of 
the man and the water through the hand in the water, and the 
reverse is not said although they are simultaneous. If this is 
what you mean by saying that God is prior to the world, then it 
follows that they must both either be temporal or eternal, for it 
is absurd that the one should be temporal and the other eternal. 
If it is meant that God is prior to the world and to time, not 
essentially, but temporally, then there was, before the existence 
of the world and of time, a time in which the world was non- 
existent, since non-existence preceded the world and God 
preceded it during a long duration which had a final term but 
no initial one, and then there was before time an infinite time, 
which is self-contradictory. Therefore the assertion that time 
had a beginning is absurd. And if time-which is the expression 
of the measure of movement -is eternal, movement must be 
eternal. And the necessity of the eternity of movement implies 
the necessity of the eternity of the thing in motion, through the 
duration of which time endures. 


LE 


The mode of their reasoning which he reproduces does not constitute a 
proof. It amounts to saying that the Creator, if He is prior to the world, must 
either be prior not in time, but in causation, like the priority of a man to his 
shadow, or prior in time, like a builder to a wall. If He is prior in the same way 
as the man is prior to his shadow, and if the Creator is eternal, then the world 
too is eternal. But if He is prior in time, then He must precede the world by a 
time which has no beginning, and time will be eternal, for if there is a time 
before the actual, its starting-point cannot be imagined. And if time is eternal, 
movement too is eternal, for time cannot be understood without motion. And 
if motion is eternal, the thing in motion will be eternal, and its mover will 
necessarily be eternal too. But this proof is unsound, for it is not of the nature 
of the Creator to be in time, whereas it belongs to the nature of the world to be 
so; and for this very reason it is not true that He is either simultaneous with it 


or prior to it in time or in causation. 
Ghazali says 


The objection to this is: Time is generated and created, and 
before it there was no time at all. The meaning of our words 
that God is prior to the world and to time is: He existed without 
the world and without time, then He existed and with Him there 
was the world and there was time. And the meaning of our 
words that He existed without the world is: the existence of the 
essence of the Creator and the non-existence of the essence of 
the world, and nothing else. And the meaning of our words that 
He existed and with Him there was the world is: the existence of 
the two essences, and nothing else. And the meaning of priority: 
the uniqueness of His existence, and nothing else. And the 
world is like a singular person; if we should say, for instance: 
God existed without Jesus, then He existed with Jesus-these 
words contain nothing but, first, the existence of an essence and 
the non-existence of an essence, then, the existence of two 
essences, and there is no need to assume here a third essence, 
namely time, although imagination cannot desist from 
assuming it. But we should not heed the errors of the 


imagination. 


78 


I say: 


These words are erroneous and mistaken, for we have already proved that 
there are two kinds of existence: one in the nature of which there is motion 
and which cannot be separated from time; the other in the nature of which 
there is no motion and which is eternal and cannot be described in terms of 
time. The first is known by the senses and by reason; the existence of the 
second-in the nature of which there is neither motion nor change-is known by 
proof to everyone who acknowledges that each motion needs a mover and 
each effect a cause, and that the causes which move each other do not regress 
infinitely, but end in a first cause which is absolutely unmoved. And it has 
also been established that the entity in the nature of which there is no 
movement is the cause of the entity in the nature of which there is movement. 
And it has been proved also that the entity in the nature of which there is 
motion cannot be separated from time, and that the entity in the nature of 
which there is no movement is entirely free from time. Therefore the priority 
of the one entity over the other is based neither on a priority in time, nor on 
the priority of that kind of cause and effect, which belongs to the nature of 
things in motion, like the priority of a man to his shadow. For this reason 
anyone who compares the priority of the unmoved being to the thing in 
motion to the priority existing between two things in motion is in error; since 
it is only true of each one in pairs of moving things that, when it is brought in 
relation to the other, it is either simultaneous with it or prior or posterior in 
time to it. It is the later philosophers of Islam who made this mistake, since 
they enjoyed but slight comprehension of the doctrine of the ancients. So the 
priority of this one being to the other is the priority of the unchanging 
timeless existence to the changing existence which is in time, and this is an 
altogether different type of priority. It is therefore not true of these existences 
that they are simultaneous, or that the one precedes the other, and Ghazali’s 
observation that the priority of the Creator to the world is not a temporal 
priority is true. But the posteriority of the world to the Creator, since He does 
not precede the world in time, can only be understood as the posteriority of 
effect to cause,’ for posteriority and priority are opposites which are 


necessarily in one genus, as has been shown in the sciences.’ Since therefore 


79 


this priority is not in time, the posteriority also cannot be in time, and we 
have the same difficulty all over again: how can the effect be delayed after the 
cause when the conditions of acting are fulfilled? The philosophers, however, 
since they do not recognize a beginning in the totality of this existence in 
moti/n, are not touched by this difficulty, and it is possible for them to 
indicate in what way the temporal beings proceed from the eternal. One of 
their proofs that existence in motion has no beginning, and that in its totality 
it does not start, is that, when it is assumed to start, it is assumed to exist 
before its existence, for to start is a movement, and movement is of necessity 
in the thing in motion, equally whether the movement is regarded as taking 
place in time or at an instants Another proof is that everything that becomes 
has the potentiality of becoming before it actually becomes, although the 
theologians deny this (a discussion with them on this point will follow); now 
potentiality is a necessary attribute of being in motion, and it follows 
necessarily that, if it were assumed to become, it would exist before its 
existence. What we have here are only dialectical arguments; they have, 
however, a much greater plausibility than what the theologians advance. 


As for Ghazali’s words: 


If we should say, for instance, that God existed without 
Jesus, and then He existed with Jesus, these words contain 
nothing but, first, the existence of an essence and the non- 
existence of an essence, then, the existence of two essences, and 


there is no need to assume here a third essence, namely time. 
I say: 


This is true, provided that Jesus’ posteriority is not regarded as an essential 
temporal posteriority, but, if there is a posteriority, it is an accidental 
posteriority, for time precedes this posterior entity, ie. it is a necessity of 
Jesus’ existence that time should precede Him and that His existence should 
have begun, but the world is not subject to such a necessity, except in so far as 
it is a part of a moving existence beyond which time extends in two 
directions,’ as happens to Jesus and other transitory individuals.z Nothing of 
this is proved here; here it is simply explained that the objection is not valid. 


80 


In addition, what he says afterwards of the proofs of the philosophers is 


untrue. 
Answering in the name of the philosophers, Ghazali says: 


One might say that our expression ‘God existed without the 
world’ means a third thing, besides the existence of one being 
and the non-existence of another, because, if we should suppose 
that in the future God should exist without the world, there 
would be in the future the existence of one being and the non- 
existence of another, still it would not be right to say ‘God 
existed without the world’, but we should say ‘God will exist 
without the world’, for only of the past do we say ‘God existed 
without the world’; and between the words ‘existed’ and ‘will 
exist’ there is a difference, for they cannot replace each other. 
And if we try to find out where the difference between the two 
sentences lies, it certainly does not lie in the words ‘existence of 
one being’ and ‘non-existence of another being’, but in a third 
entity, for if we say of the non-existence of the world in the 
future ‘God was without the world’, it will be objected: this is 
wrong, for ‘was’ refers only to the past. This shows therefore 
that the word ‘was’ comprises a third entity, namely the past, 
and the past by itself is time, and through another existent it is 
movement, for movement passes only through the passing of 
time. And so it follows necessarily that, before the world, a time 
finished which terminated in the existence of the world. 


I say: 


In this in brief he shows that when it is said ‘such-and-such was without 
such-and-such’ and then ‘such-and-such was with such-and-such’ a third 
entity is understood, namely time. The word ‘was’ shows this, because of the 
difference in the meaning of this concept in the past and in the future, for if 
we assume the existence of one thing with the non-existence of another in the 
past, we say ‘such a thing existed without such a thing’, but when we assume 
the non-existence of the one with the existence of the other in the future, we 
say ‘such a thing will exist without such a thing’, and the change in meaning 


81 


implies that there is here a third entity. If in our expression ‘such-and-such 
existed without such-and-such’ the word ‘existed’ did not signify an entity, the 
word ‘existed’ would not differ from ‘will exist’. All this is self-evident, but it is 
only unquestionable in relation to the priority and posteriority of things 
which are by nature in time. Concerning the timeless the word ‘was’ and the 
like indicate in such a proposition nothing but the copula between predicate 
and subject, when we say, for example, ‘God was indulgent and 
compassionate’; and the same holds when either predicate or subject is 
timeless, e.g. when we say ‘God was without the world, then God was with the 
world’. Therefore for such existents the time-relation to which he refers does 
not hold. This relation is, however, unquestionably real when we compare the 
non-existence of the world with its existence, for if the world is in time, the 
non-existence of the world as to be in time too. And since the non-existence 
and the existence of the world cannot be in one and the same time, the non- 
existence must precede; the non-existence must be prior and the world 
posterior to it, for priority and posteriority in the moving can only be 
understood in this relation to time. The only flaw in this argument is to 
assume this relation between God and the world. Only in this point is the 
argument which Ghazali relates faulty and does it fail to constitute a proof. 


Then Ghazali gives the theologians’ objection to this argument of the 
philosophers:’ 


The primitive meaning of the two words is the existence of 
one thing and the non-existence of another. The third element 
which is the connexion between the two words is a necessary 
relation to us. The proof is that, if we should suppose a 
destruction of the world in the future and afterwards a second 
existence for us, we should then say ‘God was without the 
world’, and this would be true, whether we meant its original 
non-existence or the second non-existence, its destruction after 
its existence. And a sign that this is a subjective relation is that 
the future can become past and can be indicated by the word 
‘past’. All this is the consequence of the inability of our 
imagination to imagine the beginning of a thing without 
something preceding it, and this ‘before’ of which the 


82 


imagination cannot rid itself is regarded as a really existing 
thing, namely time. This resembles the inability of the 
imagination to admit a limited body, e.g. overhead, without 
anything beyond its surface, so that it is imagined that behind 
the world there is a space either occupied or empty; and when it 
is said there is above the surface of the world no beyond and no 
farther extension, this is beyond the grasp of the imagination. 
Likewise, when it is said that there is no real anterior to the 
existence of the world, the imagination refuses to believe it. But 
the imagination may be called false in allowing above the world 
an empty space which is an infinite extension by our saying to 
it: empty space cannot be understood by itself, for extension is 
the necessary attribute of a body whose sides comprise space;’ a 
finite body implies the finiteness of extension, which is its 
attribute and the limitation of occupied space; empty space is 
unintelligible, therefore there is neither empty nor occupied 
space behind the world, although the imagination cannot admit 
this. And in the same way as it is said that spatial extension is 
an attribute of body, temporal extension is an attribute of 
motion, for time is the extension of movement just as the space 
between the sides of a body is the extension of space. And just 
as the proof that the sides of a body are finite prevents the 
admission of a spatial extension behind the world, so the proof 
of the finite character of movement in both directions prevents 
the supposition of a temporal extension behind the world, 
although the imagination, subject to its illusion and 
supposition, admits it and does not hold back from it. There is 
no difference between temporal extension, which is 
apprehended as divided through the relation of before and 
after, and spatial extension, which is apprehended as divided 
through the relation of high and low. If it is therefore 
permissible to admit a highest point above which there is 
nothing, it is equally permissible to admit a beginning, not 
preceded by anything real, except through an illusion similar to 
that which permits a beyond for the highest space. This is a 


83 


legitimate consequence; notice it carefully, as the philosophers 
themselves agreed that behind the world there is neither empty 


nor occupied space. 
I say: 


There are two parts to this objection; the first is that, when we imagine the 
past and the future, ic. the prior and the posterior, they are two things 
existing in relation to our imagination, because we can imagine a future event 
as becoming past and a past event as having been future. But if this is so, past 
and future are not real things in themselves and do not possess existence 
outside the soul; they are only constructs of the soul. And when movement is 


annihilated, the relation and measure of time will not have sense any more. 


The answer is that the necessary connexion of movement and time is real 
and time is something the soul constructs in movement, but neither 
movement nor time is annihilated: they are only abolished in those things 
which are not subject to motion, but in the existence of moving things or in 
their possible existence time inheres necessarily. For there are only two kinds 
of being, those that are subject to motion and those that are not, and the one 
kind cannot be converted into the other, for otherwise a conversion of the 
necessary into the possible would become possible. For if movement were 
impossible and then afterwards occurred, the nature of things which arc not 
subject to motion would have changed into the nature of things subject to 
motion, and this is impossible. This is a consequence of the fact that motion 
inheres necessarily in a substratum. If movement were possible before the 
existence of the world, the things which are subject to movement would be 
necessarily in time, for movement is only possible in what is subject to rest,’ 
not in absolute non-existence, for in absolute non-existence there is no 
possibility whatever, or one would have to admit that absolute non-existence 
could be converted into existence. Therefore, the non-existence or privation 
which necessarily precedes the occurrence of a thing has to be connected with 
a substratum, and will be disconnected from it when the substratum actually 
receives this occurrence, as happens with all contraries. For instance, when a 


warm thing becomes cold, the essence of warmth does not change into 


84 


coldness; it is only the receptacle and the substratum of warmth that exchange 
their warmth for coldness. 


The second part of this objection-and it is the most important of these 
objections-is sophistical and malicious. It amounts to saying that to imagine 
something before the beginning of this first movement (which is not preceded 
by any moving body) is like the illusion that the end of the world, for example, 
its highest part, ends necessarily either in another body or in empty space, for 
extension is a necessary attribute of body, as time is a necessary attribute of 
movement. And if it is impossible that there should be an infinite body, it is 
impossible that there should be an infinite extension, and, if it is impossible 
that there should be infinite extension, it is impossible that every body should 
end in another body or in something which has the potentiality of extension, 
i.e. for instance, emptiness, and that this should continue without end. And 
the same applies to movement which has time as a necessary attribute, for if it 
is impossible that there should be infinite past movements and there exists 
therefore a first movement with a finite initial term, it is impossible that there 
should exist a ‘before’ before it, for, if so, there would be another movement 
before the first. 


This objection is, as we said, malicious, and belongs to the class of 
sophistical substitutions-you will recognize what I mean if you have read the 
book On sophistic refutations. In other words, Ghazali treats the quantity 
which has no position and does not form a totality, i.e. time and motion, as 
the quantity which possesses position and totality, ie. body. He makes the 
impossibility of endlessness in the latter a proof of its impossibility in the 
former, and he deals with the act of the soul when it imagines an increase in 
the one quantity which is assumed to be actual, i.e. body, as if it concerned 
both quantities. This is a manifest error. For to imagine an increase in actual 
spatial magnitude, so that it must end in another actual spatial magnitude, is 
to imagine something which does not exist in the essence and definition of 
spatial magnitude, but to imagine priority and posteriority in a movement 
that occurs is to imagine something that belongs to its essence. For a 
movement can only occur in time, i.e. time has to pass beyond its beginning. 
For this reason one cannot represent a time the initial term of which is not the 
final term of another time, for the definition of ‘the instant’ is that it is the end 


85 


of the past and the beginning of the future,’ for the instant is the present 
which necessarily is the middle between the past and the future, and to 
represent a present which is not preceded by a past is absurd. This, however, 
does not apply to the point, for the point is the end of the line and exists at the 
same time as the line, for the line is at rest. Therefore one can imagine a point 
which is the beginning of a line without its being the end of another line, but 
the instant cannot exist without the past and tile future, and exists necessarily 
after the past and before the future, and what cannot subsist in itself cannot 
exist before the existence of the future without being the end of tile past. The 
cause of this error is the comparison of the instant with the point. The proof 
that each movement which occurs is preceded by time is this: everything must 
come to exist out of a privation, and nothing can become in the instant-of 
which it can be truly said that its becoming is a vanishing-and so it must be 
true that its privation must be in another moment than that in which it itself 
exists, and there is time between each pair of instants, because instant is not 
continuous with instant, nor point continuous with point. This has been 
proved in the sciences. Therefore before the instant in which the movement 
occurs there must necessarily be a time, because, when we represent two 


instants in reality, there must necessarily be time between them. 


And what is said in this objection that ‘higher’ resembles ‘before’ is not 
true, nor does the instant resemble the point, nor the quantity which 
possesses position the quantity which does not possess position.’ He who 
allows the existence of an instant which is not a present, or of a present which 
is not preceded by a past, denies time and the instant, for he assumes an 
instant as having the description which we have mentioned, and then assumes 
a time which has no beginning-which is a self-contradictory assumption. It is, 
therefore, wrong to ascribe to an act of imagination the fact that there is a 
prior event for every occurrence, for he who denies priority denies the event 
in time. The contrary is the case with the man who denies the real character of 
the high, for he denies the absolutely high and, when he denies the absolutely 
high, he denies also the absolutely low,’ and when these two are denied, also 
the heavy and the light are denied’, and the act of the imagination that a body 
with straight dimensions must end in another body is not false; no, this is a 
necessary truth, for the body with straight dimensions has the possibility of 


86 


increasing, and what has this possibility is not limited by nature. Therefore 
the body with straight surfaces must end in the circumscribing circular body, 
since this is the perfect body which is liable neither to increase nor to 
decrease. Therefore when the mind seeks to imagine that the circular body 
must end in another body, it imagines the impossible. These are all matters of 
which the theologians and those who do not start their inquiry in the proper 


scientific order are unaware. 


Further, the relation between time and motion is not the same as that 
between spatial limit and spatial magnitude, for the spatial limit is an 
attribute of spatial magnitude, in so far as it inheres in it, in the way that the 
accident inheres in its substratum and is individualized by the individuality of 
its substratum and is indicated by pointing at its substratum and by its being 
in the place in which its substratum is. But this is not the case with the 
necessary relation between time and motion. For the dependence of time on 
motion is much like the dependence of number on the thing numbered: just 
as number does not become individualized through tire individuation of the 
thing numbered, nor pluralized through its plurality, so it stands with the 
relation between time and movement. Time, therefore, is unique for all 
movement and for each thing moving, and exists everywhere, so that if we 
should suppose people confined from youth in a cave in the earth, still we 
should be sure that they would perceive time, even if they did not perceive any 
of the movements which are perceived in the world. Aristotle therefore 
thought that the existence of movements in time is much like the existence of 
the things numbered in numbers for number is not pluralized through the 
plurality of the things numbered, nor is it localized through the individuation 
of the places numbered. He thought, therefore, that its specific quality was to 
mesaure the movements and to measure the existence of moving things, in so 
far as they are moving, as number counts the individual moving things, and 
therefore Aristotle says in his definition of time that it is the number of 
movement according to the relations of anterior and posterior.’ Therefore, 
just as the supposition that a thing numbered occurs does not imply that 
number comes into existence, but it is a necessary condition for the 
occurrence of a thing numbered that number should exist before it, so the 


occurrence of movement implies that there was time before it. If time 


87 


occurred with the occurrence of any individual movement whatever, time 
would only be perceived with that individual movement. This will make you 
understand how different the nature of time is from the nature of spatial 
magnitude. 


Ghazali answers on behalf of the philosophers: 


It may be said: This comparisons is lame, for there is neither 
above nor below in the world; for the world is spherical, and in 
the sphere there is neither above nor below; if the one direction 
is called above, because it is overhead, and the other below, 
because it is under foot, this name is always determined in 
relation to you, and the direction which is below in relation to 
you is above in relation to another, if you imagine him standing 
on the other side of the terrestrial globe with the sole of his foot 
opposite the sole of your foot. Yes, these parts of heaven which 
you reckon above during the day are identical with what is 
below during the night, and what is below the earth comes 
again above the earth through the daily revolution. But it 
cannot be imagined that the beginning of the world becomes its 
end. If we imagined a stick with one thick and one thin end and 
we agreed to call the part nearest the thin end ‘above’ and the 
other ‘below, there would not arise from this an essential 
differentiation in the parts of the world; it would simply be that 
different names would have been applied to the shape of the 
stick, so that if we substituted the one name for the other, there 
would be an exchange of names, but the world itself would 
remain unchanged. So ‘above’ and ‘below are a mere relation to 
you without any differentiation in the parts and places of the 
world. The non-existence, however, preceding the world and the 
initial term of its existence are essential realities, a substitution 
or a change of which cannot be imagined. Nor can it be 
imagined that the non-existence which is supposed to occur at 
the disappearance of the world and which follows the world can 
become the non-existence preceding it. The initial and final 


terms of the world’s existence are permanent essential terms, in 


88 


which no change can be imagined through the change of the 
subjective relation to them, in contrast with ‘above’ and ‘below’. 
Therefore we philosophers, indeed, are justified in saying that 
in the world there is neither ‘above’ nor ‘below, but you 
theologians have not the right to assert that the existence of the 
world has neither a ‘before’ nor an ‘after’. 


And when the existence of ‘before’ and ‘after’ is proved, time 
cannot mean anything but what is apprehended through the 
anterior and the posterior. 


I say: 


This answer given in the name of the philosophers is extremely unsound. It 
amounts to saying that ‘above’ and ‘below’ are relative to us and that therefore 
imagination can treat them as an infinite sequence, but that the sequence of 
‘before’ and ‘after’ does not rest on imagination-for there is here no subjective 
relation-but is a ~ purely rational concept. This means that the order of above 
and below in a thing may be reversed in imagination, but that the privation 
before an event and the privation after an event, its before and its after, are 
not interchangeable for imagination. But by giving this answer the problem is 
not solved, for the philosophers think that i there exists a natural above; to 
which light things move and a natural below to which heavy things move, or 
else the heavy and the light would be relative and exist by convention, and 
they hold that in imagination the limit of a body, having by nature its place 
above, may end either in occupied or in empty space. And this argument is in- 
valid as a justification of the philosophers for two reasons. First, that the 
philosophers assume an absolute above and an absolute below, but no 
absolute beginning and no absolute end; secondly that their opponents may 
object that it is not the fact of their being relative that causes the imagination 
to regard the sequence of low and high as an infinite series, but that this 
happens to the imagination because it observes that every spatial magnitude 
is continuous with another spatial magnitude, just as any event is preceded by 
another event. n Therefore Ghazali transfers the question from the words 
‘above’ and ‘below to ‘inside’ and ‘outside’s and he says in his answer to the 
philosophers: 


89 


There is no real difference in the words ‘above’ and ‘below’, 
and therefore there is no sense in defining them, but we will 
apply ourselves rather to the words ‘inside’ and ‘outside’. We 
say: The world has an inside and an outside; and we ask: Is 
there outside the world an occupied or empty space? The 
philosophers will answer: There is outside the world neither 
occupied nor empty space, and if you mean by ‘outside’ its 
extreme surface, then there is an outside, but if you mean 
anything else, there is no outside. Therefore if they ask us 
theologians if there is anything before the existence of the 
world, we say: If you mean by it the beginning, i.e. its initial 
term, then there is a before, just as there is an outside to the 
world according to your explanation that that is its ultimate 
limit and its final plane, but if you mean anything else, then 


there is not, in analogy with your answer. 


If you say: A beginning of existence, without anything 
preceding it, cannot be understood, we say: A limit of a body 
existing without anything outside it cannot be understood.’ If 
you say: Its exterior is its furthest plane and nothing else, we 
say: Its before is the beginning of its existence, nothing else. The 
conclusion is that we say: We affirm that God has an existence 
without the world’s existing, and this assumption again does 
not force us to accept anything else. That to assume more rests 
on the act of imagination is proved by the fact that imagination 
acts in the same way in regard to time as in regard to place, for 
although our opponents believe in the eternity of the world, 
their imagination is willing to suppose it created; whereas we, 
who believe in its creation, are often allowed by our 
imagination to regard it as eternal. So much as far as body is 
concerned; but to revert to time, our opponents do not regard a 
time without a beginning as possible, and yet in opposition to 
this belief their imagination can represent it as a possible 
assumption, although time cannot be represented by the 
imagination in the way that body is represented, for neither the 


90 


champion nor the opponent of the finitude of body can imagine 
a body not surrounded by empty or occupied space; the 
imagination simply refuses to accept it. Therefore one should 
say: a clear thinker pays no attention to the imagination when 
he cannot deny the finitude of body by proof, nor does he give 
attention to the imagination when he cannot deny the 
beginning of an existence without anything preceding it, which 
the imagination cannot grasp. For the imagination, as it is only 
accustomed to a body limited by another body or by air, 
represents emptiness in this way, although emptiness, being 
imperceptible, cannot be occupied by anything. Likewise the 
imagination, being only accustomed to an event occurring after 
another event, fears to suppose an event not preceded by 
another event which is terminated. And this is the reason of the 


error. 
I say: 


Through this transference, by his comparing the time-limit with the spatial 
limit in his argument against the philosophers, this argument becomes invalid 
and we have already shown the error through which it is specious and the 
sophistical character of the argument, and we need not repeat ourselves. 


Ghazali says: 


The philosophers have a second way of forcing their 
opponents to admit the eternity of time. They say: You do not 
doubt that God was able to create the world one year, a hundred 
years, a thousand years, and so ad infinitum, before He created 
it and that those possibilities are different in magnitude and 
number. Therefore it is necessary to admit before the existence 
of the world a measurable extension, one part of which can be 
longer than another part, and therefore it is necessary that 
something should have existed before the existence of the 
world. If you say the word ‘years’ cannot be applied before the 
creation and revolution of heaven, let us drop the word ‘years’ 
and let us give another turn to our argument and say: If we 


91 


suppose that from the beginning of the world till now the 
sphere of the world has performed, for instance, a thousand 
revolutions, was God able to create a second world before it, 
which, for example, would have performed eleven hundred 
revolutions up to now? If you deny it, it would mean that the 
Eternal had passed from impotence to power or the world from 
impossibility to possibility, but if you accept it, and you cannot 
but accept it, it may be asked if God was able to create a third 
world which would have performed twelve hundred revolutions 
up to now and you will have to admit this. We philosophers say: 
Then, could the world which we called by the order of our 
supposition the third, although as a matter of fact it is the first, 
have been created at the same time as the world we called the 
second, so that the former would have performed twelve 
hundred revolutions and the latter eleven hundred revolutions, 
it being understood that both, in revolving, complete the same 
distance at the same speed? If you were to admit this, you would 
be admitting something absurd, for it would be absurd that in 
that case the number of the two revolutions, having the same 
speed and finishing at the same moment, should be different. 
But, if you answer that it is impossible that the third world 
which has up to now performed twelve hundred revolutions 
could have been created at the same time as the second world 
which has up to now performed eleven hundred revolutions, 
and that on the contrary it must have been created the same 
number of years earlier than the second, as the second has been 
created before the first-we call it first, as it comes first in order, 
when in imagination we proceed from our time to it-then there 
exists a quantity of possibility double that of another 
possibility, and there is doubtless another possibility which 
doubles the whole of the others. These measurable quantitative 
possibilities, of which some are longer than others by a definite 
measure, have no other reality than time, and those measurable 
quantities are not an attribute of the essence of God, who is too 
exalted to possess measure, nor an attribute of the non- 


92 


existence of the world, for non-existence is nothing and 
therefore cannot be measured with different measures. Still, 
quantity is an attribute which demands a substratum, and this 
is nothing other than movement, and quantity is nothing but 
the time which measures movement. Therefore also for you 
theologians there existed before the world a substratum of 
differentiated quantity, namely time, and according to you time 
existed before the world.’ 


I say: 


The summary of this argument is that, when we imagine a movement, we 
find with it an extension which measures it, as if it were its measurement, 
while reciprocally the movement measures the extension, and we find that we 
can assume in this measure and this extension a movement longer than the 
first supposed movement, and we affirm through the corresponding and 
congruous units of this extension that the one movement is longer than the 
other.’ If therefore for you theologians the world has a certain extension from 
its beginning till now-let us suppose, for instance, a thousand years and since 
God according to you is able to create before this world another world, we 
may suppose that the extension He can give it will be longer than the 
extension of the first world by a certain definite quantity, and that He can 
likewise create a third world before this second and that the existence of each 
of them must be preceded by an extension through which its existence can be 
measured. If this is true, and there is an infinite regress of this possibility of 
anterior worlds, there is an extension which precedes all these worlds. And 
this extension which measures all of them cannot be absolute nonexistence, 
for non-existence cannot measure; it has, therefore, to be a quantity, for what 
measures a quantity has to be quantity itself, and the measuring quantity is 
that which we call time. And it is clear that this must precede in existence 
anything we imagine to occur, just as the measure must precede the measured 
in existence. If this extension which is time were to occur at the occurrence of 
the first movement, then it would have to be preceded by an extension which 
could measure it, in which it could occur, and which could be like its 
measurement. And in the same way any world which could be imagined would 
have to be preceded by an extension which measures it. Therefore this 


93 


extension has no beginning, for if it had a beginning it would have to have an 
extension which measured it, for each event which begins has an extension 


which measures it and which we call time. 


This is the most suitable exposition of this argument, and this is the 
method by which Avicenna proves infinite time, but there is a difficulty in 
understanding it, because of the problem that each possible has one extension 
and each extension is connected with its own possible and this forms a point 
of discussion; or one must concede that the possibilities prior to the world 
are of the same nature as the possible inside the world, i.e. as it is of the 
nature of this possible inside the world that time inheres in it, so also with the 
possible which is prior to the world. This is clear concerning the possible 
inside the world, and therefore the existence of time may be imagined from it. 


Ghazali says: 


The objection is that all this is the work of imagination, and 
the most convenient way of refuting it is to compare time with 
place; therefore we say: Was it not in God’s power to create the 
highest sphere in its heaven a cubit higher than He has created 
it? If the answer is negative, this is to deny God’s power, and if 
the answer is affirmative, we ask: And by two cubits and by 
three cubits and so on ad infinitum? Now we affirm that this 
amounts to admitting behind the world a spatial extension 
which has measure and quantity, as a thing which is bigger by 
two or three cubits than another occupies a space bigger by two 
or three cubits, and by reason of this there is behind the world a 
quantity which demands a substratum and this is a body or 
empty space. Therefore, there is behind the world empty or 
occupied space. And how can you answer this? And likewise we 
may ask, whether God was not able to create the sphere of the 
world smaller than He has created it by a cubit or two cubits? 
And is there no difference between those two magnitudes in 
regard to the occupied space taken away from them and the 
space they still occupy, for the occupied space withdrawn is 
bigger when two cubits are taken away than when one cubit is 


94 


taken away? And therefore empty space has measure. But 
emptiness is nothing; how can it have measure? And our answer 
is: ‘It belongs to the illusion of imagination to suppose 
possibilities in time before the existence of the world’, just as 
your answer is: ‘It belongs to the illusion of imagination to 
suppose possibilities in space behind the existence of the 
world.’ There is no difference between those two points of view.’ 


I say: 


This consequence is true against the theory which regards an infinite 
increase in the size of the world as possible, for it follows from this theory that 
a finite thing proceeds from God which is preceded by infinite quantitative 
possibilities. And if this is allowed for possibility in space, it must also be 
allowed in regard to the possibility in time, and we should have a time limited 
in both directions, although it would be preceded by infinite temporal 
possibilities. The answer is, however, that to imagine the world to be bigger or 
smaller does not conform to truth but is impossible. But the impossibility of 
this does not imply that to imagine the possibility of a world before this world 
is to imagine an impossibility, except in case the nature of the possible were 
already realized and there existed before the existence of the world only two 
natures, the nature of the necessary and the nature of the impossible? But it is 
evident that the judgement of reason concerning the being of these three 
natures is eternal, like its judgement concerning the necessary and the 
impossible. 


This objection, however, does not touch the philosophers, because they 
hold that the world could not be smaller or bigger than it is, 


If it were possible that a spatial magnitude could infinitely increase, then 
the existence of a spatial magnitude without end would be possible and a 
spatial magnitude, actually infinite, would exist, and this is impossible and 
Aristotle has already shown the impossibility of this.’ But against the man who 
believes in this possibility, because the contrary would imply a denial of God’s 
power, this argument is valid, for this spatial possibility is just as much a 
purely rational concept as the possibility of temporal anteriority according to 
the philosophers. Therefore, he who believes in the temporal creation of the 


95 


world and affirms that all body is in space, is bound to admit that before the 
creation of the world there was space, either occupied by body, in which the 
production of the world could occur, or empty, for it is necessary that space 
should precede what is produced.’ The man who denies empty space and 
affirms the finiteness of body-like certain later Ash’arites who, however, 
separated themselves from the principles of the theologians; but I have not 
read it in their books and it was told to me by some who studied their 
doctrines-cannot admit the temporal production of the world. If the fact of 
this extension which measures movement and which stands in relation to it as 
its measurement were indeed the work of an illusion-like the representation 
of a world bigger or smaller than it really is-time would not exist, for time is 
nothing but what the mind perceives of this extension which measures 
movement. And if it is self-evident that time exists, then the act of the mind 
must necessarily be a veracious one, embodying reason, not one embodying 


illusion. 
Ghazali says: 


It has been objected: we declare that what is not possible is 
what cannot be done and increase or decrease in the size of the 
world is impossible, and therefore could not be brought about . 


I say 


This is the answer to the objection of the Ash’arites that to admit that God 
could not have made the world bigger or smaller is to charge Him with 
impotence, but they have thereby compromised themselves, for impotence is 
not inability to do the impossible, but inability to do what can be done. 


Ghazali, opposing this, says: 


This excuse is invalid for three reasons: The first is that it is 
an affront to reason, for when reason regards it as possible that 
the world might be bigger or smaller than it is by a cubit, this is 
not the same as regarding it as possible to identify black with 
white and existence with non-existence; impossibility lies in 


affirming the negative and the positive at the same time, and all 


96 


impossibilities amount to this. This is indeed a silly and faulty 


assertion.’ 
I say: 


This statement is, as he says, an affront to reason, but only to the reason of 
him who judges superficially; it is not an affront to true reason, for a 
statement about its being possible or not’ requires a proof. And therefore he is 
right when he declares that this is not impossible in the way in which the 
assumption that black might be white is impossible, for the impossibility of 
the latter is self-evident. The statement, however, that the world could not be 
smaller or larger than it is is not self-evident. And although all impossibilities 
can be reduced to self-evident impossibilities, this reduction can take place in 
two ways. The first is that the impossibility is self-evident; the second is that 
there follows sooner or later from its supposition an impossibility of the same 
character as that of self-evident impossibilities.’ For instance, if it is assumed 
that the world might be larger or smaller than it is, it follows that outside it 
there would be occupied or empty space. And from the supposition that there 
is outside it occupied or empty space, some of the greatest impossibilities 
follow: from empty space the existence of mere extension existing by itself; 
from occupied space a body moving either upward or downward or in a circle 
which therefore must be part of another world. Now it has been proved in the 
science of physics that the existence of another world at the same time as this 
is an impossibility and the most unlikely consequence would be that the world 
should have empty space: for any world must needs have four elements and a 
spherical body revolving round them. He who wants to ascertain this should 
look up the places where its exposition is demanded-this, of course, after 
having fulfilled the preliminary conditions necessary for the student to 
understand strict proof. 


Then Ghazali mentions the second reason: 


If the world is in the state it is, without the possibility of 
being larger or smaller than it is, then its existence, as it is, is 
necessary, not possible. But the necessary needs no cause. So 
say, then, as the materialists do that you deny the creator and 
that you deny the cause of causes! But this is not your doctrine. 


97 


I say: 


To this the answer which, Avicenna gives in accordance with his doctrine is 
quite appropriate.’ According to him necessity of existence is of two kinds: the 
necessary, existent by itself, and the necessary, existent through another. But 
my answer on this question is still more to the point: things necessary in this 
sense need not have an agent or a maker; take, for example, a saw which is 
used to saw wood-it is a tool having a certain determined quantity, quality, 
and matter, that is, it is not possible for it to be of another material than iron 
and it could not have any other shape than that of a saw or any other measure 
than the measure of a saw. Still nobody would say that the saw has a necessity 
of being= See, therefore, how crude this mistake is! If one were to take away 
the necessity from the quantities, qualities, and matters of things produced by 
art, in the way the Ash’arites imagine this to happen concerning the created in 
relation to the creator, the wisdom which lies in the creator and the created 
would have been withdrawn, any agent could be an artificer and any cause in 
existence a creator. But all this is a denial of reason and wisdom. 


Ghazali says: 


The third reason is that this faulty argument authorizes its 
opponent to oppose it by a similar one, and we may say: The 
existence of the world was not possible before its existence, for 
indeed possibility-according to your theory-is coextensive with 
existence, neither more nor less. If you say: ‘But then the eternal 


has passed from impotence to power’, we answer: 


‘No, for the existence was not possible and therefore could 
not be brought about and the impossibility of a thing’s 
happening that could not happen does not indicate impotence.’ 
If you say: ‘How can a thing which is impossible become 
possible? We answer: ‘But why should it be impossible that a 
thing should be impossible at one moment and possible at 
another?’ If you say: ‘The times are similar,’ the answer is: ‘But 
so are the measures, and why should one measure be possible 
and another, bigger or smaller by the width of a nail, 
impossible?’ And if the latter assumption is not impossible, the 


98 


former is not impossible either.’ And this is the way to oppose 
them. 


But the true answer is that their supposition of possibilities 
makes no sense whatever. We concede only that God is eternal 
and powerful, and that His action never fails, even if He should 
wish it. And there is nothing in this power that demands the 
assumption of a temporal extension, unless imagination, 


confusing God’s power with other things, connects it with time. 
I say: 


The summary of this is that the Ash’arites say to the philosophers: this 
question whether the world could be larger or smaller is impossible according 
to us; it has sense only for the man who believes in a priority of possibility in 
relation to the actualization of a thing, ie. the realization of the possible. We, 
the Ash’arites, however, say: ‘Possibility occurs together with the actuality as 
it is, without adding or subtracting anything.’ 


Now my answer is that he who denies the possibility of the possible before 
its existence denies the necessary, for the possible is the contrary of the 
impossible without there existing a middle term, and, if a thing is not possible 
before its existence, then it is necessarily impossible.’ Now to posit the 
impossible as existing is an impossible falsehood, but to posit the possible as 
existing is a possible, not an impossible, falsehood.’ Their assertion that 
possibility and actuality exist together is a falsehood, for possibility and 
actuality are contradictory, and do not exist together in one and the same 
moment. The necessary consequence for them is that possibility exists neither 
at the same time as the actuality nor before it. The true consequence for the 
Ash/’arites in this discussion is not that the eternal passes from impotence to 
power, for he who cannot do an impossible act is not called impotent, but that 
a thing can pass from the nature of the i impossible to the nature of existence, 
and this is like the changing of the necessary into the possible. To posit a 
thing, however, as impossible at one time and possible at another does not cut 
it off from the nature of the possible, for this is the general character of the 
possible; the existence of anything possible, for instance, is impossible at the 
moment when its contrary exists in its substratum. If the opponent concedes 


99 


that a thing impossible at one time is possible at another, then he has 
conceded that this thing is of the nature of the absolutely possible’ and that it 
has not the nature of the impossible. If it is assumed that the world was 
impossible for an infinite time before its production, the consequence is that, 
when it was produced, it changed over from impossibility to possibility. This 
question is not the problem with which we are concerned here, but as we have 
said before, the transference from one problem to another is an act of 
sophistry. 


And as to his words: 


But the true answer is that their supposition of possibilities 
makes no sense whatever. We concede only that God is eternal 
and powerful and that His action never fails, even if He should 
wish it. And there is nothing in this power that demands the 
assumption of a temporal extension, unless imagination 


confusing God’s power with other things connects with it time. 
I say: 


Even if there were nothing in this supposition-as he says-that implies the 
eternity of time, there is something in it that demands that the possibility of 
the occurrence of the world and equally of time should be eternal. And this is 
that God never ceases to have power for action, and that it is impossible that 
anything should prevent His act from being eternally connected with His 
existence; and perhaps the opposite of this statement indicates the 
impossibility better still, namely, that He should have no power at one time 
but power at another, and that He could be called powerful only at definite 
limited times, although He is ark eternal and perpetual being. And then we 
have the old question again whether the world may be either eternal or 
temporal, or whether the world cannot be eternal, or whether the world 
cannot be temporal, or whether the world may be temporal but certainly 
cannot be eternal, and whether, if the world is temporal, it can be a first act or 
not. And if reason has no power to pronounce for one of these opposite 
propositions, let us go back to tradition, but do not then regard this question 
as a rational one! We say that the First Cause cannot omit the best act and 
perform an inferior, because this would be an imperfection; but can there be a 


100 


greater imperfection than to assume the act of the Eternal as finite and 
limited, like the act of a temporal product, although a limited act can only be 
imagined of a limited agent, not of the eternal agent whose existence and 
action are unlimited? .All this, as you see, cannot be unknown to the man who 
has even the slightest understanding of the rational. And how can it be 
thought that the present act proceeding from the Eternal cannot be preceded 
by another act, and again by another, and so in our thinking infinitely, like the 
infinite continuation of His existence? For it is a necessary consequence that 
the act of Him whose existence time cannot measure nor comprehend in 
either direction cannot be comprehended in time nor measured by a limited 
duration. For there is no being whose act is delayed after its existence, except 
when there is an impediment which prevents its existence from attaining its 
perfection,’ or, in voluntary beings, when there is an obstruction in the 
execution of their choice. He, therefore, who assumes that from the Eternal 
there proceeds only a temporal act presumes that His act is constrained in a 
certain way and in this way therefore does not depend on His choice. 


THE THIRD PROOF FOR THE ETERNITY OF THE 
WORLD 


Ghazali says: 


They insist on saying: The existence of the world is possible 
before its existence, as it is absurd that it should be impossible 
and then become possible; this possibility has no beginning, it 
is eternally unchangeable and the existence of the world 
remains eternally possible, for at no time whatever can the 
existence of the world be described as impossible; and if the 
possibility never ceases, the possible, in conformity with the 
possibility, never ceases either; and the meaning of the 
sentence, that the existence of the world is possible, is that the 
existence of the world is not impossible; and since its existence 
is eternally possible, it is never impossible, for if it were ever 
impossible, it would not be true that the existence of the world 
is eternally possible; and if it were not true that the existence of 


101 


the world is eternally possible, it would not be true that its 
possibility never ceases; and if it were not true that its 
possibility never ceases, it would be true that its possibility had 
begun; and if it were true that its possibility had begun, its 
existence before this beginning would not be possible and that 
would lead to the assumption of a time when the world was not 
possible and God had no power over it. 


I say: 


He who concedes that the world before its existence was of a never-ceasing 
possibility must admit that the world is eternal, for the assumption that what 
is eternally possible is eternally existent implies no absurdity. What can 
possibly exist eternally must necessarily exist eternally, for what can receive 
eternity cannot become corruptible, except if it were possible that the 
corruptible could become eternal. Therefore Aristotle has said that the 
possibility in the eternal beings is necessary.’ 


Ghazali says: 


The objection is that it is said that the temporal becoming of 
the world never ceased to be possible, and certainly there is no 
time at which its becoming could not be imagined. But although 
it could be at any time, it did not become at any time whatever, 
for reality does not conform to possibility, but differs from it. 
You yourself hold, for instance, in the matter of place, that the 
world could be bigger than it is or that the creation of an 
infinite series of bodies above the world is possible, and that 
there is no limit to the possibilities of increase in the size of the 
world, but still the actual existence of absolutely infinite 
occupied space and of any infinite and limitless being is 
impossible. What is said to be possible is an actual body of a 
limited surface, but the exact size of this body, whether it is 
larger or smaller, is not specified. In the same way, what is 
possible is the coming into existence of the world in time, but 


the exact time of its coming into existence whether earlier or 


102 


later, is not specified. The principle of its having come into 
being is specified and this is the possible, nothing else.’ 


I say: 


The man who assumes that before the existence of the world there was one 
unique, never-ceasing possibility must concede that the world is eternal. The 
man who affirms, like Ghazali in his answer, that before the world there was 
an infinite number of possibilities of worlds, has certainly to admit that before 
this world there was another world and before this second world a third, and 
so on ad infinitum, as is the case with human beings, and especially when it is 
assumed that the perishing of the earlier is the necessary condition for the 
existence of the later. For instance, if God had the power to create another 
world before this, and before this second world yet another, the series must 
continue infinitely, or else we should arrive at a world before which no other 
world could have been created (however, the theologians do not affirm this 
nor use it as a proof for the temporal production of the world). Although the 
assumption that before this world there might be an infinite number of others 
does not seem an impossible one, it appears after closer examination to be 
absurd, for it would follow from it that the universe had the nature of an 
individual person in this transitory world, so that its procession from the First 
Principle would be like the procession of the individual person from Him-that 
is to say, through an eternal moving body and an eternal motion. But then this 
world would be part of another world, like the transient beings in this world, 
and then necessarily either we end finally in a world individually eternal or we 
have an infinite series. And if we have to bring this series to a standstill, it is 
more appropriate to arrest it at this world, by regarding it as eternally unique. 


THE FOURTH PROOF 


Ghazali says: 


The fourth proof is that they say everything that becomes is 
preceded by the matter which is in it, for what becomes cannot 
be free from matter.’ For this reason matter never becomes; 


what becomes is only the form, the accidents and the qualities 


103 


which add themselves to matters The proof is that the existence 
of each thing that becomes must, before its becoming, either be 
possible, impossible, or necessary: it cannot be impossible, for 
the essentially impossible will never exist; it cannot be 
necessary, for the essentially necessary will never be in a state 
of non-existence, and therefore it is the essentially possible.’ 
Therefore, the thing which becomes has before its becoming the 
possibility of becoming, but the possibility of becoming is an 
attribute which needs a relation and has no subsistence in 
itself’ It needs, therefore, a substratum with which it can be 
connected, and there is no substratum except matter, and it 
becomes connected with it in the way in which we say this 
matter receives warmth and coldness, or black and white, or 
movement and rest, i.e. it is possible that these qualities and 
these changes occur in it and therefore possibility is an 
attribute of matter. Matter does not possess other matter, and 
cannot become; for, if it did, the possibility of its existence 
would precede its existence, and possibility would subsist by 
itself without being related to anything else, whereas it is a 
relative attribute which cannot be understood as subsisting by 
itself. And it cannot be said that the meaning of possibility 
amounts to what can be done and what the Eternal had the 
power to do, because we know only that a thing can be done, 
because it is possible, and we say ‘this can be done because it is 
possible and cannot be done because it is not possible’; and if 
‘this is possible’ meant ‘this can be done’, to say ‘this can be 
done because it is possible’ would mean ‘this is possible 
because it is possible’, and this is a circular definition; and this 
shows that ‘this is possible’ is a first judgement in the mind, 
evident in itself, which makes the second judgement ‘that it can 
be done’ intelligible. It cannot be said, either, that to be possible 
refers to the knowledge of the Eternal, for knowledge depends 
on a thing known, whereas possibility is undoubtedly an object 
of knowledge, not knowledge; further, it is a relative attribute, 
and needs something to which it can be related, and this can 


104 


only be matter, and everything that becomes is preceded by 


matter. 
I say: 


The summary of this is that everything that becomes is possible before it 
becomes, and that possibility needs something for its subsistence, namely, the 
substratum which receives that which is possible. For it must not be believed 
that the possibility of the recipient is the same as the possibility of the agent. 
It is a different thing to say about Zaid, the agent, that he can do something 
and to say about the patient that it can have something done to it. Thus the 
possibility of the patient is a necessary condition for the possibility of the 
agent, for the agent which cannot act is not possible but impossible. Since it is 
impossible that the possibility prior to the thing’s becoming should be 
absolutely without substratum, or that the agent should be its substratum or 
the thing possible-for the thing possible loses its possibility, when it becomes 
actual-there only remains as a vehicle for possibility the recipient of the 
possible, i.e. matter. Matter, in so far as it is matter, does not become; for if it 
did it would need other matter and we should have an infinite regress. Matter 
only becomes in so far as it is combined with form. Everything that comes 
into being comes into being from something else, and this must either give 
rise to an infinite regress and lead directly to infinite matter which is 
impossible, even if we assume an eternal mover, for there is no actual infinite; 
or the forms must be interchangeable in the ingenerable and incorruptible 
substratum, eternally and in rotation.’ There must, therefore, be an eternal 
movement which produces this interchange in the eternally transitory things. 
And therefore it is clear that the generation of the one in each pair of 
generated beings is the corruption of the other; otherwise a thing could come 
into being from nothing, for the meaning of ‘becoming’ is the alteration of a 
thing and its change, from what it has potentially, into actuality. It is not 
possible that the privation itself should change into the existent, and it is not 
the privation of which it is said that it has become. There exists, therefore, a 
substratum for the contrary forms, and it is in this substratum that the forms 
interchange. 


Ghazali says: 


105 


The objection is that the possibility of which they speak is a 
judgement of the intellect, and anything whose existence the 
intellect supposes, provided no obstacle presents itself to the 
supposition, we call possible and, if there is such an obstacle, 
we call it impossible and, if we suppose that it cannot be 
supposed not to be, we call it necessary. These are rational 
judgements which need no real existent which they might 
qualify. There are three proofs of this. The first is: If possibility 
needed an existent to which it could be related, and of which it 
could be said that it is its possibility, impossibility also would 
need an existent of which it might be said that it is its 
impossibility; but impossibility has no real existence, and there 
is no matter in which it occurs and to which it could be related. 


I say: 


That possibility demands an existing matter is clear, for all true intellectual 
concepts need a thing outside the soul, for truth, as it has been defined, is the 
agreement of what is in the soul with what is outside the soul.’ And when we 
say that something is possible, we cannot but understand that it needs 
something in which this possibility can be. As regards his proof that the 
possible is not dependent on an existent, because the impossible is not 
dependent on an existent, this is sophistical. Indeed the impossible demands a 
substratum just as much as the possible does, and this is clear from the fact 
that the impossible is the opposite of the possible and opposite contraries 
undoubtedly require a substratum. For impossibility is the negation of 
possibility, and, if possibility needs a substratum, impossibility which is the 
negation of this possibility requires a substratum too, e.g. we say that the 
existence of empty space is impossible, because the existence of independent 
dimensions outside or inside natural bodies is impossible, or that the 
presence of opposites at the same time in the same substratum is impossible, 
or that the equivalence of one to two is impossible, i.e. in reality. All this is 
self-evident, and it is not necessary to consider the errors here committed. 


Ghazali says: 


106 


The second proof is that the intellect decides that black and 
white are possible before they exist.’ If this possibility were 
related to the body in which they inhere, so that it might be said 
that the meaning is that this body can be black and white, then 
white would not be possible by itself and possibility would be 
related only to the body. But we affirm, as concerns the 
judgement about black in itself, as to whether it is possible, 
necessary, or impossible, that we, without doubt, will say that it 
is possible. And this shows that the intellect in order to decide 
whether something is possible need not admit an existing thing 
to which the possibility can be related. 


I say 


This is a sophism. For the possible is predicated of the recipient and of the 
inherent quality. In so far as it is predicated of the substratum, its opposite is 
the impossible, and in so far as it is predicated of the inherent, its opposite is 
the necessary.’ Thus the possible which is described as being the opposite of 
the impossible is not that which abandons its possibility so far as it is 
actualized, when it becomes actual, because this latter loses its possibility in 
the actualizing process.’ This latter possible is only described by possibility in 
so far as it is in potency, and the vehicle of this potency is the substratum 
which changes from existence in potency into existence in actuality.’ This is 
evident from the definition of the possible that it is the nonexistence which is 
in readiness to exist or not to exists This possible non-existent is possible 
neither in so far as it is non-existent nor in so far as it is actually existent. It is 
only possible in so far as it is in potency, and for this reason the Mu’tazilites 
affirm that the nonexistent is a kind of entity. For non-existence is the 
opposite of existence, and each of the two is succeeded by the other, and when 
the non-existence of a thing disappears it is followed by its existence, and 
when its existence disappears it is succeeded by its non-existence. As non- 


existence by itself cannot change into existence, and existence 


by itself cannot change into non-existence, there must be a third entity 
which is the recipient for both of them, and that is what is described by 
‘possibility’ and ‘becoming’ and ‘change from the quality of non-existence to 


107 


the quality of existence’. For non-existence itself is not described by 
‘becoming’ or ‘change’; nor is the thing that has become actual described in 
this way, for what becomes loses the quality of becoming, change, and 
possibility when it has become actual. Therefore there must necessarily be 
something that can be described by ‘becoming’ and ‘change’ and ‘transition 
from nonexistence to existence’, as happens in the passage of opposites into 
opposites; that is to say, there must be a substratum for them in which they 
can interchange-with this one difference, however, that this substratum exists 
in the interchange of all the accidents in actuality, whereas in the substance it 
exists in potency.’ 


And we cannot think of regarding what is described by ‘possibility and 
‘change’ as identical with the actual, i.e. which belongs to the becoming in so 
far as it is actual, for the former again vanishes and the latter must necessarily 
be a part of the product. Therefore there must necessarily be a substratum 
which is the recipient for the possibility and which is the vehicle of the change 
and the becoming, and it is this of which it is said that it becomes, and alters, 
and changes from non-existence into existence. Nor can we think of making 
this substratum of the nature of the actualized, for if this were the case the 
existent would not become, for what becomes comes into being from the non- 
existent not from the existent.’ Both philosophers and Mu’ tazilites agree about 
the existence of this entity; only the philosophers are of the opinion that it 
cannot be exempt from a form actually existent, i.e. that it cannot be free from 
existence, like the transition, for example, from sperma to blood and the 
transition from blood to the members of the embryo. The reason is that if it 
were exempt from existence it would have an existence of its own, and if it had 
an existence of its own, becoming could not come from it. This entity is called 
by the philosophers ‘lyle’, and it is the cause of generation and corruption. 
And according to the philosophers an existent which is free from Kyle is 
neither generable nor corruptible. 


Ghazali says: 


The third proof is that the souls of men, according to the 
philosophers, are substances which subsist by themselves’ 
without being in a body or in matter or impressed on matters 


108 


they had a beginning in time, according to the theory of 
Avicenna and the acknowledged philosophers, they had 
possibility before their beginning, but they have neither essence 
nor matter’ and their possibility is a relative attribute, 
dependent neither on God’s power nor on the Agent;’ but on 
what then is it dependent? The difficulties are therefore turned 
against them themselves. 


I say: 


I do not know any philosopher who said that the soul has a beginning in 
the true sense of the word and is thereafter everlasting except -as Ghazali 
relates-Avicenna. All other philosophers agree that in their temporal existence 
they are related to and connected with the bodily possibilities, which receive 
this connexion like the possibilities which subsist in mirrors for their 
connexion with the rays of the suns According to the philosophers this 
possibility is not of the nature of the generable and corruptible forms, but of a 
kind to which, according to them, demonstrative proof leads, and the vehicle 
of this possibility is of another nature than the nature of the Kyle. He alone 
can grasp their theories in these matters who has read their books and 
fulfilled the conditions there laid down by them, and has besides a sound 
understanding and a learned master. That Ghazali should touch on such 
questions in this way is not worthy of such a man, but there are only these 
alternatives: either he knew these matters in their true nature, and sets them 
out here wrongly, which is wicked; or he did not understand their real nature 
and touched on problems he had not grasped, which is the act of an 
ignoramus. However, he stands too high in our eyes for either of these 
qualifications. But even the best horse will stumble’ and it was a stumble of 
Ghazali’s that he brought out this book. But perhaps he was forced to do so by 
the conditions of his time and his situation. 


Ghazali says, speaking on behalf of the philosophers: 


It may be said: To reduce possibility to a judgement of the 
intellect is absurd, for the meaning of ‘judgement of the 
intellect? is nothing but the knowledge of possibility, and 
possibility is an object of knowledge, not knowledge itself; 


109 


knowledge, on the contrary, comprises possibility and follows it 
and depends on it as it is, and if knowledge vanished the object 
of knowledge would not, but the disappearance of the object of 
knowledge would imply the disappearance of knowledge. For 
knowledge and the object-known are two things, the former 
dependent on the latter, and if we supposed rational beings to 
turn away from possibility and neglect it, we should say: ‘It is 
not possibility that is annulled, for the possibilities subsist by 
themselves, but it is simply that minds neglect them or that 
minds and rational beings have disappeared; but possibility 
remains, without any doubt.’ And the three proofs are not valid, 
for impossibility requires an existent to which it can be related, 
and impossibility means identifying two opposites, and if the 
substratum were white it could not become black as long as the 
white existed, and therefore we need a substratum, qualified by 
the quality during the inherence of which its opposite is spoken 
of as impossible in this substratum, and therefore impossibility 
is a relative attribute subsistent in a substratum and related to 
it. And where the necessary is concerned it is evident that it is 
related to necessary existence. 


As concerns the second proof, that black is in itself possible, 
this is a mistake, for if it is taken, abstracted from the 
substratum in which it inheres, it is impossible, not possible; it 
only becomes possible when it can become a form in a body; the 
body is then in readiness for the interchange, and the 
interchange is possible for the body; but in itself black has no 
individuality, so as to be characterizable by possibility. 


As concerns the third proof about the soul, it is eternal for 
one school of philosophers, and is only possible in the attaching 
of itself to bodies, and therefore against those philosophers the 
argument does not apply= But for those who admit that the 
soul comes into existence-and one school of philosophers has 
believed that it is impressed on matter and follows its 
temperament, as is indicated by Galen in certain passages-it 


110 


comes into existence in matter and its possibility is related to 
its matter.’ And according to the theory of those who admit that 
it comes into existence, although it is not impressed on matter- 
which means that it is possible for the rational soul to direct 
matter-the possibility prior to the becoming is relative to 
matter , and although the soul is not impressed on matter, it is 
attached to it, for it is its directing principle and uses it as an 
instrument, and in this way its possibility is relative to matters 


I say 


What he says in this section is true, as will be clear to you from our 
explanation of the nature of the possible. 


Then Ghazali, objecting to the philosophers, says: 


And the answer is: To reduce possibility, necessity, and 
impossibility to rational concepts is correct, and as for the 
assertion that the concepts of reason form its knowledge, and 
knowledge implies a thing known, let them be answered: it 
cannot be said that receptivity of colour and animality and the 
other concepts, which are fixed in the mind according to the 
philosophers-and this is what constitutes the sciences-have no 
objects ; still these objects have no real existence in the external 
world, and the philosophers arc certainly right in saying that 
universals exist only in the mind, not in the external world, and 
that in the external world there arc only particular individuals, 
which arc apprehended by the senses, not by reason; and yet 
these individuals arc the reason why the mind abstracts from 
them a concept separated from its rational matter; therefore 
receptivity of colour is a concept, separate in the mind from 
blackness and whiteness, although in reality a colour which is 
neither black nor white nor of another colour cannot be 
imagined,’ and receptivity of colour is fixed in the mind without 
any specification-now, in the same way, it can be said that 


possibility is a form which exists in minds, not in the exterior 


111 


world, and if this is not impossible for other concepts,, there is 
no impossibility in what we have said. 


I say: 


This argument is sophistical because possibility is a universal which has 
individuals outside the mind like all the other universals, and knowledge is 
not knowledge of the universal concept, but it is a knowledge of individuals in 
a universal way which the mind attains in the case of the individuals, when it 
abstracts from them one common nature which is distributed among the 
different matters. The nature, therefore, of the universal is not identical with 
the nature of the things of which it is a universal. Ghazali is here in error, for 
he assumes that the nature of possibility is the nature of the universal, 
without there being individuals on which this universal, i.e. the universal 
concept of possibility, depends. The universal, however, is not the object of 
knowledge; on the contrary through it the things become known, although it 
exists potentially in the nature of the things known;’ otherwise its 
apprehension of the individuals, in so far as they are universals, would be 
false. This apprehension would indeed be false if the nature of the object 
known were essentially individual, not accidentally individual, whereas the 
opposite is the case: it is accidentally individual, essentially universal. 
Therefore if the mind did not apprehend the individuals in so far as they are 
universal, it would be in error and make false judgements about them. But if it 
abstracts those natures which subsist in the individual things from their 
matter, and makes them universal, then it is possible that it judges them 
rightly; otherwise it would confuse those natures, of which the possible is one. 


The theory of the philosophers that universals exist only in the mind, not 
in the external world, only means that the universals exist actually only in the 
mind, and not in the external world, not that they do not exist at all in the 
external world, for the meaning is that they exist potentially, not actually in 
the external world; indeed, if they did not exist at all in the outside world they 
would be false. Since universals exist outside the mind in potency and 
possibilities exist outside the soul in potency, the nature of universals in 
regard 


112 


to this resembles that of possibilities. And for this reason Ghazali tried to 
deceive people by a sophism, for he compared possibility to the universals 
because of their both being potentially in reality, and then he assumed that 
the philosophers assert that universals do not exist at all outside the soul; 
from which he deduced that possibility does not exist outside the soul. What 
an ugly and crude sophism! 


Ghazali says: 


As regards their assertion that, if it were assumed that 
rational beings had vanished or had neglected possibility, 
possibility itself would not have disappeared, we answer: ‘If it 
were assumed that they had vanished, would not the universal 
concepts, i.e. the genera and species, have disappeared too?’ and 
if they agree to this, this can only mean that universals are only 
concepts in the mind; but this is exactly what we say about 
possibility, and there is no difference between the two cases; if 
they, however, affirm that they are permanent in the knowledge 
of God,’ the same may be said about possibility, and the 
argument is valid, and our aim of showing the contradiction in 


this theory has been attained. 
I say: 


This argument shows his foolishness and proneness to contradiction. The 
most plausible form in which it might be expressed would be to base it on two 
premisses: the first, that the evident proposition that possibility is partially 
individual, namely, outside the soul, partially universal, namely, the universal 
concept of the individual possibles, is not true; and the second, that it was said 
that the nature of the individual possibles outside the soul is identical with the 
nature of the universal of possibility in the mind; and in this case the possible 
would have neither a universal nor an individual nature, or else the nature of 
the individual would have to be identical with that of the universal. All this is 
presumptuous, and how should it be else, for in a way the universal has an 
existence outside the soul. 


Ghazali says: 


113 


And as regards their subterfuge where the impossible is 
concerned, that it is related to the matter qualified by its 
opposite, as it cannot take the place of its opposite this cannot 
be the case with every impossible, for that God should have a 
rival is impossible, but there is no matter to which this 
impossibility could be related. If they say the impossibility of 
God’s having a rival, means that the solitude of God in His 
essence and His uniqueness are necessary and that this solitude 
is proper to Him, we answer: This is not necessary, for the 
world exists with Him, and He is therefore not solitary. And if 
they say that His solitude so far as a rival is concerned is 
necessary, and that the opposite of the necessary is the 
impossible, and that the impossible is related to Him, we 
answer: In this case the solitude of God in regard to the world is 
different from His solitude in regard to His equal and in this 
case His solitude in regard to His rival is necessary, and in 
regard to the created world not necessary.’ 


I say: 


All this is vain talk, for it cannot be doubted that the judgments of the 
mind have value only in regard to the nature of things outside the soul. If 
there were outside the soul nothing possible or impossible, the judgment of 
the mind that things are possible or impossible would be of as much value as 
no judgment at all, and there would be no difference between reason and 
illusion. And that there should be a rival to God is just as impossible in reality 
as God’s existence is i necessary in reality. But there is no sense in wasting 


more words on this question. 
Ghazali says: 


The subterfuge concerning the becoming of the souls is 
worthless too, for they have individual essences and a 
possibility prior to their becoming, and at that time there is 
nothing with which they could be brought into relation. Their 
argument contends that it is possible for matter that the souls 
direct it is a remote relation and, if this satisfies you, you might 


114 


as well say that the possibility of the souls becoming lies in the 
power of Him who can on His own authority produce them, for 
the souls are then related to the Agent-although they are not 
impressed on Him-in the same way as to the body, on which 
they are not impressed either. And since the imprint is made 
neither on the one substrate nor on the other, there is no 
difference between the relation to the agent and that to the 


patient. 
I say: 


He wants to force those who assume the possibility of the soul’s becoming 
without there being an imprint in matter to concede that the possibility in the 
recipient is like the possibility in the agent, because the act proceeds from the 
agent and therefore these two possibilities are similar. But this is a shocking 
supposition, for, according to it, the soul would come to the body as if it 
directed it from the outside, as the artisan directs his product, and the soul 
would not be a form in the body, just as the artisan is not a form in his 
product. The answer is that it is not impossible that there should be amongst i 
the entelechies which conduct themselves like formsb something that is 
separate from its substratum as the steersman is from his ships and the 
artisan from his tool, and if the body is like the instrument of the 


soul, the soul is a separate form, and then the possibility which is in the 
instrument is not like the possibility which is in the agent; no, the instrument 
is in both conditions, the possibility which is in the patient and the possibility 
which is in the agent, and therefore the instruments are the mover and the 
moved, and in so far as they are the mover, there is in them the possibility 
which is in the agent, and in so far as they are moved, the possibility which is 
in the recipient.’ But the supposition that the soul is a separate entity does not 
force them into the admission that the possibility which is in the recipient is 
identical= with the possibility which is in the agent. Besides, the possibility 
which according to the philosophers is in the agent is not only a rational 
judgement, but refers to something outside the soul. Therefore his argument 
does not gain by assimilating one of these two possibilities to the other. And 
since Ghazali knew that all these arguments have no other effect than to bring 


115 


doubts and perplexity to those who cannot solve them-which is an act of 
wicked sophists, he says: 


And if it is said you have taken good care in all your 
objections to oppose the difficulties by other difficulties, but 
nothing of what you yourself have adduced is free from 
difficulty, we answer: the objections do show the falsity of an 
argument, no doubt, and certain aspects of the problem are 
solved in stating the opposite view and its foundation. We have 
not committed ourselves to anything more than to upsetting 
their theories, and to showing the faults in the consequence of 
their proofs so as to demonstrate their incoherence. We do not 
seek to attack from any definite point of view, and we shall not 
transgress the aim of this book, nor give full proofs for the 
temporal production of the world, for our intention is merely to 
refute their alleged knowledge of its eternity. But after finishing 
this book we shall, if it pleases God, devote a work to 
establishing the doctrine of truth, and we call it ‘The Golden 
Mean in Dogmatic Beliefs’, in which we shall be engaged in 
building up, as in this book we have been in destroying. 


I say: 


To oppose difficulty with difficulty does not bring about destruction, but 
only perplexity and doubts in him who acts in this way, for why should he 
think one of the two conflicting theories reasonable and the opposite one 
vain? Most of the arguments with which this man Ghazali opposes the 
philosophers are doubts which arise when certain parts of the doctrine of the 
philosophers come into conflict with others, and when those differences are 
compared with each other; but this is an imperfect refutation. A perfect 
refutation would be one that succeeded in showing the futility of their system 
according to the facts themselves, not such a one as, for instance, his 
assumption that it is permissible for the opponents of the philosophers to 
claim that possibility is a mental concept in the same way as the philosophers 
claim this for the universal. For if the truth of this comparison between the 


two were conceded, it would not follow that it was untrue that possibility was 


116 


a concept dependent on reality, but only either that the universal existed in 
the mind only was not true, or that possibility existed in the mind only was 
not true. Indeed, it would have been necessary for him to begin by 
establishing the truth, before starting to perplex and confuse his readers, for 
they might die before they could get hold of that book, or he might have died 
himself before writing it. But this book has not yet come into my hands’ and 
perhaps he never composed it, and he only says that he does not base this 
present book on any doctrine, in order that it should not be thought that he 
based it on that of the Ash’arites. It appears from the books ascribed to him 
that in metaphysics he recurs to the philosophers. And of all his books this is 
most clearly shown and most truly proved in his book called The Niche for 
Lights. 








THE SECOND DISCUSSION 








THE REFUTATION OF THEIR THEORY OF THE 
INCORRUPTIBILITY OF THE WORLD AND OF TIME AND 
MOTION 


Ghazali says: 


Know that this is part of the first question, for according to 
the philosophers the existence of the world, having no 
beginning, does not end either; it is eternal, without a final 
term. Its disappearance and its corruption cannot be imagined; 
it never began to exist in the condition in which it exists’ and it 


will never cease to exist in the condition in which it exists. 


Their four arguments which we have mentioned in our 


discussion of its eternity in the past refer also to its eternity in 


117 


the future, and the objection is the same without any difference. 
They say that the world is caused, and that its cause is without 
beginning or end, and that this applies both to the effect and to 
the cause, and that, if the cause does not change, the effect 
cannot change either; upon this they build their proof of the 
impossibility of its beginning, and the same applies to its 
ending. This is their first proof. 


The second proof is that an eventual annihilation of the 
world must occur alter its existence, but ‘after’ implies an 


affirmation of time. 


The third proof is that the possibility of its existence does 
not end, and that therefore its possible existence may conform 
to the possibility.’ But this argument has no force, for we regard 
it as impossible that the world should not have begun, but we 
do not regard it as impossible that it should last eternally, if 
God should make it last eternally, for it is not necessary that 
what begins has also an end, although it is necessary for an act 
to have a beginning and an initial term. Only Abu Hudhail al- 
Allaf thought that the world must needs have an end, and he 
said that, as in the past infinite circular movements are 
impossible, so they are in the future s but this is wrong, for the 
whole of the future never enters into existence either 
simultaneously or successively, whereas the whole of the past is 
there simultaneously but not successively.’ And since it is clear 
that we do not regard the incorruptibility of the world as 
impossible from a rational point of view-we regard indeed its 
incorruptibility and corruptibility as equally possible-we know 
only through the Divine Law which of the two possibilities will 
be realized. Therefore let us not try to solve this problem by 


mere reason! 
I say: 


His assertion that the argument of the philosophers for the eternity of the 
world in the past applies also to its eternity in the future is true, and equally 


118 


the second argument applies to both cases. But his assertion that the third 
argument is not equally valid for the future and for the past, that indeed we 
regard the becoming of the world in the past as impossible, but that with the 
exception of Abu Hudhail al-Allaf, who thought that the eternity of the world 
was impossible in either direction, we do not regard its eternity in the future 
as absolutely impossible, is not true. For when it was conceded to the 
philosophers that the possibility of the world had no beginning and that with 
this possibility a condition of extension, which could measure this possibility, 
was connected in the same way as this condition of extension is connected 
with the possible existent, when it is actualized, and it was also evident that 
this extension had no initial term, the philosophers were convinced that time 
had no initial term, for this extension is nothing but time, and to call it 
timeless eternitys is senseless. And since time is connected with possibility 
and possibility with existence in motion, existence in motion has no first term 
either. And the assertion of the theologians that everything which existed in 
the past had a first term is futile, for the First exists in the past eternally, as it 
exists eternally in the future. And their distinction here between the first term 
and its acts requires a proof, for the existence of the temporal which occurs in 
the past is different from the existence of the eternal which occurs in the past. 
For the temporal which has occurred in the past is finite in both directions, 
i.e. it has a beginning and an end, but the eternal which has occurred in the 
past has neither beginning nor end.’ And therefore, since the philosophers 
have not admitted that the circular movement has a beginning, they cannot be 
forced to admit that it has an end, for they do not regard its existence in the 
past as transitory, and, if some philosopher does regard it as such, he 
contradicts himself and therefore the statement is true that everything that 
has a beginning has an end. That anything could have a beginning and no end 
is not true, unless the possible could be changed into the eternal, for 
everything that has a beginning is possible. And that anything could be liable 
to corruption and at the same time could be capable of eternity is something 
incomprehensible’ and stands in need of examination. The ancient 
philosophers indeed examined this problem, and Abu Hudhail agrees with the 
philosophers in saying that whatever can be generated is corruptible, and he 
kept strictly to the consequence which follows from the acceptance of the 
principle of becoming. As to those who make a distinction between the past 


119 


and the future, because what is in the past is there in its totality, whereas the 
future never enters into existence in its totality (for the future enters reality 
only successively), this is deceptive, for what is in reality past is that which has 
entered time and that which has entered time has time beyond it in both 
directions and possesses totality. But that which has never entered the past in 
the way the temporal enters the past can only be said in an equivocal way to 
be in the past; it is infinitely extended, with the past rather than in the past, 
and possesses no totality in itself, although its parts are totalities. And this, if 
it has no initial term beginning in the past, is in fact time itself. For each 
temporal beginning is a present, and each present is preceded by a past, and 
both that which exists commensurable with time, and time commensurable 
with it, must necessarily be infinite. Only the parts of time which are limited 
by time in both directions can enter the past, in the same way as only the 
instant which is everchanging and only the instantaneous motion of a thing in 
movement in the spatial magnitude in which it moves can really enter the 
existence of the moved.’ And just as we do not say that the past of what never 
ceased to exist in the past ever entered existence at an instant-for this would 
mean that its existence had a beginning and that time limited it in both 
directions-so it stands with that which is simultaneous with time, not in time. 
For of the circular movements only those that time limits enter into 
represented existence, but those that are simultaneous with time do not 
afterwards enter past existence, just as the eternally existent does not enter 
past existence, since no time limits it. And when one imagines an eternal 
entity whose acts are not delayed after its existence-as indeed must be the case 
with any entity whose existence is perfect-then, if it is eternal and does not 
enter past time, it follows necessarily that its acts also cannot enter past time, 
for if they did they would be finite and this eternal existent would be eternally 
inactive and what is eternally inactive is necessarily impossible. And it is most 
appropriate for an entity, whose existence does not enter time and which is 
not limited by time, that its acts should not enter existence either, because 
there is no difference between the entity and its acts. If the movements of the 
celestial bodies and what follows from them are acts of an eternal entity, the 
existence of which does not enter the past, then its acts do not enter past time 
either. For it is not permissible to say of anything that is eternal that it has 
entered past time, nor that it has ended, for that which has an end has a 


120 


beginning. For indeed, our statement that it is eternal means the denial of its 
entering past time and of its having had a beginning. He who, assuming that it 
entered past time, assumes that it must have a beginning begs the question. It 
is, therefore, untrue that what is coexistent with eternal existence, has entered 
existence, unless the eternal existence has entered existence by entering past 
time. Therefore our statement ‘everything past must have entered existence’ 
must be understood in two ways: first, that which has entered past existence 
must have entered existence, and this is a true statement; secondly, that which 
is past and is inseparably connected with eternal existence cannot be truly 
said to have entered existence, for our expression ‘entered existence’ is 
incompatible with our expression ‘connected with eternal existence’. And 
there is here no difference between act and existence. For he who concedes the 
existence of an entity which has an eternal past must concede that there exist 
acts, too, which have no beginning in the past. And it by no means follows 
from the existence of His acts that they must have entered existence, just as it 
by no means follows from the past permanency of His essence that He has 
ever entered existence. And all this is perfectly clear, as you see. 


Through this First Existent acts can exist which never began and will never 
cease, and if this were impossible for the act, it would be impossible, too, for 
existence, for every act is connected with its existent in existence. The 
theologians, however, regarded it as impossible that God’s act should be 
eternal, although they regarded His existence as eternal, and that is the 
gravest error. To apply the expression ‘production’ for the world’s creation as 
the Divine Law does is more appropriate than to use it of temporal 
production, as the Ash/’arites did,’ for the act, in so far as it is an act, is a 
product, and eternity is only represented in this act because this production 
and the act produced have neither beginning nor end. And I say that it was 
therefore difficult for Muslims to call God eternal and the world eternal, 
because they understood by ‘eternal’ that which has no cause. Still I have seen 
some of the theologians tending rather to our opinion. 


Ghazali says: 


Their fourth proof is similar to the third, for they say that if 
the world were annihilated the possibility of its existence would 


121 


remain, as the possible cannot become impossible. This 
possibility is a relative attribute and according to them 
everything that becomes needs matter which precedes it and 
everything that vanishes needs matter from which it can vanish, 
but the matter and the elements do not vanish, only the forms 


and accidents vanish which were in them. 
I say: 


If it is assumed that the forms succeed each other in one substratum in a 
circular way and that the agent of this succession is an eternal one, nothing 
impossible follows from this assumption. But if this succession is assumed to 
take place in an infinite number of matters or through an infinite number of 
specifically different forms, it is impossible, and equally the assumption is 
impassible that such a succession could occur without an eternal agent or 
through a temporal agent. For if there were an infinite number of matters, an 
actual infinite would exist, and this is impossible. It is still more absurd to 
suppose that this succession could occur through temporal agents, and 
therefore from this point of view it is only true that a man must become from 
another man, on condition that the successive series happens in one and the 
same matter and the perishing of the curlier men can become the matter of 
the later. Besides, the existence of the earlier men is also in some respect the 
efficient cause and the instrument for the later-all this, however, in an 
accidental way, for those men are nothing but the instrument for the Agent, 
who does not cease to produce a man by means of a man and through the 
matter of a man. The student who does not distinguish all these points will 
not be able to free himself from insoluble doubts. Perhaps God will place you 
and us among those who have reached the utmost truth concerning what may 
and must be taught about God’s infinite acts. What I have said about all these 
things is not proved here, but must be examined by the application of the 
conditions which the ancients have explained and the rules which they have 
established for scientific research. Besides, he who would like to be one of 
those who possess the truth should in any question he examines consult those 
who hold divergent opinions.’ 


Ghazali says: 


122 


The answer to all this has been given above. I only single out 
this question because they have two proofs for it. 


The first proof is that given by Galen, who says: If the sun, 
for instance, were liable to annihilation, decay would appear in 
it over a long period. But observation for thousands of years 
shows no change in its size and the fact that it has shown no 
loss of power through such a long time shows that it does not 
suffer corruption.’ There are two objections to this: The first is 
that the mode of this proof-that if the sun suffers corruption, it 
must suffer loss of power, and as the consequence is impossible 
the antecedent must be impossible too-is what the philosophers 
call a conjunctive hypothetical proposition,’ and this inference 
is not conclusive, because its antecedent is not true, unless it is 
connected with another condition. In other words the falsehood 
of the consequence of the proposition ‘if the sun suffers 
corruption, it must become weaker’ does not imply the 
falsehood of the antecedent, unless either (z) the antecedent is 
bound up with the additional condition that, if it suffers 
corruption through decay, it must do so during a long period, 
or () it is seriously proved that there is no corruption except 
through decay. For only then does the falsehood of the 
consequence imply the falsehood of the antecedent. Now, we do 
not concede that a thing can only become corrupt through 
decay; decay is only one form of corruption, for it is not 
impossible that what is in a state of perfection should suddenly 
suffer corruption. 


I say: 


He says in his objection here to this argument that there is no necessary 
relation between antecedent and consequent, because that which suffers 
corruption need not become weaker, since it can suffer corruption before it 
has become weaker. The conclusion, however, is quite sound, when it is 
assumed that the corruption takes place in a natural way, not by violence, and 
it is assumed besides that the celestial body is an animal, for all animals super 


123 


corruption only in a natural way-they necessarily decay before their 
corruption. However, our opponents do not accept these premisses, so far as 
they concern heaven, without proof. And therefore Galen’s statement is only 
of dialectical value. The safest way to use this argument is to say that, if 
heaven should suffer corruption, it would either disintegrate into the elements 
of which it is composed or, losing the form it possesses, receive another, as 
happens with the four elements when they change into one another. If, 
however, heaven passed away into the elements, those elements would have to 
be part of another world, for it could not have come into being from the 
elements contained in this world, since these elements are infinitely small, 
compared with its size, something like a point in relation to a circle.’ Should 
heaven, however, lose its form and receive another there would exist a sixth 
element opposed to all the others, being neither heaven, nor earth, nor water, 
nor air, nor fire. And all this is impossible. And his statement that heaven 
does not decay ; is only a common opinion, lacking the force of the 
immediately evident axioms; and it is explained in the Posterior Analytics of 
what kind these premisses area 


Ghazali says: 


The second objection is that, if it were conceded to Galen 
that there is no corruption except through decay, how can it be 
known that decay does not affect the sun? His reliance on 
observation is impossible, for observations determine the size 
only by approximation, and if the sun, whose size is said to be 
approximately a hundred and seventy times that of the earth, 
decreased, for instance, by the size of mountains the difference 
would not be perceptible to the senses. Indeed, it is perhaps 
already in decay, and has decreased up to the present by the 
size of mountains or more; but perception cannot ascertain 
this, for its knowledge in the science of optics works only by 
supposition and approximation. The same takes place with 
sapphire and gold, which, according to them, are composed out 
of elements and which are liable to corruption. Still, if you left a 
sapphire for a hundred years, its decrease would be 
imperceptible, and perhaps the decrease in the sun during the 


124 


period in which it has been observed stands in proportion to its 
size as the decrease of the sapphire to its size in a hundred 
years. This is imperceptible, and this fact shows that his proof is 


utterly futile. 


We have abstained from bringing many proofs of the same 
kind as the wise disdain. We have given only this one to serve as 
an example of what we have omitted, and the have restricted 
ourselves to the four proofs which demand that their solution 
should be attempted in the way indicated above. 


I say: 


If the sun had decayed and the parts of it which had disintegrated during 
the period of its observation were imperceptible because of the size of its 
body, still the effect of its decay on bodies in the sublunary world would be 
perceptible in a definite degree, for everything that decays does so only 
through the corruption and disintegration of its parts, and those parts which 
disconnect themselves from the decaying mass must necessarily remain in the 
world in their totality or change into other parts, and in either case an 
appreciable change must occur in the world, either in the number or in the 
character of its parts. And if the size of the bodies could change, their actions 
and affections would change too, and if their actions and affections, and 
especially those of the heavenly bodies, could change, changes would arise in 
the sublunary world. To imagine, therefore, a dissipation of the heavenly 
bodies is to admit a disarrangement in the divine order which, according to 
the philosopher, prevails in this world. This proof is not absolutely strict. 


Ghazali says: 


The philosophers have a second proof of the impossibility of 
the annihilation of the world. They say: The substance of the 
world could not be annihilated, because no cause could be 
imagined for this and the passage from existence to non- 
existence cannot take place without a cause. This cause must be 
either the Will of the Eternal, and this is impossible, for if He 
willed the annihilation of the world after not having willed it, 


He would have changed; or it must be assumed that God and 


125 


His Will are in all conditions absolutely the same, although the 
object of His Will changes from non-existence to existence and 
then again from existence to non-existence. And the 
impossibility of which we have spoken in the matter of a 
temporal existence through an eternal will, holds also for the 
problem of annihilation. But we shall add here a still greater 
difficulty, namely, that the object willed is without doubt an act 
of the wiper, for the act of him who acts after not having acted- 
even if he does not alter in his own nature-must necessarily 
exist after having not existed: if he remained absolutely in the 
state he was in before, his act would not be there. But when the 
world is annihilated, there is no object for God’s act, and if He 
does not perform anything (for annihilation is nothing), how 
could there be an action? Suppose the annihilation of the world 
needed a new act in God which did not exist before, what could 
such an act be? Could it be the existence of the world? But this is 
impossible, since what happens is on the contrary the 
termination of its existence. Could this act then be the 
annihilation of the world? But annihilation is nothing at all, and 
it could therefore not be an act. For even in its slightest 
intensity an act must be existent, but the annihilation of the 
world is nothing existent at all; how could it then be said that he 
who caused it was an agent, or he who effected it its cause? 


The philosophers say that to escape this difficulty the 
theologians are divided into four sects and that each sect falls 
into an absurdity. 


I say: 


He says here that the philosophers compel the theologians who admit the 
annihilation of the world to draw the consequence that from the Eternal, who 
produced the world, there proceeds a new act, i.e. the act of annihilation, just 
as they compelled them to draw this consequence in regard to His temporal 
production. About this problem everything has been said already in our 
discussion of temporal production, for the same difficulties as befall the 


126 


problem of production apply to annihilation, and there is no sense in 
repeating ourselves. But the special difficulty he mentions here is that from 
the assumption of the world’s temporal production it follows that the act of 
the agent attaches itself to non-existence, so that in fact the agent performs a 
non-existing act and this seemed to all the parties too shocking to be 
accepted,’ and therefore they took refuge in theories he mentions later. But 
this consequence follows necessarily from any theory which affirms that the 
act of the agent is connected with absolute creation-that is, the production of 
something that did not exist before in potency and was not a possibility which 
its agent converted from potency into actuality, a theory which affirms in fact 
that the agent created it out of nothing. But for the philosophers the act of the 
agent is nothing but the actualizing of what is in potency, and this act is, 
according to them, attached to an existent in two ways, either in production, 
by converting the thing from its potential existence into actuality so that its 
non-existence is terminated, or in destruction, by converting the thing from 
its actual existence into potential existence, so that it passes into a relative 
non-existence. But he who does not conceive the act of the agent in this way 
has to draw the consequence that the agent’s act is attached to non-existence 
in both ways, in production as in destruction; only as this seems clearer in the 
case of destruction, the theologians could not defend themselves against their 
opponents. For it is clear that for the man who holds the theory of absolute 
annihilation the agent must perform something non-existent, for when the 
agent converts the thing from existence into absolute non-existence, he 
directs his first intention to something non-existent, by contrast with what 
happens when he converts it from actual existence into potential existence; for 
in this conversion the passage into non-existence is only a secondary fact. The 
same consequence applies to production, only here it is not so obvious, for 
the existence of the thing implies the annulment of its non-existence, and 
therefore production is nothing but the changing of the non-existence of a 
thing into its existence; but since this movement is directed towards 
production, the theologians could say that the act of the agent is attached 
solely to production. They could not, however, say this in regard to 
destruction, since this movement is directed towards non-existence. They 
have, therefore, no right to say that in production the act of the agent attaches 
itself only to production, and not to the annulment of non-existence, for in 


127 


production the annulment of non-existence is necessary, and therefore the act 
of the agent must necessarily be attached to non-existence. For according to 
the doctrine of the theologians, the existent possesses only two conditions: a 
condition in which it is absolutely non-existent and a condition in which it is 
actually existent., The act of the agent, therefore, attaches itself to it, neither 
when it is actually existent, nor when it is non-existent . Thus only the 
following alternatives remain: either the act of the agent does not attach itself 
to it at all, or it attaches itself to non-existence,’ and non-existence changes 
itself into existence. He who conceives the agent in this way must regard the 
change of nonexistence itself into existence, and of existence itself into non- 
existence, as possible, and must hold that the act of the agent can attach itself 
to the conversion of either of these opposites into the other. This is absolutely 
impossible in respect to the other opposites, not to speak of non-existence 


and existence. 


The theologians perceived the agent in the way the weaksighted perceive 
the shadow of a thing instead of the thing itself and then mistake the shadow 
for it. But, as you see, all these difficulties arise for the man who has not 
understood that production is the conversion of a thing from potential into 
actual existence, and that destruction is the reverse, i.e. the change from the 
actual into the potentials It appears from this that possibility and matter are 
necessarily connected with anything becoming, and that what is subsistent in 
itself can be neither destroyed nor produced. 


The theory of the Ash’arites mentioned here by Ghazali, which regards the 
production of a substance, subsistent in itself, as possible, but not so its 
destruction, is an extremely weak one, for the consequences which apply to 
destruction apply also to production, only, it was thought, because in the 
former case it is more obvious that there was here a real difference. He then 
mentions the answers of the different sects to the difficulty which faces them 
on the question of annihilation. 


Ghazali says: 


The Mu’tazilites say: the act proceeding from Him is an 
existent, ie. extinction, which He does not create in a 


substratum; at one and the same moment it annihilates the 


128 


whole world and disappears by itself, so that it does not stand 


in need of another extinction and thus of an infinite regress. 
And mentioning this answer to the difficulty, he says: 


This is wrong for different reasons. First, extinction is not 
an intelligible existent, the creation of which can be supposed. 
Moreover, why, if it is supposed to exist, does it disappear by 
itself without a cause for its disappearance? Further, why does it 
annihilate the world? For its creation and inherence in the 
essence of the world are impossible, since the inherent meets its 
substratum and exists together with it if only in an instant; if 
the extinction and existence of the world could meet, extinction 
would not be in opposition to existence and would not 
annihilate it? and, if extinction is created neither in the world 
nor in a substratum, where could its existence be in order to be 
opposed to the existence of the world? Another shocking feature 
in this doctrine is that God cannot annihilate part of the world 
without annihilating the remainder; indeed He can only create 
an extinction which annihilates the world in its totality, for if 
extinction is not in a substratum, it stands in one and the same 


relation to the totality of the world. 
I say: 
The answer is too foolish to merit refutation. Extinction and annihilation 


are synonymous, and if God cannot create annihilation, 


He cannot create extinction either. And even if we suppose extinction to be 
an existent, it could at most be an accident, but an accident without a 
substratum is absurd. And how can one imagine that the non-existent causes 
non-existence? All this resembles the talk of the delirious. 


Ghazali says: 


The second sect, the Karramites, say that the act of God is 
annihilation, and annihilation signifies an existent which He 
produces in His essence and through which the world becomes 


non-existent. In the same way, according to them, existence 


129 


arises out of the act of creation which He produces in His 
essence and through which the world becomes existent. Once 
again, this theory is wrong as it makes the Eternal a substratum 
for temporal production . Further it is incomprehensible, for 
creation and likewise annihilation cannot be understood except 
as an existence, related to will and power, and to establish 
another entity besides the will and the power and their object, 
the world, is inconceivable. 


I say: 


The Karramites believe that there are here three factors: the agent, the act- 
which they call creation-and an object, i.e. that to which the act attaches itself, 
and likewise they believe that in the process of annihilation there are three 
factors: the annihilator, the act-which they call annihilation-and a non- 
existent. They believe that the act inheres in the essence of the agent and 
according to them the rise of such a new condition’ in the agent does not 
imply that the agent is determined by a temporal cause, for such a condition 
is of a relative and proportional type, and a new relation and proportion does 
not involve newness in the substratum; only those new events involve a 
change in the substratum which change the essence of the substratum, e.g. the 
changing of a thing from whiteness to blackness. Their statement, however, 
that the act inheres in the essence of the agent is a mistake; it is only a relation 
which exists between the agent and the object of the act which, when assigned 
to the agent, is called ‘act’ and when assigned to the object is called ‘passivity’ 
Through this assumption the Karramites are not obliged to admit that, as the 
Ash/arites believed, the Eternal produces temporal reality or that the Eternal 
is not eternal, but the consequence which is forced upon them is that there 
must be a cause anterior to the Eternal, for, when an agent acts after not 
having acted, all the conditions for the existence of his object being fulfilled at 
the time he did not act, there must have arisen a new quality in the agent at 
the time when he acts, and each new event demands a new causes So there 
must be another cause before the first, and so on ad infinitum. 


Ghazali says: 


130 


The third sect is that of the Ash’arites, who say that 
accidents pass away by themselves and cannot be imagined to 
persist, for if they persisted they could not, for this very reason, 
be imagined ever to pass away.b Substances do not persist by 
themselves either, but persist by a persistence added to their 
existence. And if God had not created persistence, substances 
would have become non-existent through the nonexistence of 
persistence. This too is wrong, in so far as it denies the evidence 
of the senses by saying that black and white do not persist and 
that their existence is continually renewed; reason shrinks from 
this, as it does, too, from the statement that the body renews its 
existence at each moment, for reason judges that the hair which 
is on a man’s head today is identical with, not similar to, the 
hair that was there yesterday, and judges the same about the 
black and the white.’ There is yet another difficulty, namely, 
that when things persist through persistence, God’s attributes 
must persist through persistence and this persistence persists 
through persistence and so on ad in finitum. 


I say: 


This theory of the flux of all existing things is a useless one, although many 
ancients held it, and there is no end to the impossibilities it implies. How 
could an existent come into existence, when it passes away by itself and 
existence passes away through its passing away? If it passed away by itself, it 
would have to come into existence by itself, and in this case that by which it 
becomes existent would be identical with that by which it passes away and this 
is impossible. For existence is the opposite of passing away, and it is not 
possible that two opposites should occur in the same thing in one and the 
same connexion. Therefore in a pure existent no passing away can be 
imagined, for if its existence determined its passing away, it would be non- 
existent and existent at one and the same moment, and this is impossible. 
Further, if the existents persist through the persistence of an attribute by 
itself, will this absence of change in them occur through their existence or 
through their non-existence? The latter is impossible, so it follows that they 
persist because of their existence. If, then, all existents must persist because 


131 


they are existent, and non-existence is something that can supervene upon 
them, why in Heaven’s name do we need this attribute of persistence to make 
them persist? All this resembles a case of mental disorder. But let us leave this 
sect, for the absurdity of their theory is too clear to need refutation. 


Ghazali says: 


The fourth sect are a group of Ash’arites who say that 
accidents pass away by themselves, but that substances pass 
away when God does not create motion or rest or aggregation 
and disintegration in them, for it is impossible that a body 
should persist which is neither in motion nor at rest, since in 
that case it becomes non-existent. The two parties of the 
Ash/arites incline to the view that annihilation is not an act, but 
rather a refraining from acting, since they do not understand 
how non-existence can be an act. All these different theories 
being false---say the philosophers -it cannot any longer be 
asserted that the annihilation of the world is possible, even if 
one were to admit that the world had been produced in time; 
for although the philosophers concede that the human soul has 
been produced, they claim the impossibility of its annihilation 
by means of arguments which are very close to those we have 
mentioned. For, according to the philosophers, nothing that is 
self-subsistent and does not inhere in a substratum’ can be 
imagined as becoming non-existent after its existence, whether 
it is produced or eternal.’ If one objects against them, that when 
water is boiled it disappears, they answer that it does not 
disappear, but is only changed into steam and the steam 
becomes water again, and its primary matter, i.e. its hyle, the 
matter in which the form of water inhered, persists when the 
water has become air, for the hyle only loses the form of water 
and takes up that of air; the air, having become cold again, 
condenses into water, but does not receive a new matter, for the 
matter is common to the elements and only the forms are 


changed in it. 


132 


I say: 


He who affirms that accidents do not persist for two moments, and that 
their existence in substances is a condition of the persistence of those 
substances, does not know how he contradicts himself, for if the substances 
are a condition of the existence of the accidents-since the accidents cannot 
exist without the substances in which they inhere-and the accidents are 
assumed to be a condition for the existence of the substances, the substances 
must be necessarily a condition for their own existence; and it is absurd to say 
that something is a condition for its own existence. Further, how could the 
accidents be such a condition, since they themselves do not persist for two 
moments? For, as the instant is at the same time the end of their privation and 
the beginning of their period of existence, the substance mint be destroyed in 
this instant, for in this instant there is neither anything of the privative period 
nor anything of the existent. If there were in the instant anything of the 
privative period or of the existent, it could not be the end of the former and 
the beginning of the latter.’ And on the whole, that something which does not 
persist two moments should be made a condition for the persistence of 
something for two moments is absurd. Indeed, a thing that persists for two 
moments is more capable of persisting than one which does not persist for 
two moments, for the existence of what does not persist for two moments is at 
an instant, which is in flux, but the existence of what persists for two moments 
is constant, and how can what is in flux be a condition for the existence of the 
constant, or how can what is only specifically persistent be a condition for the 
persistence of the individually persistent? This is all senseless talk. One should 
know that he who does not admit a Kyle for the corruptible must regard the 
existent as simple and as not liable to corruption, for the simple does not alter 
and does not exchange its substance for another substance. Therefore 
Hippocrates says ‘if man were made out of one thing alone, he could not 
suffer by himself , ie. he could not suffer corruption or change. And 
therefore he could not have become either, but would have to be an eternal 
existent. What he says here about Avicenna of the difference between the 
production and the destruction of the soul is without sense. 


Ghazali says, answering the philosophers: 


133 


The answer is: So far as concerns the different sects you 
have mentioned, although we could defend each of them and 
could show that your refutation on the basis of your principle is 
not valid, because your own principles are liable to the same 
kind of objection, we will not insist on this point, but we will 
restrict ourselves to one sect and ask: How will you refute the 
man who claims that creation and annihilation take place 
through the will of God: if God wills, He creates, and if He wills, 
He annihilates, and this is the meaning of His being absolutely 
powerful, and notwithstanding this He does not alter in 
Himself, but it is only His act that alters? And concerning your 
objection that, inasmuch as an act must proceed from the agent, 
it cannot be understood which act can proceed from Him, when 
He annihilates, we answer: What proceeds from Him is a new 
fact, and the new fact is non-existence, for there was no non- 
existence; then it happened as something new, and this is what 
proceeds from Him. And if you say: Non-existence is nothing, 
how could it then proceed from Him? we reply: If non-existence 
is nothing, how could it happen? Indeed, ‘proceeding from 
Him’ does not mean anything but that its happening is related 
to His power. If its happening has an intelligible meaning, why 
should its relation to His power not be reasonable? 


I say: 


All this is sophistical and wrong. The philosophers do not deny that a thing 
becomes non-existent when a destroying agent destroys it; they only say that 
the destroying act does not attach itself to it, in so far as the thing becomes 
non-existent, but in so far as it changes from actual being to potential being, 
and non-existence results from this change, and it is in this way that non- 
existence is related to the agent. But it does not follow from the fact that its 
non-existence occurs after the act of the agent that the agent performs it 
primarily and essentially. For when it was conceded to Ghazali during the 
discussion of this problem that the non-existence of the corrupting thing will 
necessarily occur after the act of the corrupting agent, he drew the conclusion 
that its non-existence would follow essentially and primarily from the act, but 


134 


this is impossible. For the agent’s act does not attach itself to its non-existence 
in so far as it is non-existent, i.e. primarily and essentially. And therefore , if 
the perceptible existences were simple, they could neither be generated nor 
destroyed except through the act of the agent being attached to their 
nonexistence essentially and primarily. But the act of the agent is only 
attached to non-existence accidentally and secondarily through its changing 
the object from actual existence into another form of existence in an act 
followed by non-existence, as from the change of a fire into air there follows 
the non-existence of the fire. This is the philosophical theory of existence and 


non-existence. 
Ghazali says: 


And what is the difference between you and the man who 
denies absolutely that non-existence can occur to accidents and 
forms, and who says that non-existence is nothing at all and 
asks how then it could occur and be called an occurrence and a 
new event? But no doubt non-existence can be represented as 
occurring to the accidents, and to speak of it as occurring has a 
sense whether you call it something real or not. And the 
relation of this occurrence, which has a reasonable sense, to the 
power of the Omnipotent, also has an intelligible meaning.’ 


I say: 


That non-existence of this kind occurs is true, and the philosophers admit 
it, because it proceeds from the agent according to a second intention and 
accidentally; but it does not follow from its proceeding or from its having a 
reasonable meaning that it happens essentially or primarily, and the 
difference between the philosophers and those who deny the occurrence of 
non-existence is that the philosophers do not absolutely deny the occurrence 
of non-existence, but only its occurring primarily and essentially through the 
agent. For the act of the agent does not attach itself necessarily, primarily, and 
essentially to non-existence, and according to the philosophers non-existence 
happens only subsequently to the agent’s act in reality. The difficulties ensue 
only for those who affirm that the world can be annihilated in an absolute 


annihilation. 


135 


Ghazali says: 


Perhaps the philosophers will answer: This difficulty is only 
acute for those who allow the non-existence of a thing after its 
existence, for those may be asked what the reality is that occurs. 
But according to us philosophers the existing thing does not 
become non-existent, for we understand by the fact that the 
accidents become non-existent the occurrence of their 
opposites, which are existing realities, and not the occurrence 
of mere non-existence which is nothing at all, and how could 
what is nothing at all be said to occur? For if hair becomes 
white, it is simply whiteness that occurs, for whiteness is 
something real; but one cannot say that what occurs is the 
privation of blackness.’ 


I say: 


This answer on behalf of the philosophers is mistaken, for the philosophers 
do not deny that non-existence occurs and happens through the agent, not, 
however, according to a primary intention as would be the consequence for 
one who assumes that a thing can change into pure nothingness; no, non- 
existence, according to them, occurs when the form of the thing that becomes 
non-existent disappears, and the opposite form appears. Therefore the 
following objection which Ghazali makes is valid. 


Ghazali says: 


This is wrong for two reasons. The first is: Does the 
occurrence of whiteness imply the absence of blackness? If they 
deny it, this is an affront to reason, and if they admit it, it may 
be asked: Is what is implied identical with that which implies? 
To admit this is a contradiction, for a thing does not imply 
itself, and if they deny it, it may be asked: Has that which is 
implied an intelligible meaning? If they deny it, we ask, ‘How do 
you know, then, that it is implied, for the judgement that it is 
implied presupposes that it has a sensible meaning? If they 
admit this, we ask; ‘Is this thing which is implied and has a 
sensible meaning, i.e. the absence of blackness, eternal or 


136 


temporal? The answer ‘eternal’ is impossible; if they answer 
‘temporal’, how should what is described as occurring 
temporally not be clearly understood? And if they answer 
“neither eternal nor temporal, this is absurd, for if it were said 
before the occurrence of whiteness that blackness was non- 
existent, it would be false, whereas afterwards it would be true.’ 
It occurred, therefore, without any doubt, and this occurrence is 
perfectly intelligible and must be related to the Omnipotent. 


I say: 


This is an occurrence which is perfectly intelligible and must be related to 
the Omnipotent, but only accidentally and not essentially, for the act of the 
agent does not attach itself to absolute non-existence, nor to the non- 
existence of anything, for even the Omnipotent cannot bring it about that 
existence should become identical with nonexistence. The man who does not 
assume matter cannot be freed from this difficulty, and he will have to admit 
that the act of the agent is attached to non-existence primarily and essentially. 
All this is clear, and there is no need to say more about it. The philosophers, 
therefore, say that the essential principles of transitory things are two: matter 
and form, and that there is a third accidental principle, privation, which is a 
condition of the occurrence of what becomes, namely as preceding it: if a 
thing becomes, its privation disappears, and if it suffers corruption, its 


privation arises.’ 
Ghazali says: 


The second objection is that according to the philosophers 
there are accidents which can become non-existent otherwise 
than through their contrary, for instance, motion has no 
contrary, and the opposition between motion and rest is, 
according to the philosophers, only the opposition of 
possession and non-possession, i.e. the opposition of being and 
not-being, not the opposition of one being to another being,’ 
and the meaning of rest is the absence of motion, and, when 
motion ceases, rest does not supervene as its contrary, but is a 


pure non-existence.’ The same is the case with those qualities 


137 


which belong to the class of entelechies, like the impression of 
the sensible species on the vitreous humour of the eyes and still 
more the impression of the forms of the intelligibles on the 
soul; they become existent without the cessation of a contrary, 
and their non-existence only means the cessation of their 
existence without the subsequent occurrence of their opposites, 
and their disappearance is an example of pure nonexistence 
which arises. The occurrence of such a non-existence is an 
understandable fact, and that which can be understood as 
occurring by itself, even if it is not a real entity, can be 
understood as being related to the power of the Omnipotent. 
Through this it is clear that, when one imagines an event as 
occuring through the eternal Will, it is unessential, whether the 


occurring event is a becoming or a vanishing. 
I say: 


On the contrary, when non-existence is assumed to proceed from the agent 
as existence proceeds from it, there is the greatest difference between the two. 
But when existence is assumed as a primary fact and non-existence as a 
secondary fact, i.e. when non-existence is assumed to take place through the 
agent by means of a kind of existence, i.e. when the agent transforms actual 
existence into potential existence by removing the actuality-which is a quality 
possessed by the substrate-then it is true. And from this point of view the 
philosophers do not regard it as impossible that the world should become 
non-existent in the sense of its changing into another form, b for non- 
existence is in this case only a subsequent occurrence and a secondary fact. 
But what they regard as impossible is that a thing should disappear into 
absolute nothingness, for then the act of the agent would have attached itself 
to non-existence, primarily and essentially. 


Throughout this discussion Ghazali has mistaken the accidental for the 
essential, and forced on the philosophers conclusions which they themselves 
regard as impossible. This is in general the character of the discussion in this 
book. A more suitable name, therefore, for this book would be ‘The Book of 


Absolute Incoherence’, or ‘The Incoherence of Ghazali’, not ‘The Incoherence 


138 


of the Philosophers’, and the best name for my book ‘The Distinction between 
Truth and Incoherent Arguments’. 








THE THIRD DISCUSSION 








THE DEMONSTRATION OF THEIR CONFUSION IN SAYING THAT 
GOD IS THE AGENT AND THE MAKER OF THE WORLD AND 
THAT THE WORLD IS HIS PRODUCT AND ACT, AND THE 
DEMONSTRATION THAT THESE EXPRESSIONS ARE IN THEIR 
SYSTEM ONLY METAPHORS WITHOUT ANY REAL SENSE 


Ghazali says: 


All philosophers, except the materialists, agree that the 
world has a maker, and that God is the maker and agent of the 
world and the world is His act and His work. And this is an 
imposture where their principle is concerned, nay it cannot be 
imagined that according to the trend of their principle the 
world is the work of God, and this for three reasons, from the 
point of view of the agent, from the point of view of the act, and 
from the point of view of the relation common to act and agent. 
As concerns the first point, the agent must be willing, choosing, 
and knowing what he wills to be the agent of what he wills, but 
according to them God does not will, He has no attribute 
whatever, and what proceeds from Him proceeds by the 
compulsion of necessity. The second point is that the world is 
eternal, but ‘act’ implies production. And the third point is that 
God is unique, according to their principles, from all points of 
view, and from one thing-according to their principles-there 
can only proceed one thing. The world, however, is constituted 


139 


out of diverse components; how could it therefore proceed from 


Him? 
I say: 


Ghazali’s words “The agent must be willing, choosing, and knowing what he 
wills to be the agent of what he wills’ are by no means self evident and cannot 
be accepted as a definition of the maker of the world without a proof, unless 
one is justified in inferring from the empirical to the divine. For we observe in 
the empirical world two kinds of agents, one which performs exclusively one 
thing and this essentially, for instance warmth which causes heat and coldness 
which causes cold; and this kind is called by the philosophers natural agents. 
The second kind of agents are those that perform a certain act at one time and 
its opposite at another; these, acting only out of knowledge and deliberation, 
are called by the philosophers voluntary and selective agents. But the First 
Agent cannot be described as having either of these two actions, in so far as 
these are ascribed to transitory things by the philosophers. For he who 
chooses and wills lacks the things which he wills, and God cannot lack 
anything He wills. And he who chooses makes a choice for himself of the 
better of two things, but God is in no need of a better condition. Further, when 
the willer has reached his object, his will ceases and, generally speaking, will is 
a passive quality and a change, but God is exempt from passivity and change. 
God is still farther distant from natural action, for the act of the natural thing 
is a necessity in its substance, but is not a necessity in the substance of the 
willer, and belongs to its entelechy. In addition, natural action does not 
proceed from knowledge: it has, however, been proved that God’s act does 
proceed from knowledge. The way in which God becomes an agent and a 
willer has not become clear in this place, since there is no counterpart to His 
will in the empirical world. How is it therefore possible to assert that an agent 
can only be understood as acting through deliberation and choice? For then 
this definition is indifferently applied to the empirical and the divine, but the 
philosophers do not acknowledge this extension of the definition, so that from 
their refusal to acknowledge this definition as applying to the First Agent, it 
cannot be inferred that they deny that He acts at all. 


140 


This is, of course, self-evident and not the philosophers are impostors, but 
he who speaks in this way, for an impostor is one who seeks to perplex, and 
does not look for the truth. He, however, who errs while seeking the truth 
cannot be called an impostor, and the philosophers, as a matter of fact, are 
known to seek the truth, and therefore they are by no means impostors. There 
is no difference between one who says that God wills with a will which does 
not resemble the human will, and one who says that God knows through a 
knowledge which does not resemble human knowledge; in the same way as 
the quality of His knowledge cannot be conceived, so the quality of His will 


cannot be conceived. 
Ghazali says: 


We will now test each of these three reasons at the same 
time as the illusory arguments which the philosophers give in 
their defence. 


The first reason. We say: ‘Agent? means someone from 
whom there proceeds an act with the will to act according to 
choice and with the knowledge of the object willed. But 
according to the philosophers the world stands in relation to 
God as the effect to the cause, in a necessary connexion which 
God cannot be imagined to sever, and which is like the 
connexion between the shadow and the man, light and the sun, 
but this is not an act at all. On the contrary, he who says that 
the lamp makes the light and the man makes the shadow uses 
the term vaguely, giving it a sense much wider than its 
definition, and uses it metaphorically, relying on the fact that 
there is an analogy between the object originally meant by it 
and the object to which it is transferred, i.e. the agent is in a 
general sense a cause, the lamp is the cause of the light, and the 
sun is the cause of luminosity; but the agent is not called a 
creative agent from the sole fact that it is a cause, but by its 
being a cause in a special way, namely that it causes through 
will and through choice. If, therefore, one said that neither a 


wall, nor a stone, nor anything inanimate is an agent, and that 


141 


only animals have actions, this could not be denied and his 
statement would not be called false. But according to the 
philosophers a stone has an action, namely falling and 
heaviness and a centripetal tendency, just as fire has an action, 
namely heating, and a wall has an action, namely a centripetal 
tendency and the throwing of a shadow, and, according to them 
each of these actions proceeds from it as its agent; which is 
absurd.’ 


I say: 


There are in brief two points here, the first of which is that only those who 
act from deliberation and choice are regarded as acting causes, and the action 
of a natural agent producing something else is not counted among acting 
causes, while the second point is that the philosophers regard the procession 
of the world from God as the necessary connexion obtaining between shadow 
and the person, and luminosity and the sun, and the downward rolling in 
relation to the stone, but that this cannot be called an action because the 
action can be separated from the agent. 


I say: 


All this is false. For the philosophers believe that there are four causes: 
agent, matter, form, and end. The agent is what causes some other thing to 
pass from potency to actuality and from nonexistence to existence; this 
actualization occurs sometimes from deliberation and choice, sometimes by 
nature, and the philosophers do not call a person who throws a shadow an 
agent, except metaphorically, because the shadow cannot be separated from 
the man, and by common consent the agent can be separated from its object, 
and the philosophers certainly believe that God is separated’ from the world 
and according to them He is not to be classed with this kind of natural cause. 
Nor is He an agent in the sense in which any empirical agent, either voluntary 
or involuntary, is; He is rather the agent of these causes, drawing forth the 
Universe from non-existence to existence and conserving it, and such an act is 
a more perfect and glorious one than any performed by the empirical agents. 
None of these objections therefore touch them, for they believe that God’s act 
proceeds from Him through knowledge, not through any necessity which calls 


142 


for it, either in His essence or outside His essence, but through His grace and 
His bounty. He is necessarily endowed with will and choice in their highest 
form, since the insufficiency which is proper to the empirical willer does not 
pertain to Him. And these are the very words of Aristotle in one of his 
metaphysical treatises: We were asked how God could bring forth the world 
out of nothing, and convert it into something out of nothing, and our answer 
is this: the Agent must be such that His capacity must be proportionate to His 
power and His power proportionate to His will and His will proportionate to 
His wisdom, if not, His capacity would be weaker than His power, His power 
weaker than His will, and His will weaker than His wisdom. And if some of His 
powers were weaker than others, there would be no difference between His 
powers and ours, and imperfection would attach to Him as to us-a very 
blasphemous theory. But in the opposite case each of these powers is of the 
utmost perfection. When He wills He has the power, and when He has the 
power He has the capacity and all this with the greatest wisdom. And He 
exists, making what He wants out of nothing. And this is only astonishing 
through this imperfection which is in us. And Aristotle said also: Everything 
that is in this world is only set together through the power which is in it from 
God; if this power did not exist in the things, they could not last the twinkling 
of an eyes 


I say: 


Composite existence is of two classes; in the one class the composition is 
something additional to the existence of the composed, but in the other the 
composition is like the existence of matter and form and in these existents the 
existence cannot be regarded as anterior to the composition, but on the 
contrary the composition is the cause of their existence and anterior to it. If 
God therefore is the cause of the composition of the parts of the world, the 
existence of which is in their composition, then He is the cause of their 
existence and necessarily he who is the cause of the existence of anything 
whatever is its agent. This is the way in which according to the philosophers 
this question must be understood, if their system is truly explained to the 
student. 


Ghazali says, speaking on behalf of the philosophers: 


143 


The philosophers may say: we call an object anything that 
has no necessary existence by itself, but exists through another, 
and we call its cause the agent, and we do not mind whether the 
cause acts by nature or voluntarily, just as you do not mind 
whether it acts by means of an instrument or without an 
instrument, and just as ‘act’ is a genus subdivided into ‘acts 
which occur by means of an instrument’ and ‘acts which occur 
without an instrument’, so it is a genus subdivided into ‘acts 
which occur by nature’ and ‘acts which occur voluntarily’. The 
proof is that, when we speak of an act which occurs by nature, 
our words ‘by nature’ are not contradictory to the term ‘act’; the 
words ‘by nature’ are not used to exclude or contradict the idea 
of act, but are meant only to explain the specific character of 
the act, just as, when we speak of an act effected directly 
without an instrument, there is no contradiction, but only a 
specification and an explanation. And when we speak of a 
‘voluntary act’, there is not a redundancy as in the expression a 
‘living being-man’;’ it is only an explanation of its specific 
character, like the expression, ‘act performed by means of an 
instrument’. If, however, the word ‘act’ included the idea of will, 
and will were essential to act, in so far as it is an act, our 


expression ‘natural act’ would be a contradiction. 
I say: 


The answer, in short, has two parts. The first is that everything that is 
necessary through another thing is an object of what is necessary by itself,z 
but this can be opposed, since that through which the ‘necessary through 
another’ has its necessary existence need not be an agent, unless by ‘through 
which it has its necessary existence’ is meant that which is really an agent, i.e. 
that which brings potency into act. The second part is that the term ‘agent’ 
seems like a genus for that which acts by choice and deliberation and for that 
which acts by nature; this is true, and is proved by our definition of the term 
‘agent’. Only this argument wrongly creates the impression that the 
philosophers do not regard the first agent as endowed with will. And this 


144 


dichotomy that everything is either of necessary existence by itself or existent 
through another is not self-evident. 


Ghazali, refuting the philosophers, says: 


This designation is wrong, for we do not call any cause 
whatsoever an agent, nor any effect an object; for, if this were 
so, it would be not right to say that the inanimate has no act 
and that only the living exhibit acts-a statement generally 
admitted. 


I say: 


His assertion that not every cause is called an agent is true, but his 
argument that the inanimate is not called an agent is false, for the denial that 
the inanimate exhibits acts excludes only the rational and voluntary act, not 
act absolutely, for we find that certain inanimate things have powers to 
actualize things like themselves; e.g. fire, which changes anything warm and 
dry into another fire like itself, through converting it from what it has in 
potency into actuality. Therefore fire cannot make a fire like itself in 
anything that has not the potency or that is not in readiness to receive the 
actuality of fire. The theologians, however, deny that fire is an agent, and the 
discussion of this problem will follow later. Further, nobody doubts that 
there are in the bodies of animals powers which make the food a part of the 
animal feeding itself and generally direct the body of the animal. If we 
suppose them withdrawn, the animal would die, as Galen says. And through 


this direction we call it alive, whereas in the absence of these powers we call 
it dead. 


Ghazali goes on: 


If the inanimate is called an agent, it is by metaphor, in the 
same way as it is spoken of metaphorically as tending and 
willing, since it is said that the stone falls down, because it tends 
and has an inclination to the centre, but in reality tendency and 
will can only be imagined in connexion with knowledge and an 


object desired and these can only be imagined in animals. 


I say: 


145 


If by ‘agent’ or ‘tendency’ or ‘willing’ is meant the performance of an act of 
a willer, it is a metaphor, but when by these expressions is meant that it 
actualizes another’s potency, it is really an agent in the full meaning of the 


word. 
Ghazali then says: 


When the philosophers say that the term ‘act’ is a genus 
which is subdivided into ‘natural act’ and ‘voluntary act’, this 
cannot he conceded; it is as if one were to say that ‘willing’ is a 
genus which is subdivided into willing accompanied by 
knowledge of the object willed, and willing without knowledge 
of the object willed. This is wrong, because will necessarily 
implies knowledge, and likewise act necessarily implies will. 


I say: 


The assertion of the philosophers that ‘agent’ is subdivided into ‘voluntary’ 
and ‘non-voluntary agent’ is true, but the comparison with a division of will 
into rational and irrational is false, because in the definition of will knowledge 
is included, so that the division has no sense. But in the definition of ‘act’ 
knowledge is not included, because actualization of another thing is possible 
without knowing it. This is clear, and therefore the wise say that God’s word: 
‘a wall which wanted to fall to pieces” is a metaphor. 


Ghazali proceeds: 


When you affirm that your expression ‘natural act’ is not a 
contradiction in terms you are wrong; there is as a matter of 
fact a contradiction when ‘natural act’ is taken in a real sense, 
only this contradiction is not at once evident to the 
understanding nor is the incompatibility of nature and act felt 
acutely, because this expression is employed metaphorically; for 
since nature is in a certain way a cause and the agent is also a 
cause, nature is called an agent metaphorically. The expression 
‘voluntary act’ is as much redundant as the expression ‘he wills 
and knows what he wills’. 


I say: 


146 


This statement is undoubtedly wrong, for what actualizes another thing, i.e. 
acts on it, is not called agent simply by a metaphor, but in reality, for the 
definition of ‘agent’ is appropriate to it. The division of ‘agent’ into ‘natural’ 
and ‘voluntary agent’ is not the division of an equivocal term, but the division 
of a genus. Therefore the division of ‘agent’ into ‘natural’ and ‘voluntary 
agent’ is right, since that which actualizes another can also be divided into 
these two classes. 


Ghazali says: 


However, as it can happen that ‘act’ is used metaphorically 
and also in its real sense, people have no objection in saying 
‘someone acted voluntarily’, meaning that he acted not in a 
metaphorical sense, but really, in the way in which it is said ‘he 
spoke with his tongue’, or ‘he saw with his eye’. For, since one is 
permitted to rise ‘heart’ metaphorically for ‘sight’, and motion 
of the head or hand for word-for one can say ‘He nodded 
assent’-it is not wrong to say ‘He spoke with his tongue and he 
saw with his eye’, in order to exclude any idea of metaphor. This 
is a delicate point, but let us be careful to heed the place where 
those stupid people slipped. 


I say: 


Certainly it is a delicate point that a man with scientific pretensions should 
give such a bad example and such a false reason to explain the repugnance 
people seem to have in admitting the division of ‘act’ into ‘natural’ and 
‘voluntary act’. No one ever says ‘He saw with his eye, and he saw without his 
eye’ in the belief that this is a division of sight; we only say ‘He saw with his 
eye’ to emphasize the fact that real sight is meant, and to exclude the 
metaphorical sense of ‘sight’. And the intelligent in fact think that for the man 
who understands immediately that the real meaning is intended, this 
connecting of sight with the eye is almost senseless. But when one speaks of 
‘natural’ and ‘voluntary act’, no intelligent person disagrees that we have here 
a division of ‘act’. If, however, the expression ‘voluntary act’ were similar to 
‘sight with the eye’ the expression ‘natural act’ would be metaphorical. But as 
a matter of fact the natural agent has an act much more stable than the 


147 


voluntary agent, for the natural agent’s act is constant-which is not the case 
with the act of the voluntary agent. And therefore the opponents of the 
theologians might reverse the argument against them and say that ‘natural 
act’ is like ‘sight with the eye’ and ‘voluntary act’ is a metaphor-especially 
according to the doctrine of the Ash’arites, who do not acknowledge a free will 
in man and a power to exercise an influence on reality. And if this is the case 
with the agent in the empirical world, how can we know that it is an accurate 
description of the real Agent in the divine world to say that He acts through 
knowledge and will? 


Ghazali says, speaking on behalf of the philosophers: 


The philosophers may reply: The designation ‘agent’ is 
known only through language. However, it is clear to the mind 
that the cause of a thing can be divided into voluntary and non- 
voluntary cause, and it may be disputed whether or not in both 
cases the word ‘act’ is used in a proper sense, but it is not 
possible to deny this since the Arabs say that fire burns, a sword 
cuts, that snow makes cold, that scammony purges, that bread 
stills hunger and water thirst, and our expression ‘he beats’ 
means he performs the act of beating, and ‘it burns’ it performs 
the act of burning, and ‘he cuts’ he performs the act of cutting; 
if you say, therefore, that its use is quite metaphorical, you are 
judging without any evidence. 


I say: 


I This, in short, is a common-sense argument. The Arabs indeed call that 
which exerts an influence on a thing, even if not voluntary, an agent, in a 
proper, not in a metaphorical, sense. This argument, however, is dialectical 


and of no importance. 
Ghazali replies to this: 


The answer is that all this is said in a metaphorical way and 
that only a voluntary act is a proper act. The proof is that, if we 
assume an event which is based on two facts, the one voluntary, 
the other involuntary, the mind relates the act to the voluntary 


148 


fact. Language expresses itself in the same way, for if a man 
were to throw another into a fire and kill him, it is the man who 
would be called his killer, not the fire. If, however, the term 
were used in the same sense of the voluntary and the non- 
voluntary, and it were not that the one was a proper sense, the 
other a metaphorical, why should the killing be related to the 
voluntary, by language, usage, and reason, although the fire was 
the proximate cause of the killing and the man who threw the 
other into the fire did nothing but bring man and fire together? 
Since, however, the bringing together is a voluntary act and the 
influence of the fire non-voluntary, the man is called a killer 
and the fire only metaphorically so. This proves that the word 
‘agent’ is used of one whose act proceeds from his will, and, 
behold, the philosophers do not regard God as endowed with 
will and choice. 


I say: 


This is an answer of the wicked who heap fallacy on fallacy. Ghazali is above 
this, but perhaps the people of his time obliged him to write this book to 
safeguard himself against the suspicion of sharing the philosophers’ view. 
Certainly nobody attributes the act to its instrument, but only to its first 
mover. He who killed a man by fire is in the proper sense the agent and the 
fire is the instrument of the killing, but when a man is burned by a fire, 
without this fact’s depending on someone’s choice, nobody would say that the 
fire burned him metaphorically. The fallacy he employs here is the wellknown 
one a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter, e.g. to say of a negro, 
because his teeth are white, that he is white absolutely. The philosophers do 
not deny absolutely that God wills, for He is an agent through knowledge and 
from knowledge, and He performs the better of two contrary acts, although 
both are possible; they only affirm that He does not will in the way that man 


wills. 
Ghazali says, answering in defence of the philosophers: 


If the philosophers say: We do not mean anything by God’s 
being an agent but that He is the cause of every existent besides 


149 


Himself and that the world has its subsistence through Him, 
and if the Creator did not exist, the existence of the world could 
not be imagined. And if the Creator should be supposed non- 
existent, the world would be non-existent too, just as the 
supposition that the sun was non-existent would imply the non- 
existence of light. This is what we mean by His being an agent. 
If our opponents refuse to give this meaning to the word ‘act’, 


well, we shall not quibble about words. 
I say: 


Such an answer would mean that the philosophers would concede to their 
opponents that God is not an agent, but one of those causes without which a 
thing cannot reach its perfection; and the answer is wrong, for against them it 
might be deduced from it that the First Cause is a principle, as if it were the 
form of the Universe, in the way the soul is a principle for the body; no 


philosopher, however, affirms this. 
Then Ghazali says, answering the philosophers: 


We say: Our aim is to show that such is not the meaning of 
‘act’? and ‘work’. These words can mean only that which really 
proceeds from the will. But you reject the real meaning of ‘act’, 
although you use this word, which is honoured amongst 
Muslims. But one’s religion is not perfect when one uses words 
deprived of their sense. Declare therefore openly that God has 
no act, so that it becomes clear that your belief is in opposition 
to the religion of Islam, and do not deceive by saying that God 
is the maker of the world and that the world is His work, for you 
use the words, but reject their real sense! 


I say: 


This would indeed be a correct conclusion against the philosophers, if they 
should really say what Ghazali makes them say. For in this case they could 
indeed be forced to admit that the world has neither a natural nor a voluntary 
agent, nor that there is another type of agents besides these two. He does not 


150 


unmask their imposture by his words, but lie himself deceives by ascribing to 
them theories which they do not hold. 


Ghazali says: 


The second reason for denying that the world is according 
to the principle of the philosophers an act of God is based on 
the implication of the notion of an act. ‘Act’ applies to temporal 
production, but for them the world is eternal and is not 
produced in time. The meaning of ‘act’ is ‘to convert from not- 
being into being by producing it’ and this cannot be imagined 
in the eternal, as what exists already cannot be brought into 
existence. Therefore ‘act’ implies a temporal product, but 
according to them the world is eternal; how then could it be 
God’s act? 


I say: 


If the world were by itself eternal and existent (not in so far as it is moved, 
for each movement is composed of parts which are produced), then, indeed, 
the world would not have an agent at all. But if the meaning of ‘eternal’ is that 
it is in everlasting production and that this production has neither beginning 
nor end, certainly the term ‘production’ is more truly applied to him who 
brings about an everlasting production than to him who procures a limited 
production. In this way the world is God’s product and the name ‘production’ 
is even more suitable for it than the word ‘eternity’, and the philosophers only 
call the world eternal to safeguard themselves against the word ‘product’ in 
the sense of ‘a thing produced after a state of nonexistence, from something, 


and in time’. 
Then Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers: 


The philosophers may perhaps say: The meaning of 
‘product’ is ‘that which exists after its non-existence’. Let us 
therefore examine if what proceeds from the agent when He 
produces, and what is connected with Him, is either pure 
existence, or pure non-existence, or both together. Now, it is 
impossible to say that previous non-existence was connected 


151 


with Him, since the agent cannot exert influence upon non- 
existence, and it is equally impossible to say ‘both together’, for 
it is clear that nonexistence is in no way connected with the 
agent, for non-existence qua non-existence needs no agent at 
all. It follows therefore that what is connected with Him is 
connected with Him in so far as it is an existent, that what 
proceeds from Him is pure existence, and that there is no other 
relation to Him than that of existence. If existence is regarded 
as everlasting, then this relation is everlasting, and if this 
relation is everlasting, then the term to which this relation 
refers is the most illustrious and the most enduring in 
influence, because at no moment is non-existence connected 
with it. Temporal production implies therefore the 
contradictory statements that it must be connected with an 
agent, that it cannot be produced, if it is not preceded by non- 
existence, and that non-existence cannot be connected with the 


agent. 


And if previous non-existence is made a condition of the 
existent, and it is said that what is connected with the agent is a 
special existence, not any existence, namely an existence 
preceded by non-existence, it may be answered that its being 
preceded by non-existence cannot be an act of an agent or a 
deed of a maker, for the procession of this existence from its 
agent cannot be imagined, unless preceded by non-existence; 
neither, therefore , can the precedence of this non-existence be 
an act of the agent and connected with him, nor the fact that 
this existence is preceded by non-existence. Therefore to make 
non-existence a condition for the act’s becoming an act is to 
impose as a condition one whereby the agent cannot exert any 


influence under any condition.’ 


I say: 


152 


This is an argument put forward on this question by Avicenna from the 
philosophical side. It is sophistical, because Avicenna leaves out one of the 
factors which a complete division would have to state. 


For he says that the act of the agent must be connected either with an 
existence or with a non-existence, previous to it and in so far as it is non- 
existence, or with both together, and that it is impossible that it should be 
connected with non-existence, for the agent does not bring about non- 
existence and, therefore, neither can it effect both together. Therefore the 
agent can be only connected with existence, and production is nothing but the 
connexion of act with existence, i.e. the act of the agent is only bringing into 
existence,’ and it is immaterial whether this existence be preceded by non- 
existence or not. But this argument is faulty, because the act of the agent is 
only connected with existence in a state of non-existence, i.e. existence in 
potentiality, and is not connected with actual existence, in so far as it is actual, 
nor with non-existence, in so far as it is non-existent. It is only connected with 
imperfect existence in which non-existence inheres. The act of the agent is not 
connected with non-existence, because non-existence is not actual; nor is it 
connected with existence which is not linked together with non-existence, for 
whatever has reached its extreme perfection of existence needs neither 
causation nor cause. But existence which is linked up with non-existence only 
exists as long as the producer exists. The only way to escape this difficulty is 
to assume that the existence of the world has always been and will always be 
linked together with non-existence, as is the case with movement, which is 
always in need of a mover. And the acknowledged philosophers believe that 
such is the case with the celestial world in its relation to the Creator, and a 
fortiori with the sublunary world. Here lies the difference between the created 
and the artificial, for the artificial product, once produced, is not tied up with 
non-existence which would be in need of an agent for the continued 
sustenance of the product.’ 


Ghazali continues: 


And your statement, theologians, that what exists cannot be 
made to exist, if you mean by it, that its existence does not 
begin after its nonexistence, is true; but if you mean that it 


153 


cannot become an effect at the time when it exists, we have 
shown that it can only become an effect at the time when it 
exists, not at the time when it does not exist. For a thing only 
exists when its agent causes it to exist, and the agent only 
causes it to exist at the time when, proceeding from it, it exists, 
not when the thing does not exist; and the causation is joined 
with the existence of the agent and the object, for causation is 
the relation between cause and effect. Cause, effect, and 
causation are simultaneous with existence and there is no 
priority here, and therefore there is causation only for what 
exists, if by ‘causation’ is meant the relation through which the 
agent and its object exist. The philosophers say: It is for this 
reason that we have come to the conclusion that the world, 
which is the work of God, is without beginning and everlasting, 
and that never at any moment was God not its agent, for 
existence is what is joined with the agent and as long as this 
union lasts existence lasts, and, if this union is ever 
discontinued, existence ceases. It is by no means what you 
theologians mean, that if the Creator were supposed to exist no 
longer, the world could still persist; you, indeed, believe that the 
same relation prevails as between the builder and the building, 
for the building persists when the builder has disappeared. But 
the persistence of the building does not depend on the builder, 
but on the strength of the structure in its coherence, for if it had 
not the power of coherence-if it were like water, for example-it 
would not be supposed to keep the shape which it received 
through the act of the agent.’ 


I say: 


Possibly the world is in such a condition, but in general this argument is not 
sound. For it is only true that the causing agent is always connected with the 
effect , in so far as the effect actually exists without this actuality’s having any 
insufficiency and any potency, if one imagines that the essence of the effect 


154 


lies in its being an effect, for then the effect can only be an effect through the 
causation of the agent. But if its becoming an effect through a cause is only an 
addition to its essence, then it is not necessary that its existence should cease 
when the relation between the causing agent and the effect is interrupted. If, 
however, it is not an addition, but its essence consists in this relation of being 
an effect, then what Avicenna says is true. However, it is not true of the world, 
for the world does not exit on account of this relation, but it exists on account 
of its substance and the relation is only accidental to it. Perhaps what 
Avicenna says is true concerning the forms of the celestial bodies, in so far as 
they perceive the separate immaterial forms; and the philosophers affirm this, 
because it is proved that there are immaterial forms whose existence consists 
in their thinking, whereas knowledge in this sublunary world only differs 
from its object because its object inheres in matter.’ 


Ghazali, answering the philosophers, says: 


Our answer is that the act is connected with the agent only 
in so far as it comes into being, but not in so far as it is 
preceded by non-existence nor in so far as it is merely existent. 
According to us the act is not connected with the agent for a 
second moment after its coming to be, for then it exists; it is 
only connected with it at the time of its coming to be in so far as 
it comes to be and changes from non-existence into existence. If 
it is denied the name of becoming, it cannot be thought to be an 
act nor to be connected with the agent. Your statement, 
philosophers, that a thing’s coming to be means its being 
preceded by non-existence, and that its being preceded by non- 
existence does not belong to the act of the agent and the deed of 
the producer, is true; but this prior non-existence is a necessary 
condition for the existent’s being an act of the agent. For 
existence not preceded by non-existence is everlasting, and 
cannot be truly said to be an act of the agent. Not all conditions 
necessary to make an act an act need proceed from the agent’s 
act; the essence, power, will, and knowledge of the agent are a 
condition of his being an agent, but do not derive from him. An 
act can only be imagined as proceeding from an existent, and 


155 


the existence, will, power, and knowledge of the agent are a 
condition of his being an agent, although they do not derive 


from him.’ 
I say: 


All this is true. The act of the agent is only connected with the effect, in so 
far as it is moved, and the movement from potential to actual being is what is 
called becoming. And, as Ghazali says, nonexistence is one of the conditions 
for the existence of a movement through a mover. Avicenna’s argument that 
when it is a condition for the act of the agent to be connected with the 
existence, the absence of this connexion implies that the agent is connected 
with its opposite, i.e. non-existence, is not true. But the philosophers affirm 
that there are existents whose essential specific differences consist in motion, 
e.g. the winds and so on; and the heavens and the sublunary bodies belong to 
the genus of existents whose existence lies in their movement, and if this is 
true, they are eternally in a continual becoming. And therefore, just as the 
eternal existent is more truly existent than the temporal, similarly that which 
is eternally in becoming is more truly coming to be than that which comes to 
be only during a definite time. And if the substance of the world were not in 
this condition of continual movement, the world would not, after its 
existence, need the Creator, just as a house after being completed and 
finished does not need the builder’s existence, unless that were true which 
Avicenna tried to prove in the preceding argument, that the existence of the 
world consists only in its relation to the agent; and we have already said that 
we agree with. him so far as this concerns the forms of the heavenly bodies. 


Therefore the world is during the time of its existence in need of the 
presence of its agent for both reasons together, namely, because the 
substance of the world is continually in motion and because its form, 
through which it has its subsistence and existence, is of the nature of a 
relation, not of the nature of a quality, i.e. the shapes and states which have 
been enumerated in the chapter on quality. A form which belongs to the class 
of quality, and is included in it, is, when it exists and its existence is finished, 
in no need of an agent. All this will solve the problem for you, and will 


156 


remove from you the perplexity which befalls man through these 
contradictory statements.’ 


Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers: 


The philosophers might say: If you acknowledge that it is 
possible that the act should be simultaneous with the agent and 
not posterior to it, it follows that if the agent is temporal the act 
must be temporal, and if the agent is eternal the act must be 
eternal. But to impose as a condition that the act must be 
posterior in time to the agent is impossible, for when a man 
moves his finger in a bowl of water, the water moves at the 
same time as the finger, neither before nor after, for if the water 
moved later than the finger, finger and water would have to be 
in one and the same space before the water disconnected itself, 
and if the water moved before the finger, the water would be 
separated from the finger and notwithstanding its anteriority 
would be an effect of the finger performed for its sake. But if we 
suppose the finger eternally moving in the water, the movement 
of the water will be eternal too, and will be, notwithstanding its 
eternal character, an effect and an object, and the supposition 
of eternity does not make this impossible. And such is the 
relation between the world and God. 


I say: 


This is true in so far as it concerns the relation of movement and mover, but 
in regard to the stable existent or to that which exists without moving or 
resting by nature (if there exist such things ) and their relation to their cause, 
it is not trues Let us therefore admit this relation between the agent and the 
world only in so far as the world is in motion. As for the fact that the act of 
every existent must be conjoined with its existence, this is true, unless 
something occurs to this existent which lies outside its nature, or one or 
another accident occurs to it,b and it is immaterial whether this act be natural 
or voluntary. See, therefore, what the Ash’arites did who assumed an eternal 
existent, but denied that He acted during His eternal existence, but then, 
however, allowed this agent to act eternally in the future, so that the eternal 


157 


existence of the Eternal would become divided into two parts, an eternal past 
during which He does not act and an eternal future during which He acts! But 
for the philosophers all this is confusion and error. 


Ghazali answers the philosophers on the question of priority: 


We do not say that the simultaneity of agent and act is 
impossible, granted that the act is temporal, e.g. the motion of 
the water, for this happens after its non-being and therefore it 
can be an act, and it is immaterial whether this act be posterior 
to the agent or simultaneous with him. It is only an eternal act 
that we consider impossible, for to call an act that which does 
not come into being out of not-being is pure metaphor and 
does not conform to reality. As to the simultaneity of cause and 
effect, cause and effect can be either both temporal or both 
eternal, in the way in which it may be said that the eternal 
knowledge is the cause of the fact that the Eternal is knowing; 
we are not discussing this, but only what is called an act. For the 
effect of a cause is not called the act of a cause, except 
metaphorically. It can only be called an act on condition that it 
comes into being out of non-being. And if a man thinks he may 
describe the everlasting Eternal metaphorically as acting on 
something, what he thinks possible is only the use of a 
metaphor. And your argument, philosophers-that if we suppose 
the movement of the water to be eternal and everlasting with 
the movement of the finger, this does not prevent the 
movement of the water from being an act-rests on a confusion, 
for the finger has no act, the agent is simply the man to whom 
the finger belongs, that is the man who wills the movement; 
and, if we suppose him to be eternal, then the movement of the 
finger is his act, because every part of this movement comes out 
of not-beings and in this sense it is an act. So far as the motion 
of the water is concerned, we do not say that it occurs through 
the act of this man-it is simply an act of God. In any case, it is 
only an act in so far as it has come to be, and if its coming to be 
is everlasting, it is still an act, because it has come to be. 


158 


Then Ghazali gives the philosophers’ answer: 


The philosophers may say: ‘If you acknowledge that the 
relation of the act to the agent, in so far as this act is an 
existent, is like the relation of effect and cause and you admit 
that the causal relation may be everlasting, we affirm that we do 
not understand anything else by the expression “that the world 
is an act” than that it is an effect having an everlasting relation 
to God. Speak of this as an “act” or not just as you please, for do 


not let us quibble about words when their sense has once been 
established.’ 


Ghazali says: 


Our answer is that our aim in this question is to show that 
you philosophers use those venerable names _ without 
justification, and that God according to you is not a true agent, 
nor the world truly His act, and that you apply this word 
metaphorically-not in its real sense. This has now been shown. 


I say: 


In this argument he supposes that the philosophers concede to him that they 
only mean by God’s agency that He is the cause of the world, and nothing else, 
and that cause and effect are simultaneous. But this would mean that the 
philosophers had abandoned their original statement, for the effect follows 
only from its cause, in so far as it is a formal or final cause, but does not 
necessarily follow from its efficient cause, for the efficient cause frequently 
exists without the effect’s existing. Ghazali acts here like a guardian who tries 
to extract from his ward the confession of having done things he did not 
allow him to do. The philosophers’ theory, indeed, is that the world has an 
agent acting from eternity and everlasting, i.e. converting the world eternally 
from non-being into being. This question was formerly a point of discussion 
between Aristotelians and Platonists. Since Plato believed in a beginning of 
the world, there could not in his system be any hesitation in assuming a 
creative agent for the world. But since Aristotle supposed the world to be 
eternal, the Platonists raised difficulties against him, like the one which 
occupies us here, and they said that Aristotle did not seem to admit a creator 


159 


of the world. If was therefore necessary for the Aristotelians to defend him 
with arguments which establish that Aristotle did indeed believe that the 
world has a creator and an agent. This will be fully explained in its proper 
place. 


The principal idea is that according to the Aristotelians the celestial bodies 
subsist through their movement, and that He who bestows this movement is 
in reality the agent of this movement and, since the existence of the celestial 
bodies only attains its perfection through their being in motion, the giver of 
this motion is in fact the agent of the celestial bodies. Further, they prove that 
God is the giver of the unity through which the world is united, and the giver 
of the unity which is the condition of the existence of the composite; that is to 
say, He provides the existence of the parts through which the composition 
occurs, because this action of combining is their cause (as is proved), and 
such is the relation of the First Principle to the whole world. And the 
statement that the act has come to be, is true, for it is movement, and the 
expression ‘eternity applied to it means only that it has neither a first nor a 
last term. Thus the philosophers do not mean by the expression ‘eternal’ that 
the world is eternal through eternal constituents,s for the world consists of 
movement. And since the Ash’arites did not understand this, it was difficult 
for them to attribute eternity at the same time to God and to the world. 
Therefore the term’ eternal becoming’ is more appropriate to the world than 
the term ‘eternity’. 


Ghazali says: 


The third reason why it is impossible for the philosophers to 
admit according to their principle that the world is the act of 
God is because of a condition which is common to the agent 
and the act, namely, their assertion that out of the one only one 
can proceed. Now the First Principle is one in every way, and 
the world is composed out of different constituents. Therefore 
according to their principle it cannot be imagined that the 
world is the act of God. 


I say: 


160 


If one accepts this principle, and its consequences, then indeed the answer is 
difficult. But this principle has only been put forward by the later 
philosophers of Islam.’ 


Then Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers: 


The philosophers may say perhaps: The world in its totality 
does not proceed from God without a mediator; what proceeds 
from Him is one single existent, and this is the first of the 
created principles, namely, abstract intellect, that is a substance 
subsisting by itself, not possessing any volume, knowing itself 
and knowing its principle, which in the language of the Divine 
Law is called ‘angel’. From it there proceeds a third principle, 
and from the third a fourth, and through this mediation the 
existent beings come to be many. The differentiation and 
multiplicity of the act can proceed either from a differentiation 
in active powers, in the way that we act differently through the 
power of passion and through the power of anger; or through a 
differentiation of matters, as the sun whitens a garment which 
has been washed, blackens the face of man, melts certain 
substances and hardens others; or through a differentiation of 
instruments, as one and the same carpenter saws with a saw, 
cuts with an axe, bores with an awl; or this multiplication of the 
act can proceed through mediation, so that the agent does one 
act, then this act performs another act, and in this way the act 
multiplies. All these divisions are impossible in the First 
Principle, because there is no differentiation nor duality, nor 
multiplicity in His essence, as will be proved in the proofs of 
His unity. And there is here neither a differentiation of matters- 
and the very discussion refers to the first effect, which is, for 
example, primary matter, nor a differentiation of the 
instrument, for there is no existent on the same level as God- 
and the very discussion refers to the coming into existence of 
the first instrument. The only conclusion possible is that the 
multiplicity which is in the world proceeds from God through 
mediation, as has been stated previously. 


161 


I say: 


This amounts to saying that from the One, if He is simple, there can proceed 
only one. And the act of the agent can only be differentiated and multiplied 
either through matters (but there are no matters where He is concerned), or 
through an instrument (but there is no instrument with Him). The only 
conclusion therefore is that this happens through mediation, so that first the 
unit proceeds from Him, and from this unit another, and from this again 
another, and that it is in this way that plurality comes into existence. 


Then Ghazali denies this, and says: 


We answer: The consequence of this would be that there is 
nothing in the world composed of units, but that everything 
that exists is simple and one, and each unit is the effect of a 
superior unit and the cause of an inferior, till the series ends in 
an effect which has no further effect, just as the ascending series 
ends in a cause which has no other cause. But in reality it is not 
like this, for, according to the philosophers, body is composed 
of form and Kyle, and through this conjunction there arises one 
single thing; and man is composed out of body and soul and 
body does not arise out of soul, nor soul out of body: they exist 
together through another cause. The sphere, too, is, according 
to them, like this, for it is a body possessing a soul and the soul 
does not come to be through the body, nor the body through 
the soul; no, both proceed from another cause. How do these 
compounds, then, come into existence? Through one single 
cause? But then their principle that out of the one only one 
arises is false. Or through a compound cause? But then the 
question can be repeated in the case of this cause, till one 
necessarily arrives at a point where the compound and the 
simple meet. For the First Principle is simple and the rest are 
compound, and this can only be imagined through their 
contact. But wherever this contact takes place, this principle, 
that out of the one only one proceeds, is false. 


I say: 


162 


This consequence, that everything which exists is simple, is a necessary 
consequence for the philosophers, if they assume that the First Agent is like a 
simple agent in the empirical world. But this consequence is binding only 
upon the man who applies this principle universally to everything that exists. 
But the man who divides existents into abstract existents and material, 
sensible existents, makes the principles to which the sensible existent ascends 
different from the principles to which the intelligible existent ascends, for he 
regards as the principles of the sensible existents matter and form, and he 
makes some of these existents the agents of others, till the heavenly body is 
reached, and he makes the intelligible substances ascend to a first principle 
which is a principle to them, in one way analogous to a formal cause, in 
another analogous to a final cause, and in a third way analogous to an 
efficient cause. All this has been proved in the works of the philosophers, and 
we state this proposition here only in a general way. Therefore these 
difficulties do not touch them. And this is the theory of Aristotle.’ 


About this statement-that out of the one only one proceeds-all ancient 
philosophers were agreed, when they investigated the first principle of the 
world in a dialectical way (they mistook this investigation, however, for a real 
demonstration), and they all came to the conclusion that the first principle is 
one and the same for everything, and that from the one only one can proceed. 
Those two principles having been established, they started to examine where 
multiplicity comes from. For they had already come to the conclusion that the 
older theory was untenable. This theory held that the first principles are two, 
one for the good, one for the bad; for those older philosophers did not think 
that the principles of the opposites could be one and the same; they believed 
that the most general opposites which comprehend all opposites are the good 
and the bad, and held therefore that the first principles must be two. When, 
however, after a close examination, it was discovered that all things tend to 
one end, and this end is the order which exists in the world, as it exists in an 
army through its leader, and as it exists in cities through their government, 
they came to the conclusion that the world must have one highest principle; 
and this is the sense of the Holy Words ‘If there were in heaven and earth gods 
beside God, both would surely have been corrupted’. They believed therefore, 
because of the good which is present in everything, that evil occurs only in an 


163 


accidental way, like the punishments which good governors of cities ordain; 
for they are evils instituted for the sake of the good, not by primary intention. 
For there exist amongst good things some that can only exist with an 
admixture of evil, for instance, in the being of man who is composed of a 
rational and an animal soul. Divine Wisdom has ordained, according to these 
philosophers, that a great quantity of the good should exist, although it had to 
be mixed with a small quantity of evil, for the existence of much good with a 
little evil is preferable to the non-existence of much good because of a little 


evidence. 


Since therefore these later philosophers were convinced that the first 
principle must of necessity be one and unique, and this difficulty about the 
one occurred, they gave three answers to this question. Some, like Anaxagoras 
and his school, believe that plurality is only introduced through matter,’ some 
believe that plurality is introduced through the instruments, and some believe 
that plurality comes only through the mediators; and the first who assumed 
this was Plato. This is the most convincing answer, for in the case of both the 
other solutions one would have to ask again; from where does the plurality 
come in the matters and in the instruments? But this difficulty touches anyone 
who acknowledges that from the one only one can proceed: he has to explain 
how plurality can derive from the one. Nowadays, however, the contrary of 
this theory, namely, that out of the one all things proceed by one first 
emanation, is generally accepted, and with our contemporaries we need 


discuss only this latter statement. 


The objection which Ghazali raises against the Peripatetics, that, if plurality 
were introduced through mediators, there could only arise a plurality of 
qualitatively undifferentiated agglomerates which could only form a 
quantitative plurality, does not touch them. For the Peripatetics hold that 
there exists a twofold plurality, the plurality of simple beings, those beings 
namely that do not exist in matter, and that some of these are the causes of 
others and that they all ascend to one unique cause which is of their own 
genus, and is the first being of their genus, and that the plurality of the 
heavenly bodies only arises from the plurality of these principles; and that the 
plurality of the sublunary world comes only from matter and form and the 
heavenly bodies. So the Peripatetics are not touched by this difficulty. The 


164 


heavenly bodies are moved primarily through their movers, which are 
absolutely immaterial, and the forms of these heavenly bodies are acquired 
from these movers and the forms in the sublunary world are acquired from 
the heavenly bodies and also from each other, indifferently, whether they are 
forms of the elements which are in imperishable prime matters or forms of 
bodies composed out of the elements, and, indeed, the composition in this 
sublunary world arises out of the heavenly bodies. This is their theory of the 
order which exists in the world. The reasons which led the philosophers to 
this theory cannot be explained here, since they built it on many principles 
and propositions, which are proved in many sciences and through many 
sciences in a systematic way. But when the philosophers of our religion, like 
Farabi and Avicenna, had once conceded to their opponents that the agent in 
the divine world is like the agent in the empirical, and that from the one agent 
there can arise but one object (and according to all the First was an absolutely 
simple unity), it became difficult for them to explain how plurality could arise 
from it. This difficulty compelled them finally to regard the First as different 
from the mover of the daily circular movement; they declared that from the 
First, who is a simple existent, the mover of the highest sphere proceeds, and 
from this mover, since he is of a composite nature, as he is both conscious of 
himself and conscious of the First, a duality, the highest sphere, and the 
mover of the second sphere, the sphere under the highest can arise. This, 
however, is a mistake,’ according to philosophical teaching, for thinker and 
thought are one identical thing in human intellect and this is still more true in 
the case of the abstract intellects. This does not affect Aristotle’s theory, for 
the individual agent in the empirical world, from which there can only 
proceed one single act, can only in an equivocal way be compared to the first 
agent. For the first agent in the divine world is an absolute agent, while the 
agent in the empirical world is a relative agent, and from the absolute agent 
only an absolute act which has no special individual object can proceed. And 
thereby Aristotle proves that the agent of the human intelligibles is an 
intellect free from matter, since this agent thinks all things, and in the same 
way he proves that the passive intellect is ingenerable and incorruptible,s 
because this intellect also thinks all things. 


165 


According to the system of Aristotle the answer on this point is that 
everything whose existence is only effected through a conjunction of parts, 
like the conjunction of matter and form, or the conjunction of the elements of 
the world, receives its existence as a consequence of this conjunction. The 
bestower of this conjunction is, therefore, the bestower of existence. And since 
everything conjoined is only conjoined through a unity in it, and this unity 
through which it is conjoined must depend on a unity, subsistent by itself, and 
be related to it, there must exist a single unity, subsistent by itself, and this 
unity must of necessity provide unity through its own essence. This unity is 
distributed in the different classes of existing things, according to their 
natures, and from this unity, allotted to the individual things, their existence 
arises; and all those unities lead upwards to the First Monad, as warmth which 
exists in all the individual warm things proceeds from primal warmth, which 
is fire, and leads upwards to it? By means of this theory Aristotle connects 
sensible existence with intelligible, saying that the world is one and proceeds 
from one, and that this Monad is partly the cause of unity, partly the cause of 
plurality. And since Aristotle was the first to find this solution, and because of 
its difficulty, many of the later philosophers did not understand it, as we have 
shown. It is evident, therefore, that there is a unique entity from which a 
single power emanates through which all beings exist. And since they are 
many, it is necessarily from the Monad, in so far as it is one, that plurality 
arises or proceeds or whatever term is to be used. This is the sense of 
Aristotle’s theory, a sense very different from that in which those thinkers 
believe who affirm that from the one only one can proceed. See therefore how 
serious this error proved among the philosophers! You should, therefore, see 
for youself in the books of the ancients whether these philosophical theories 
are proved, not in the works of Avicenna and others who changed the 
philosophical doctrine in its treatment of metaphysics so much that it became 


mere guessing. 
Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers: 


It may be said: If the philosophical theory is properly 
understood, the difficulties disappear. Existents can be divided 
into what exists in a substratum, like accidents and forms, and 
what does not exist in a substratum. The latter can be divided 


166 


again into what serves as a substratum for other things, e.g. 
bodies, and what does not exist in a substratum, e.g. substances 
which subsist by themselves. These latter again are divided into 
those which exert an influence on bodies and which we call 
souls, and those which exert an influence not on bodies but on 
souls, and which we call abstract intellects. Existents which 
inhere in a substratum, like accidents, are temporal and have 
temporal causes which terminate in a principle, in one way 
temporal, in another way everlasting, namely, circular 
movement. But we are not discussing this here. Here we are 
discussing only those principles which exist by themselves and 
do not inhere in a substratum, which are of three kinds: (i) 
bodies, which are the lowest type, (ii) abstract intellects, which 
are not attached to bodies, either by way of action or by being 
impressed upon them, which are the highest type, and (iii) 
souls, which are the intermediate agencies, attached to the 
bodies in a certain way, namely, through their influence and 
their action upon them, and which stand midway in dignity; 
they undergo an influence from the intellects and exert an 
influence upon the bodies. 


Now the number of bodies is ten. There are nine heavens, 
and the tenth body is the matter which fills the concavity of the 
sphere of the moon. The nine heavens are animated; they 
possess bodies and souls, and they have an order in existence 
which we shall mention here. From the existence of the First 
Principle there emanates the first intellect-an existent which 
subsists by itself, immaterial, not impressed on body, conscious 
of its principle and which we philosophers call First Intellect, 
but which (for we do not quibble about words) may be called 
angel, or intellect, or what you will. From its existence there 
derive three things, an intellect, the soul, and the body of the 
farthest sphere, i.e. the ninth heaven. Then from the second 
intellect there derive a third intellect and the soul and the body 
of the sphere of the fixed stars, then from the third intellect 


167 


there derive a fourth intellect and the soul and the body of the 
sphere of Saturn, then from the fourth intellect there derive a 
fifth intellect and the soul and the body of the sphere of Jupiter, 
and so on till one arrives at the intellect from which there 
derive the intellect, the soul and the body of the sphere of the 
moon, and this last intellect is that which is called the active 
intellect. Then there follows that which fills the sphere of the 
moon, namely, the matter which receives generation and 
corruption from the active intellect and from the natures of the 
spheres. Then through the action of the movements of the 
spheres and the stars the matters are mixed in different 
mixtures from which the minerals, vegetables, and animals 
arise. It is not necessary that from each intellect another 
intellect should derive endlessly, for these intellects are of a 
different kind, and what is valid for the one is not valid for the 
other. It follows from this that the intellects after the First 
Principle are ten in number and that there are nine spheres, and 
the sum of these noble principles after the First Principle is 
therefore nineteen; and that under each of the primary 
intellects there are three things, another intellect and a soul and 
body of a sphere. Therefore there must be in each intellect a 
triple character, and in the first effect a plurality can only be 
imagined in this way: (i) it is conscious of its principle, (ii) it is 
conscious of itself, (iii) it is in itself possible, since the necessity 
of its existence derives from another. These are three 
conditions, and the most noble of these three effects must be 
related to the most noble of these conditions. Therefore the 
intellect proceeds from the first effect; in so far as the first effect 
is conscious of its principle; the soul of the sphere proceeds 
from the first effect, in so far as the first effect is conscious of 
itself; and the body of the sphere proceeds from the first effect, 
in so far as by itself the first effect belongs to possible existence. 
We must still explain why this triple character is found in the 
first effect, although its principle is only one. We say that from 
the First Principle only one thing proceeds, namely, the essence 


168 


of this intellect through which it is conscious of itself. The 
effect, however, must by itself become conscious of its principle, 
and this kind of consciousness cannot derive from its cause. 
Also the effect by itself belongs to possible existence, and i 
cannot receive this possibility from the First Principle, but 
possesses it in its own essence. We do indeed regard it as 
possible that one effect should proceed from the one, although 
this effect possesses by itself and not through its principle 
certain necessary qualities, either relative or nonrelative. In this 
way a plurality arises, and so it becomes the principle of the 
existence of plurality. Thus the composite can meet the simple, 
as their meeting must needs take place and cannot take place in 
any other g manner, and this is the right and reasonable 
explanation, and it is in this way that this philosophical theory 
must be understood. 


I say: 


All these are inventions fabricated against the philosophers by Avicenna, 
Farabi, and others. But the true theory of the ancient philosophers is that 
there are principles which are the celestial bodies, and that the principles of 
the celestial bodies, which are immaterial existents, are the movers of those 
celestial bodies, and that the celestial bodies move towards them in obedience 
to them and out of love for them, to comply with their order to move and to 
understand them, and that they are only created with a view to movement. For 
when it was found that the principles which move the celestial bodies are 
immaterial and incorporeal, there was no way left to them in which they 
might move the bodies other than by ordering them to move. And from this 
the philosophers concluded that the celestial bodies are rational animals, 
conscious of themselves and of their principles, which move them by 
command. And since it was established-in the De Anima-that there is no 
difference between knowledge and the object of knowledge, except for the 
latter’s being in matter, of necessity the substance of immaterial beings-if 
there are such -had to be knowledge or intellect or whatever you wish to call 
it. And the philosophers knew that these principles must be immaterial, 
because they confer on the celestial bodies everlasting movement in which 


169 


there is no fatigue or weariness,’ and that anything which bestows such an 
everlasting movement must be immaterial, and cannot be a material power. 
And indeed the celestial body acquires its permanence only through these 
immaterial principles. And the philosophers understood that the existence of 
these immaterial principles must be connected with a first principle amongst 
them; if not, there could be no order in the world. You can find these theories 
in the books of the philosophers and, if you want to make sure of the truth in 
these matters, you will have to consult them. It also becomes clear from the 
fact that all the spheres have the daily circular movement, although besides 
this movement they have, as the philosophers had ascertained, their own 
special movements, that He who commands this movement must be the First 
Principle, i.e. God, and that He commands the other principles to order the 
other movements to the other spheres. Through this heaven and earth are 
ruled as a state is ruled by the commands of the supreme monarch, which, 
however, are transmitted to all classes of the population by the men he has 
appointed for this purpose in the different affairs of the state. As it says in the 
Qur’an: ‘And He inspired every Heaven with its bidding. This heavenly 
injunction and this obedience are the prototypes of the injunction and 
obedience imposed on man because he is a rational animal. What Avicenna 
says of the derivation of these principles from each other is a theory not 
known amongst the ancients, who merely state that these principles hold 
certain positions in relation to the First Principle, and that their existence is 
only made real through this relation to the First Principle. As is said in the 
Qur’an: “There is none amongst us but has his appointed place. It is the 
connexion which exists between them which brings it about that some are the 
effect of others and that they all depend on the First Principle. By ‘agent’ and 
‘object’, ‘creator’ and ‘creature’, in so far as it concerns this existence nothing 
more can be understood than just this idea of connexion. But what we said of 
this connexion of every existent with the One is something different from 
what is meant by ‘agent’ and ‘object’, ‘maker’ and ‘product’ in this sublunary 
world. If you imagine a ruler who has many men under his command who 
again have others under their command, and if you imagine that those 
commanded receive their existence only through receiving this command and 
through their obedience to this command, and those who are under those 
commanded can only exist through those commanded, of necessity the first 


170 


ruler will be the one who bestows on all existents the characteristic through 
which they become existent, and that which exists through its being 
commanded will only exist because of the first ruler. And the philosophers 
understood that this is what is meant by the divine laws when they speak of 
creation, of calling into existence out of nothing, and of command. This is tire 
best way to teach people to understand the philosophical doctrine without tile 
ignominy attaching to it, which seems to attach when you listen to the 
analysis Ghazali gives of it here. Tire philosophers assert that all this is proved 
in their books, and the man who, (raving fulfilled the conditions they impose,’ 
is able to study their works will find the truth of what they say---or perhaps its 
opposite--and will not understand Aristotle’s theory or Plato’s in any other 
sense than that here indicated. And their philosophy is tire highest point 
human intelligence can reach. It may be that, Nvlrerr it man discover, these 
explanations of philosophical theory, lie will find that they happen not only to 
be true but to be generally acknowledged, and teachings which are fserrerally 
acceptable are pleasing and delightful to all. 


One of the premisses from which this explanation is deduced is that when 
one observes this sublunary world, one finds that what is called ‘living’ and 
‘knowing’ moves on its own account in welldefined movements towards well- 
defined ends and well-defined acts from which new well-defined acts arise. 
For this reason the theologians say that any act can only proceed from a 
living, knowing being. When one has found this first premiss, that what 
moves in welldefined movements from which arise well-defined and ordered 
actions is living and knowing, and one joins to this a second premiss which 
can be verified by the senses, that the heavens move on their own account in 
well-defined movements from which there follow in the existents under them 
well-defined acts, order, and rank through which these existents under them 
receive their subsistence, one deduces from this, no doubt, a third principle, 
namely, that the heavenly bodies are living beings endowed with perception. 
That from their movements there follow well-defined acts from which this 
sublunary world, its animals, vegetables, and minerals receive their 
subsistence and conservation , is evident from observation, for, were it not 
that the sun in its ecliptic approaches the sublunary world and recedes from 
it, there would not be the four seasons, and without tile four seasons there 


171 


would be no plants and no animals, and the orderly origination of elements 
out of each other necessary for the conservation of their existence would not 
take place. For instance, when the sun recedes towards tile south the air in the 
north becomes cold and rains occur and tire production of the watery element 
increases, whereas in tile south tile production of the airy element becomes 
greater; whereas in summer, when the sun approaches our zenith, the 
opposite takes place. Those actions which the sun exercises everlastingly 
through its varying distance from the different existents which always occupy 
one and the same place are also found in the moon and all the stars which 
have oblique spheres, and they produce tile four seasons through their 
circular movements, and the most important of all these movements, in its 
necessity for tire existence and conservation of the creation, is tire highest 
circular movement which produces day and night. The Venerable Book refers 
in several verses to the providential care for man which arises out of God’s 
subjection of all tile heavens to His bidding, as, for instance, in tile Qur’anic 
verse ‘And the sun and the moon and the stars are subjected to His bidding’, 
and wlrcn man observes these acts and this guidance which proceed 
necessarily and permanently from tire movcnrcnts of tile stars, and sees how 
these stars move in fixed movements, and drat they have well-defined shapes 
and move in well-defined directions towards well-defined actions in opposite 
motions, he understands that these well-defined acts can only arise from 
beings perceptive, living, capable of choice and of willing. 


And he becomes still more convinced of this when he sees that many beings 
in this world which have small, despicable, miserable, and insignificant bodies 
are not wholly devoid of life, notwithstanding the smallness of their size, the 
feebleness of their powers, the shortness of their lives, the insignificance of 
their bodies; and that divine munificence has bestowed on them life and 
perception, through which they direct themselves and conserve their 
existence. And he knows with absolute certainty that the heavenly bodies are 
better fitted to possess life and perception than the bodies of this sublunary 
world, because of the size of their bodies, the magnificence of their existence, 
and the multitude of their lights,’ as it says in the Divine Words: ‘Surely the 
creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of man, but 
most men know it not. But especially when he notices how they direct the 


172 


living beings of this sublunary world, does he understand with absolute 
certainty that they are alive, for the living can only be guided by a being 
leading a more perfect life. And when man observes these noble, living, 
rational bodies, capable of choice, which surround us, and recognizes a third 
principle, namely, that they do not need for their own existence the 
providence with which they guide the sublunary world, he becomes aware that 
they are commanded to perform these movements and to control the animals, 
vegetables, and minerals of this sublunary world, and that He who commands 
them is not one of them and that He is necessarily incorporeal (for, if not, He 
would be one of them) and that all these heavenly bodies control the existents 
which are under them, but serve Him, who for His existence is in no need of 
them. And were it not for this Commander, they would not give their care 
everlastingly and continuously to this sublunary world which they guide 
willingly, without any advantage to themselves, especially in this act. They 
move thus by way of command and obligation the heavens which repair to 
them, only in order to conserve this sublunary world and to uphold its 
existence. And the Commander is God (glory be to Him), and all this is the 
meaning of the Divine Words ‘We come willingly’. 


And another proof of all this is that, if a man sees a great many people, 
distinguished and meritorious, applying themselves to definite acts without a 
moment’s interruption, although these acts are not necessary for their own 
existence and they do not need them, it is absolutely evident to him that these 
acts have been prescribed and ordered to them and that they have a leader 
who has obliged them in his everlasting service to act continually for the good 
of others. This leader is the highest among them in power and rank and they 
are, as it were, his submissive slaves. And this is the meaning to which the 
Venerable Book refers in the words: “Thus did we show Abraham the kingdom 
of heaven. and the earth that he should be of those who are safe. “ And when 
man observes still another thing, namely, that all the seven planets in their 
own special movements are subservient to their universal daily motion and 
that their own bodies as parts of the whole are submissive to the universal 
body, as if they were all one in fulfilling this service, he knows again with 
absolute certainty that each planet has its own commanding principle, 
supervising it as a deputy of the first Commander. Just as, in the organization 


173 


of armies, | where each body of troops has one commander, called a 
centurion, each centurion is subordinate to the one Commander-in-chief of 
the army, so also in regard to the movements of the heavenly bodies which the 
ancients observed. They number somewhat more than forty, of which seven or 
eight’-for the ancients disagreed about this -dominate the others and 
themselves depend on the first Commander, praise be to Him! Man acquires 
this knowledge in this way, whether or not lie knows how the principle of the 
creation of these heavenly bodies acts, or what the connexion is between the 
existence of these commanders and the first Commander. In any case lie does 
not doubt that, if these heavenly bodies existed by themselves, that is, if they 
were eternal and had no cause, they might refuse to serve their own 
commanders or might not obey them, and the commanders might refuse to 
obey the first Commander. But, since it is not possible for them to behave in 
this way, the relation between them and the first Commander is determined 
by absolute obedience, and this means nothing more than that they possess 
this obedience in the essence of their being, not accidentally, as is the case in 
the relation between master and servant. Servitude, therefore, is not 
something additional to their essence, but these essences subsist through 
servitude and this is the meaning of the Divine Words: ‘There is none in the 
heavens or the earth but comes to the Merciful as a servant. And their 
possession is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth which God showed to 
Abraham, as it is expressed in the Devine Words: “Thus did we show Abraham 
the kingdom of heaven and earth that he should be of those who are safe. 
Therefore you will understand that the creation of these bodies and the 
principle of their becoming cannot be like the coming to be of the bodies of 
this sublunary world, and that the human intellect is too weak to understand 
how this act works, although it knows that this act exists. He who tries to 
compare heavenly with earthly existence, and believes that the Agent of the 
divine world acts in the way in which an agent in this sublunary world works, 
is utterly thoughtless, profoundly mistaken, and in complete error. 


This is the extreme limit we can reach in our understanding of the theories 
of the ancients about the heavenly bodies, of their proof for the existence of a 
Creator for these bodies who is immaterial, and of their statements 


concerning the immaterial existents under Him, one of which is the soul. But 


174 


to believe in His existence as if He were the cause through which these bodies 
had been produced in time, in the way we see the production of the bodies of 
this sublunary world, as the theologians desired-this, indeed, is very difficult, 
and the premisses they use for its proof do not lead them where they desire. 
We shall show this later, when we discuss the different proofs for the existence 
of God. 


And since this has been firmly established, we shall now go back to relate 
and refute in detail what Ghazali tells of the philosophers, and to show the 
degree of truth reached by his assertions, for this is the primary intention of 
this book. 


Ghazali says, refuting the philosophers: 


What you affirm are only suppositions and in fact you do 
nothing but add obscurities to obscurities. If a man were to say 
that he had seen such things in a dream, it would be a proof of 
his bad constitution, or if one should advance such arguments 
in juridical controversies, in which everything under discussion 
is conjectural, one would say these were stupidities which could 


not command any assent. 
I say: 


This is very much the way the ignorant treat the learned and the vulgar the 
eminent, and in this way, too, the common people behave towards the 
products of craftsmanship. For, when the artisans show the common people 
the products of their craftsmanship which possess many qualities from which 
they draw wonderful actions, the masses scoff at them and regard them as 
insane, whereas in reality they themselves are insane and ignorant in 
comparison with the wise. With such utterances as these the learned and the 
thoughtful need not occupy themselves. What Ghazali ought to have done, 
since he relates these theories, is to show the motives which led to them, so 
that the reader might compare them with the arguments through which he 
wants to refute them. 


Ghazali says: 


175 


The ways of refuting such theories are countless, but we 
shall bring here a certain number. The first is that we say: You 
claim that one of the meanings of plurality in the first effect is 
that it is possible in its existence, but we ask whether its being 
possible in its existence is identical with its being or something 
different? If you say ‘identical’, then no plurality proceeds from 
it, but if you say that it is different, why then do you not assert 
that there is a plurality in the First Principle, for it not only has 
existence, but is necessary in its existence, and existence and 
necessary existence are not identical. Therefore, because of this 
plurality in the First Principle, let us allow that different entities 
proceed from it. If it is said: ‘Necessity of existence cannot 
mean anything but existence’, we answer: ‘Possibility of 
existence cannot mean anything but existence. If, however, you 
say: ‘Its existence can be known without its possibility being 
known, and therefore they are different, we answer: ‘In the 
same way the existence of the necessary existent can be known 
without its necessity being known, unless another proof is 
added,’ let them therefore be different! Generally speaking, 
existence is a universal which can be divided into necessary and 
possible, and if the one specific difference is an addition to the 
universal, the other specific difference is also an addition, for 
both cases are the same. If you say, ‘It possesses the possibility 
of its existence through itself and its existence through another, 
how then can what it possesses through itself and what it 
possesses through another be identical?’ we answer: ‘How then 
can the necessity of its being be identical with its being, so that 
the necessity of its existence can be denied and its existence 
affirmed? And to God, the One, the Absolute Truth, negation 
and affirmation cannot be applied equivocally, for one cannot 
say of Him that He is and is not, or that His existence is at the 
same time necessary or not necessary; but it can be said of Him 
that He exists, but that His existence is not necessary, as it can 
be said of Him that He exists, but that His existence is not 
possible. And it is through this that His Unity can be 


176 


recognized. But this unity in the First cannot be upheld, if what 
you say is true, that possibility of existence is something 
different from the possible existent. 


I say: 


Ghazali affirms that, when we say of a thing that it is possible in its 
existence, this must either mean that it is identical with its existence or 
different from it, i.e. something additional to its existence. If it is identical, 
there is no plurality, and the statement of the philosophers that there is a 
plurality in the possible existent has no sense. If, however, it is not identical, 
the philosophers will have to make the same admission about the necessary 
existent, i.e. that there is a plurality in it, but this is in contradiction to their 
own principle. This reasoning, however, is not valid, for Ghazali has 
overlooked a third case, namely, that necessity of being might be not 
something added to existence outside the soul but a condition’ in the 
necessary existent which adds nothing to its essence; it might be said to refer 
to the denial of its being the effect of something else, a denial of that which is 
affirmed of all other entities, just as, when we say of something that it is one, 
nothing additional to its essence existing outside the soul is meant-as is, on 
the contrary, the case when we speak of a white existent-but only a negative 
condition, namely, indivisibility. In the same way, when we speak of the 
necessary existent, we mean by the necessity of His existence a negative 
condition which is the consequence of His existence, namely, that His 
existence is necessary through Himself, not through something else. And also 
when we speak of the existent which is possible through itself, it is not 
something additional to its essence outside the soul-as is the case with the real 
possible-that should be understood, but merely that its essence determines 
that its existence can become necessary only through a cause; what is meant, 
therefore, is an essence which will not be by itself necessary in its existence 
when its cause is removed and therefore is not a necessary existent, i.e. it is 
denied the quality of necessary existence. It is as if Ghazali said that the 
necessary existent is partially necessary through itself, partially through a 
cause, and that which is necessary through a cause is not necessary through 
itselfb Nobody doubts that these specific differences are neither substantial 
differences which divide the essence nor additions to the essence, but that 


177 


they are only negative or relative relations, just as, when we say that a thing 
exists, the word ‘exists’ does not indicate an entity added to its essence 
outside the soul, which is the case when we say of a thing that it is white. It is 
here that Avicenna erred, for he believed that unity is an addition to the 
essence and also that existence, when we say that a thing exists, is an addition 
to the things This question will be treated later. And the first to develop this 
theory of the existent, possible by itself and necessary through another, was 
Avicenna; for him possibility was a quality in a thing, different from the thing 
in which the possibility is, and from this it seems to follow that what is under 
the First is composed of two things, one to which possibility is attributed, the 
other to which necessity is attributed; but this is a mistaken theory. But he 
who has understood our explanation will not be concerned about the 
difficulty which Ghazali adduces against Avicenna. The only question he will 
have to ask, when he has understood the meaning of ‘possibility of existence’ 
for the first effect, is whether this possibility brings about a compound 
character in the first effect or not, for if the quality is relative, it does not 
bring about a compound character. For not all the different dispositions 
which can be imagined in a thing need determine additional qualities in its 
essence outside the soul; indeed, this is the case with the disposition of 
privations and relations, and for this reason certain philosophers do not 
count the category of relation among things which exist outside the soul, i.e. 
the ten categories. Ghazali, however, implies in his argument that any 
additional meaning must apply to an additional entity actually outside the 
soul; but this is a mistake, and a sophistical argument. This follows from his 


words 


Generally speaking, existence is a universal which can be divided into 
necessary and possible, and if the one specific difference is an addition to the 
universal, the other specific difference also is an addition, for both cases are 
the same. 


But the division of existence into possible and necessary is not like the 
division of animal into rational and irrational, or into walking, swimming, 
and flying animals, for those things are additional to the genus and provide 
additional species-animality is their common concept and they are specific 
differences added to it. But the possible into which Avicenna divides existence 


178 


is not an entity actually outside the soul, and his theory is wrong, as we said 
before. For the existence which for its existence is in need of a cause can, as an 
entity by itself, only be understood as non-existence-that is to say, anything 
that exists through another thing must be non-existent by itself, unless its 
nature is the nature of the true possible. Therefore the division of existence 
into necessary and possible existence is not a valid one, if one does not mean 
by ‘possible’ the true possible; but we will treat of this later. The summary of 
what we said here is that the existent can be divided either into essential 
differences or into relative conditions or into accidents additional to its 
essence; out of the division into essential differences there must necessarily 
result a plurality of acts which arise out of the existent, but out of the division 
into relational and accidental dispositions no such plurality of different acts 
results. And if it should be claimed that out of relational qualities a plurality 
of acts results, well then, a plurality will proceed from the First Principle of 
necessity without need of the intervention of an effect as the principle of 
plurality; on the other hand, if it should be claimed that out of relational 
qualities no plurality of acts results, well then, out of the relational qualities of 
the first effect also there will result no plurality of acts, and this latter 
assumption is the better.’ 


Ghazali says: 


How then can what it possesses through itself, and what it 
possesses through another, be identical? 


But how can this same man who affirms that possibility exists only in the 
mind, say such a thing? Why then does he not apply this doctrine here, for it is 
not impossible for the one essence to be positive and negative in its relations 
without there resulting a plurality in this essence-which, however, Ghazali 
denies. But if you have understood this, you will be able to solve the problem 
Ghazali poses in this section. 


If it is said: ‘It follows from this that there is no composition, either in 
existence, necessary by itself, or in existence, necessary through another,’ we 
answer: As to what is necessary through another, the mind perceives in it a 
composition through cause and effect; if it is a body , there must be in it both 
a unity actually, and a plurality potentially; if it is, however, incorporeal, the 


179 


mind does not perceive a plurality either in act or in potency . For this reason 
the philosophers call this kind of existent simple, but they regard the cause as 
more simple than the effect and they hold that the First is the most simple of 
them all, because it cannot be understood as having any cause or effect at all. 
But composition can be understood of the principles which come after the 
First; therefore, according to the philosophers, the second principle is more 
simple than the third, and it is in this way that their theory must be 
understood. The meaning of ‘cause’ and ‘effect’ in these existents is that a 
potential plurality (as it were) exists in them which shows itself in the effect, 
i.e. there proceeds out of it a plurality of effects which it never contains 
actually in any definite moments If the hearer has understood their theory in 
this way and accepted it, he will see that they are not affected by the 
objections of Ghazali. But one should not understand this theory in the way 
Ghazali does, namely, that out of the second principle, because it knows its 
own essence and knows its principle, and therefore possesses two forms or a 
dual existence, there proceed two different things, for this is a false theory. 
For this would mean that this second principle is composed of more than one 
form and that therefore this form’ is one in its substratum, many by its 
definition, as is the case with the soul. But the theologians keep tenaciously to 
this false explanation in their statements about the derivation of these 
principles from each other, as if they wanted to understand the divine through 
an analogy with perceptible acts; indeed, when metaphysics contains such 
theories, it becomes more conjectural than jurisprudence. You will have seen 
from this that the conclusion Ghazali wants the philosophers to draw 
concerning the plurality in the necessary existent, because of the plurality 
which he considers must exist in the possible existent, has no validity. For, if 
possibility were understood as real possibility, it would indeed imply here a 
plurality, but since this is impossible, according to what we have said and 
shall show later, nothing similar follows concerning the necessary existent. 
But if possibility is understood as being a concept of the mind, it follows that 
neither the necessary existent nor the possible existent must be regarded as 
composite for this reason; the only reason why composition must be admitted 
here is because of the relation of cause ; and effect. 


Ghazali says: 


180 


The second objection is that we say: ‘Is the knowledge the 
first effect has of its principle identical with its own existence 
and with the knowledge it has of itself? If so, there is only a 
plurality in the expression used to describe the essence, not in 
the essence itself; if not, this plurality will exist also in the First, 
for He knows Himself and He knows others. 


I say: 


What is true is that the knowledge the first effect has of its principle is 
identical with its own essence and that the first effect belongs to the domain of 
relation and is therefore of a lesser rank than the First who belongs to the 
domain of what exists by itself. It is true, according to the philosophers, that 
the First thinks only His own essencenot something relative, namely, that He 
is a principle-but His essence, according to the philosophers, contains all 
intellects, nay, all existents, in a nobler and more perfect way than they all 
possess in reality, as we shall explain later. Therefore this theory does not 
imply the abominable consequences he ascribes to it. 


Ghazali says: 


It may be said by the philosophers that His knowing Himself 
is identical with His essence, and that he who does not know 
that he is a principle for others does not know his own essence, 
for knowledge conforms to the thing known and refers 
therefore to His essence. 


I say: 


This statement is wrong, for His being a principle is something relative and 
cannot be identical with His essence. If He could think that He is a principle, 
He would be conscious of the things the principle of which He is, in the way 
these things really exist, and in this case the higher would be perfected 
through the lower, for the thing known is the perfection of the knower 
according to the philosophers, as is set forth in the sciences about the human 


intellect.’ 


Ghazali says: 


181 


But we answer: In this case the knowledge the effect has of 
itself is identical with its essence, for it thinks with its substance 
and knows itself, and intellect and knower and thing known are 
all one. Therefore, if its knowing itself is identical with its 
essence, well then, let it think itself as the effect of a cause, for 
this it really is. But the intellect conforms to the thing known; 
therefore all this refers solely to its essence and so there is no 
plurality. If, indeed, there is a plurality, it must exist in the First. 
Therefore, let differentiation proceed from the First. 


I say: 


What he says here of the philosophers, about the exclusive existence of a 
plurality in the principles under the First Principle, is wrong and does not 
follow from their principles. There is, according to them, no plurality in these 
intellects, and they do not distinguish themselves by simplicity and plurality, 
but only by being cause and effect. And the difference between the knowledge 
of the First Principle, as knowing itself, and the knowledge of the other 
principles, as knowing themselves, is that the First Principle thinks itself as 
existing by itself, not as being related to a cause, whereas the other intellects 
think themselves as related to their cause and in this way plurality is 
introduced into them. They need not all have the same degree of simplicity, 
since they are not of the same rank in relation to the First Principle and none 
of them is simple in the sense in which the First Principle is simple, because 
the First Principle is regarded as an existence by itself whereas they are in 


related existence. 
And as to Ghazali’s words: 


Therefore, if its knowing itself is identical with its essence, 
well then, let it think itself as the effect of a cause, for this it 
really is. But the intellect conforms to the thing known, and 
therefore all this refers solely to its essence and so there is no 
plurality. If, indeed, there is a plurality, it must exist in the First 
Principle. 


I say: 


182 


It does not follow from the fact that intellect and the thing known are 
identical in the separate intellects that they are all similar in simplicity, for in 
this, according to the philosophers, some are superior to others in a greater or 
lesser degree; absolute simplicity is only found in the First Intellect, and the 
reason is that the essence of the First Intellect is subsistent by itself, and the 
other intellects, when they think themselves, are conscious that they subsist 
by it; if intellect and the intelligible were in each of them of the same degree of 
unity as in the First Principle, either the essence existing by reason of itself 
and the essence existing by reason of another would be congruous, or intellect 
would not conform to the nature of the intelligible thing; which is impossible, 
according to the philosophers. All these arguments and their answers, as set 
forth by Ghazali, are dialectical and the only man who can-notwithstanding 
the deficiency of the human understanding concerning these questions-give a 
demonstrative argument about them is the man who knows (to begin with) 
what the intellect is, and the only man who knows what the intellect is is the 
man who knows what the soul is, and the only man who knows what the soul 
is is the man who knows what a living being is. There is no sense in discussing 
these matters in a superficial way and according to the common notions, 
which do not contain specific knowledge and are not properly related to the 
problem. To discuss these questions, before knowing what the intellect is, is 
nothing more than babbling. The Ash/’arites, therefore, when they relate the 
philosophical doctrines, make them extremely hateful and something very 
different from even the first speculation of man about what exists. 


Ghazali says: 


Let us therefore drop the claim of its absolute unity, if this 
unity is annulled through plurality of this kind. 
I say: 


Ghazali means that, when the philosophers assume that the First thinks its 
own essence and knows through this that it is the cause of others, they must 
conclude that it is not absolutely one. For it has not yet been proved that God 
must be absolutely one. This is the theory of some Peripatetics who 
interpreted it as the theory of Aristotle himself. 


Ghazali says: 


183 


If it is said that the First knows only its own essence, and the 
knowledge of its own essence is identical with its essence, for 
intelligence, thinker, and intelligible are all one and it does not 
know anything but itself-this can be refuted in two ways. First, 
because of its worthlessness this theory was abandoned by 
Avicenna and other philosophers of repute, who affirm that the 
First knows itself as the principle of what emanates from it and 
knows all other existents in their species by a universal thought, 
and not individually. For they repudiate the theory that there 
emanates out of the First Principle, which does not know what 
emanates from it, only one intellect; that its effect is an intellect 
from which there emanates an intellect and the soul and the 
body of a sphere, and that this intellect knows itself and its 
three effects, whereas its cause and principle knows only itself. 
For according to this theory the effect is superior to the cause, 
since from the cause only one thing emanates, whereas from the 
effect three things emanate; moreover, the First Principle knows 
only itself, but the effect knows its principle and effects besides 
itself. Who can be satisfied with the idea that such words can 
apply to the status of God, for indeed they make Him lower than 
any of His creatures, who know themselves and know Him, and 
he who knows Him and knows himself is of a nobler rank than 
He is, since He knows none but Himself. Their profound 
thoughts about God’s glory end therefore in a denial of 
everything that is understood by His greatness, and assimilate 
the state of God to that of a dead body which has no notion of 
what happens in the world, with the sole exception that God 
possesses self-knowledge. So does God deal with those who turn 
aside from His way and deviate from the path of His guidance, 
denying His words: ‘I did not make them witnesses of the 
creation of the heavens and the earth nor of the creation of 
themselves, ‘ who think wicked thoughts about God, who 
believe that the powers of man suffice to reach the essence of 
the divine, who, deceived in their minds, believe that the human 
understanding is competent to free itself from the authority of 


184 


the prophets and from obedience to them. For no doubt they 
are now forced to acknowledge that the quintessence of their 
thought is reduced to absurdities which would make one 
wonder if they were told in a dream. 


I say: 


One who wants to enter deeply into these speculations must know that much 
of what is firmly established in the speculative sciences seems at first sight, 
and compared to the opinions the common man holds about them, like the 
visions of a dreamer, as Ghazali truly says; many of these truths are deduced 
from a different kind of premisses from that which satisfies the masses; 
indeed there is no other way for anyone to become convinced of their truth 
than that of comprehending them by logical proof and evidence. If, for 
example, the common man, and even he who has reached a somewhat higher 
degree of culture, is told that the sun, which appears to the eye as being the 
size of a foot, is about a hundred and seventy times bigger than the earth, he 
will say that it is absurd, and will regard him who believes it as a dreamer; and 
it is difficult for us to convince him through propositions which he can easily 
understand and acknowledge in a short time. The only way, indeed, to attain 
such knowledge is through deductive proof-that is, for the man who is 
amenable to proof. If it is the case even with geometrical questions and 
mathematical problems in general, that, when a solution is explained to the 
common man, it will appear to him fallacious and open to criticism at first 
sight and to have the character of a dream, how much more this will be the 
case in the metaphysical sciences, since for this kind of knowledge there are 
no plausible premisses which satisfy the superficial understanding, by which I 
mean the understanding of the masses. One might say that the final 
knowledge the understanding can reach will seem to the common man at first 
sight something absurd. And this happens not only in the theoretical sciences 
but in the practical sciences as well. Therefore, the assumption that one of the 
sciences should vanish and then come into existence again, at first sight 
would seem to be impossible. For this reason many have thought that those 
sciences are of supernatural origin and some attribute them to the Jinn, others 
to the prophets, so that Ibn Hazm goes so far as to affirm that the strongest 
proof of the existence of prophecy is the existence of these sciences. 


185 


Therefore, if a lover of truth finds a theory reprehensible and does not find 
plausible premisses which remove its reprehensible character, he must not at 
once believe that the theory is false, but must inquire how he who puts it 
forward has arrived at it, must employ much time in learning this, and follow 
the systematic order corresponding to the nature of the topic. And if this is 
necessary in other sciences than metaphysics, how much more will this hold 
for metaphysics, since that science is so remote from the sciences built on 
common sense. Thus it should be learned that in metaphysics rhetorical 
reasoning cannot be applied, as it may be applied in other questions; for 
dialectics is useful and permissible in the other sciences but forbidden in this. 
For this reason most students of this science seek refuge in the theory that 
metaphysics is wholly concerned with the qualification of the substance which 
the human mind cannot qualify, for if it could do so, the eternal and the 
transitory would be on the same level. If this is so, may God judge him who 
discusses these questions with common opinions and who argues about God 
without scientific knowledge. So it is often thought that the philosophers are 
extremely inefficient in this science, and for this reason Ghazali says that 
metaphysics is only conjectural. 


But in any case we shall try to show some plausible premisses and true 
propositions-and we try this only because Ghazali gave such a false 
representation of this noble science and denied people the possibility of 
attaining happiness through excellent acts, and God is the inquirer and the 
reckoner-in order to set out the motives which moved the philosophers to 
believe these theories about the First Principle and other existents, the limit 
which the human understanding can reach in this matter, and the doubts 
which beset these problems; and we shall show all this also in respect to the 
Muslim theologians and indicate how far their wisdom attained. We hope 
through this to help the lover of knowledge to find the truth, and to urge him 
to study the sciences of both parties, hoping also that God may assist him in 
all this! 


We say: 


The philosophers tried to acquire knowledge about reality through 
speculation alone, without relying on the words of anyone who should induce 


186 


them to acquiesce in them without proof; on the contrary, sometimes through 
speculation they came into contradiction with the facts as shown by the 
senses. They discovered that the sublunary world can be divided into two 
classes, the living and the inanimate, any instance of which only comes into 
being through something, called form, which is the entity by which it comes 
into being after having been non-existent; through something, called matter, 
out of which it comes into being; through something, called the agent, from 
which it comes into being; and through something, called the end, for the sake 
of which it comes into being; and so they established that there are four 
causes. And they found that the form by which a thing comes into being, i.e. 
the form of the thing generated, is identical with the proximate agent, from 
which it comes into being, either in species, like the generation of man out of 
man, or in genus, like the generation of the mule from a horse and a donkey. 
And since, according to them, the causes do not form an infinite series, they 
introduced a primary, permanent efficient cause. Some of them believed that 
the heavenly bodies are this efficient cause, some that it is an abstract 
principle, connected with the heavenly bodies, some that it is the First 
Principle, some again that it is a principle inferior to it, and these 
philosophers thought it sufficient to regard the heavens and the principles of 
the heavenly bodies as the cause for the coming into being of the elements, 
since according to them they too need an efficient cause. As to the generation 
of living beings from each other in the sublunary world, the philosophers had, 
because of this faculty of life, to introduce another principle, which was the 
bestower of soul and of form, and of the wisdom which is manifested in this 
world. This is what Galen calls the formative faculty and some regard it as an 
abstract principle, some as an intellect, some as a soul,’ some as the body of 
the heavens, and some as the First. Galen called this potency the demiurge 
and was in doubt whether it is God or another principle. This faculty acts in 
the generative animals and in plants, and is needed still more in those plants 
and animals which have an equivocal generation. This was the point they 
reached in the examination of the sublunary world. 


When they had agreed that the heavens were the principles of the 
perceptible bodies, they investigated the heavens also and agreed that the 
heavenly bodies are the principles of the changeable perceptible bodies and of 


187 


the species in the sublunary world, either by themselves or in combination 
with an abstract principle. And from their investigation of the heavenly bodies 
it appeared to them that these do not come into being in the way that the 
transitory things of the sublunary world come into being, for what comes into 
being, in so far as it comes into being, is seen to be a part of this perceptible 
world and its coming into being is only effected in so far as it is a part of it, for 
what has come into being has come into being out of something, through the 
act of something, by means of something, in time and in space. And they 
discovered that the celestial bodies are, as remote efficient causes, a condition 
for the coming into being of perceptible things. If, however, the celestial 
bodies themselves had come into being in this way, they would, as a condition 
of their becoming, have required prior to them other bodies which would have 
needed to be parts of another world, and there would be in this other world 
bodies like these, and if these bodies had also come into being, they would 
have required other celestial bodies before, and so ad infinitum. And since 
this was established in this way and many others, they were convinced that 
the heavenly bodies neither come into being nor are destroyed in the way that 
sublunary things come into being and are destroyed, for “coming into being’ 
has no other definition or description or explanation or meaning than that 
which we have laid down here. Then they found that the celestial bodies have 
also moving principles by means of which and by the agency of which they are 
moved. And when they investigated their principles, they found that the 
moving principles were neither bodies nor potencies in bodies. They are not 
bodies because they are the first principles of the bodies encircling the world; 
they are not potencies in bodies, i.e. their bodies are not a condition for their 
existence (as is the case in this sublunary world with the composite principles 
in animals), because any potency in a body is, according to the philosophers, 
finite, since it can be divided through the division of the body and every body 
which can be divided is generable and corruptible, i.e. composed of matter 
and form, and the existence of its matter is a condition for the existence of its 
form. And again, if the principles of heavenly bodies were like the principles 
of earthly bodies, the former would be like the latter and would need other 
bodies prior to them. Thus they were convinced of the existence of 
incorporeal principles which are not potencies in a body. 


188 


Moreover, they had already found, concerning the human intellect, that 
form has two modes of existence, a sensible existence in matter, as in the 
stone there is the form of the inorganic which exists in the matter outside the 
soul, and an intelligible existence, namely, perception and intellect, which is 
separate from matter and exists in the sou. From this they concluded that 
these absolutely abstract existences are pure intellects, for if what is 
separated from another is already intellect, how much better suited to be 
intellect will something be that is absolutely separates And so, of necessity, 
they deduced that the objects of thought of those intellects are the forms of 
the existents and of the order which exists in the world, as is the case with the 
human intellect, for the human intellect is nothing other than the perception 
of the forms of the existents, in so far as they are without matter. They 
concluded, therefore, that existents have two modes of existence, a sensible 
existence and an intelligible existence, and that the relation between sensible 
and intelligible existence is like the relation between the products of art and 
the arts of the craftsman, and they believed therefore that the heavenly bodies 
are conscious of these principles and that they can only guide what exists in 
the sublunary world because they are animated. And when they compared the 
separate intellects with the human intellect, they found that these intellects 
are superior to the human intellect, although they have it in common with the 
human intellect that their intelligibles are the forms of existents, and that the 
form of each of these intellects is nothing but the forms and the order of the 
existents it perceives, in the way that the human intellect is nothing but the 
forms and the order of the existents it perceives. The difference between these 
two kinds of intellect is that the forms of the existents are a cause of the 
human intellect, since it receives its perfection through them, in the way that 
the existent is brought into being through its form, whereas the intelligibles of 
these intellects are the cause of the forms of the existents. For the order and 
arrangement in the existents of this sublunary world are only a consequence 
and result of the order which exists in these separate intellects; and the order 
which exists in the intellect which is in us is only a consequence of the order 
and arrangement which it perceives in the existents, and therefore it is very 
imperfect, for most of this order and arrangement it does not perceive. If this 
is true, there are different degrees in the forms of the sensible existents; the 


lowest is their existence in matters, then their existence in the human intellect 


189 


is superior to their existence in matters, and their existence in the separate 
intellects is still superior to their existence in the human intellect. Then again 
they have in the separate intellects different degrees of superiority of 
existence, according to the different degrees of superiority in these intellects 


in themselves. 


And again when they investigated the body of the heavens they found that in 
reality it is one unique body similar to one single animal, and that it has one 
general movement-which is like the general movement of the animal which 
moves the whole body of the animal -namely, the daily movement, and they 
found that the other heavenly bodies and their individual movements were 
similar to the particular members of a single animal and its particular 
movements. And they believed, because of this connexion between these 
bodies, their referring to one body and to one end, and their collaboration in 
one act-namely, the world in its totality-that they depended on one principle, 
as happens to different arts which aim at one product and which depend on 
one primary art. For this reason they believed that these abstract principles 
depend on a unique abstract principle which is the cause of all of them, that 
the forms and the order and arrangement in this principle are the noblest 
existence which the forms, the order, and the arrangement in all reality can 
possess, that this order and arrangement are the cause of all the orders and 
arrangements in this sublunary world, and that the intellects reach their 
different degrees of superiority in this, according to their lesser or greater 
distance from this principle. The First amongst all these principles thinks only 
its own essence and, by thinking its essence, thinks at the same time all 
existents in the noblest mode of existence and in the noblest order and 
arrangement. The substance of everything under the First Principle depends 
on the way in which it thinks the forms, order, and arrangement which exist 
in the First Intellect; and their greater or lesser superiority consists only in 
this. They conclude therefore that the inferior cannot think the superior in the 
way the superior thinks its own essence, nor does the superior think the 
inferior in the way the inferior thinks its own essence; this means that no one 
of any pair of existents can be of the same rank as its fellow, since if this were 
possible they would have become one and would not form a numerical 
plurality. Because of this they say that the First thinks only its own essence, 


190 


and that the next principle can think only the First, but cannot think what is 
under itself, because this is its effect and if it should think its effect, the effect 
would become a cause. The philosophers believe that the consciousness which 
the First has of its own essence is the cause of all existents, and that which 
each of the intellects inferior to it thinks is in part the cause of those existents 
the creation of which pertains especially to it, in part the cause of its own 


essence, i.e. the human intellect in its universality. 


It is in this way that the doctrine of the philosophers concerning these 
things and concerning the motives which lead them to these beliefs about the 
world must be understood. On examination they will not be less convincing 
than the motives of the theologians of our religion, first the Mu’tazilites and 
secondly the Ash’arites, which lead them to their view of the First Principle. 
They believed, namely, that there exists an essence-neither corporeal, nor in a 
body-which is living, knowing, willing, provided with power, speaking, 
hearing, and seeing, while the Ash’arites, but not the Mu ’tazilites, held besides 
that this essence is the agent of everything without intermediary and knows 
them with an infinite knowledge, since the existents themselves are infinite. 
The Ash’arites denied the existence of causes, and professed that this living, 
knowing, willing, hearing, seeing, powerful, speaking essence exists in 
continuous existence connected with everything and in everything. But this 
assumption may be thought to imply consequences open to criticism, for an 
essence with qualities as mentioned above must necessarily be of the genus of 
the soul, for the soul is an essence, incorporeal, living, knowing, provided with 
power, willing, hearing, seeing, speaking, and therefore these theologians 
assumed the principle of reality to be a universal soul, separated from matter 
in a way they did not understand.’ 


We shall now mention the difficulties which result from this assumption. 
The most obvious one concerning their theory of the qualities is that there 
must exist a composite, eternal essence and therefore an eternal compound, 
which contradicts the Ash’arite theory that every compound is temporal, 
because it is an accident and every accident is according to them a temporal 
product. They assumed besides that all existents are possible acts, and they 
did not believe that there is in them an order, a proportion, and a wisdom 
which the nature of these existents requires; no, they held that all things could 


191 


be different from what they are and this applies necessarily also to the 
intellect; still, they believed that in the products of art, to which they 
compared the products of nature, there exist order and proportion, and this 
was called wisdom, and they called the Creator wises The argument by which 
they tried to show that there is in the universe something like this principle 
was that they compared natural acts to acts of will and said that every act, in 
so far as it is an act, proceeds from an agent endowed with will, power, choice, 
life, and knowledge, and that the nature of an act, in so far as it is an act, 
demands this; and they tried to prove the truth of this by arguing that what is 
not living is inorganic and dead, and, since from the dead there cannot 
proceed any act, there does not proceed any act from what is not alive. Thus 
they denied the acts which proceed from natural things and moreover they 
refused to admit that the living beings which we see in the empirical world 
have acts; they said that these acts seem connected with the living in the 
empirical world, but their agent is only the living God in the divine world. But 
the logical conclusion for them would be that there is in the empirical world 
no life at all, for life is inferred from things in the empirical world, because of 
their acts;b and, further, it would be interesting to know how they arrived at 
this judgement about the divine world.’ 


The manner in which they established this creator was by assuming that 
every temporal product must have a cause, but that this cannot go on 
infinitely, and that therefore of necessity the series must end in an eternal 
cause; and this is true enough, only it does not follow from this that this 
eternal principle cannot be body. They need therefore the additional 
proposition that a body cannot be eternal, but this proposition causes them 
many difficulties. For it is not sufficient for them to prove that this world is 
produced, since it might still be argued that its cause is an eternal body which 
has none of the accidents, no circular movements, nor anything else, through 
which---although they themselves admitted an eternal composite being-they 
proved that the heavens must be produced. Now, having assumed that the 
lileavcnly body has been produced, they supposed that this production had 
taken place in quite a different way from what is understood by production in 
the empirical world. In the empirical world, namely, things are produced from 
something, in time and space, and with a definite quality, not in their totality, 


192 


and in the empirical world there is no production of a body from that which is 
not a body. Nor did they suppose its agent to act like an agent in the empirical 
world, for the empirical agent changes one quality in the existent into 
another; it does not change absolute nonexistence into existence-no, it brings 
the existent into a form and an intelligible quality through which this existent 
becomes another existent instead of this, different from it in substance, 
definition, name, and act, as it is expressed in the Divine Words: ‘We have 
created man from [an extract of] clay, then we made him a clot in a sure 
depository, then we created the clot congealed blood, and we created the 
congealed blood a morsel, etc. It is for this reason that the ancient 
philosophers believed that the absolute existent neither comes into existence 
nor can be destroyed. 


Now, if one concedes to the theologians that the heavens were created in 
time, they are unable to prove that they are the first of created things, as is the 
evident meaning of what is said in the Venerable Book in more than one 
verse, for instance, in the Divine Words, ‘Do not those who misbelieve see that 
the heavens and the earth were both solid, &c.?? and in the words, ‘and His 
throne was upon the water’ and in the words, ‘then He made for heaven and it 
was but smoke, &c.’s And as concerns this agent, according to the theologians, 
it creates the matter and the form of that which becomes, if they believe that it 
has a matter, or it creates the thing in its totality, if they believe it to be simple 
in the way they believe the atom to be simple; and if this is so, this kind of 
agent changes either non-existence into existence, namely, when there is 
generation, that is when the atom, which according to them is the element of 
the bodies, comes into being; or existence into non-existence, namely, when 
there is destruction, that is, when the atom is destroyed. But it is clear that an 
opposite cannot be changed into its opposite, and that non-existence itself 
cannot become existence nor warmth itself cold. It is the privation which 
becomes existent, it is the warm thing which becomes cold and the cold thing 
which becomes warm, and for this reason the Mu’tazilites say that privation is 
an entity although they deprive this entity of the attribute of existence before 
the becoming of the world. And their arguments by which they believe it can 
be proved that a thing does not come into being from another thing are 
incorrect. The most plausible of them is their affirmation that, if a thing came 


193 


into being from another thing, this would imply an infinite regress. The 
answer is that this is only impossible for production in a straight line, which, 
indeed, needs an infinite existence in act; but, as to circular production, it is 
not impossible that, for instance, fire should come from air and air from fire 
ad infinitum, while the substratum is eternal. They support their theory of the 
temporal production of the universe by saying that that which cannot be 
devoid of things produced must itself be produced, and the universe, being 
the substratum of the things that are produced, must therefore be produced. 
The greatest mistake in this argument, when its premiss is conceded, is that it 
is a false generalization, for that which cannot be devoid of things produced in 
the empirical world is a thing produced out of something else, not out of 
nothing, whereas they assume that the universe is produced out of nothing. 
Further, this substratum which the philosophers call primary matter cannot 
be devoid of corporeality according to the philosophers, and, according to the 
philosophers, absolute corporeality is not produced. Besides, the premiss 
which affirms that what cannot be devoid of things produced is produced, is 
only true when the things produced of which it cannot be devoid are 
individual things, but if the things produced are one generically, they have no 
initial term; and from whence then should it follow that their substratum 
must be produced? And since among the theologians the Ash/arites 
understood this, they added to this proposition another, namely, that it is not 
possible that infinite generated things (i.e. without initial and final term) 
should exist, a proposition which the philosophers regard as necessary. Such 
difficulties follow from the assumption of the theologians, and they are much 
more numerous than those which can be held against the philosophers. 


And again their assumption that the identical agent which is the First 
Principle is an agent for everything in the world without an intermediary 
contradicts the evidence of the senses that things act upon other things. Their 
most convincing argument on this point is that, if the agent were an effect, 
this would lead to an infinite regress. But this would only follow if the agent 
were agent only in so far as it is effect, and if what is moved were the mover, 
in so far as it is moved, but this is not the case; on the contrary the agent is 
only agent in so far as it is an actual existent, for the non-existent does not 
produce any effect. What follows from this is not that there are no acting 


194 


effects, as the theologians thought, but that the acting effects end in an agent 
which itself is not an effect at all. Further, the impossibility which is the 
consequence of their deduction is still greater than the impossibility which 
follows from the premisses from which they draw this conclusion. For if the 
principle of the existents is an essence, endowed with life, knowledge, power, 
and will, and if these qualities are additional to its essence and this essence is 
incorporeal, then the only difference between the soul and this existent is that 
the soul is in a body and this existent is a soul which is not in a body. But that 
which has such a quality is necessarily composed of an essence and attributes, 
and each compound requires of necessity a cause for its being a compound, 
since a thing can neither be compounded by itself nor produced by itself, for 
producing, which is an act of the producer, is nothing but the putting together 
of the product. And, in general, just as for each effect there must be an agent, 
so for each compound there must be an agent which puts it together, for the 
putting together is a condition of the existence of the compounds And 
nothing can be a cause of the condition of its own existence, because this 
would imply that a thing should be its own cause. Therefore the Mu’tazilites 
assumed that these attributes in the First Principle refer to its essence and are 
nothing additional to it, in the way in which this happens with many essential 
qualities in many existents, like a thing’s being existent and one and eternal 
and so on This comes nearer to the truth than the theory of the Ash’arites, 
and the philosophers’ theory of the First Principle approaches that of the 
Mv tazilites. 


We have now mentioned the motives which led these two parties to their 
theories about the First Principle, and the conclusions which their adversaries 
can draw from them and hold against them. As concerns the objections 
against the philosophers, Ghazali has related them in full; we have answered 
some of them already, and we will answer some of them later. The difficulties 
which beset the theologians we have shown in this discussion in detail. 


We shall now return to distinguish the degree of conviction and plausibility 
reached by the different statements which Ghazali makes in this book, as we 
proposed to do, and we were only compelled to mention the plausible 
propositions which led the philosophers to their theories about the principles 
of the universe because they answer the objections which their adversaries, 


195 


the theologians, adduce against them; on the other hand, we mentioned the 
difficulties which beset the theologians because it is only right that their 
arguments on this problem should be known and their views represented, 
since they are free to use them as they wish. It is right, as Aristotle says, that a 
man should adduce the arguments of his adversaries as he brings forward his 
own; that is, he should exert himself to find the arguments of his opponents in 
the same way as he exerts himself to find the arguments of his own school of 
thought, and he should accept the same kind of arguments from them as he 
accepts when he has found the arguments himself.’ 


We say: The objection that the First Principle, if it can think only its own 
essence, must be ignorant of everything it has created would be only a valid 
inference if the way it thinks its essence were to exclude all existents 
absolutely. But the philosophers mean only that the manner in which it thinks 
its own essence includes the existents in their noblest mode of existence, and 
that it is the intellect which is the cause of the existents; and that it is not an 
intellect because it thinks the existents, in so far as they are the cause of its 
thinking, as is the case with our intellect. The meaning of their words, that it 
does not think the existents which are under it, is that it does not think them 
in the way we think them, but that it thinks them in a way no other thinking 
existent can think them, for if another existent could think them in the way it 
thinks them, it would participate in the knowledge of God, and God is far too 
exalted for this . This is a quality which is peculiar to God, and for this reason 
certain theologians concluded that God, besides the seven qualities which they 
attribute to Him, has yet another which is peculiar to Him. Therefore His 
knowledge can be described neither as universal nor as individual, for both 
the universal and the individual are effects of existents, and the knowledge of 
both universal and individual is transitory. We shall explain this still better 
when we discuss the question whether God knows individuals or does not 
know them, as the philosophers mostly assert when they pose this problem, 
and we shall explain that the whole problem is absurd in relation to Gods This 
problem as a whole is based on two necessary points. First, if God thought 
existents in such a way that they should be the cause of His knowledge, His 
intellect would necessarily be transitory and the superior would be brought 
into being through the inferior. Secondly, if His essence did not contain the 


196 


intelligibles of all things and their order, there would exist a supreme intellect 
which would not perceive the forms of existents in their order and proportion. 
And since these two cases are absurd, it follows that when this principle 
thinks its own essence, these existents exist in it in a nobler mode than that in 
which they exist by themselves. And that one and the same existent can have 
different degrees of existence can be shown from what occurs with colour . 
For we find that colour has different degrees of existence, some higher than 
others; the lowest degree is its existence in matter, a higher degree is its 
existence in sight, for it exists in such a way that the colour becomes 
conscious of itself, whereas existence in matter is an inorganic existence 
without consciousness; further, it has been proved in the science of 
psychology that colour has also an existence in the imaginative faculty, and 
this is a superior existence to its existence in the faculty of sight; it has equally 
been shown that it has an existence in the remembering faculty superior to 
that in the imaginative faculty,s and, finally, it has in the intellect an existence 
superior to all these existences. Now, in the same way, we are convinced that it 
has in the essence of the First Knowledge an existence superior to all its other 
existences, and that this is the highest degree of existence possible. 


As for what Ghazali mentions concerning the philosophical theory of the 
order in the emanation of these separate principles and of the number of 
entities which emanate out of each of them, there is no proof that this really 
takes place and that this happens exactly in this way; and the form in which 
Ghazali relates it is therefore not to be found in the works of the ancient 
philosophers. But these philosophers all agree on the theory that the 
principles, both separate and nonseparate, all emanate from the First 
Principle, and that through the emanation of this unique power the world in 
its totality becomes a unity, and that through this power all its parts are 
connected, so that the universe aims at one act, as happens with the one body 
of an animal; which, however, has different potencies, members, and acts; and 
indeed the world is according to the learned one and the same existent only 
because of this one power which emanates from the First Principle. And they 
agree about all this, because according to them the heavens are like a single 
animal and the daily movement which is common to all the heavens is like the 


animal’s general movement in space, and the particular movements which the 


197 


different parts of heaven have are like the particular movements of the 
members of the animal. And the philosophers had already proved that there is 
one power in the animal through which it becomes one and through which all 
the potencies which it possesses tend towards one act, that is, towards the 
preservation of the animal,’ and all these potencies are connected with the 
potency which emanates from the First Principle; and if this were not the case, 
its parts would disconnect themselves and it would not persist for the 
twinkling of an eye. If, however, it is necessary that for a single animal there 
should be a single spiritual potency, permeating all its parts, through which 
the plurality of potencies and bodies in it becomes unified, so that it can be 
said of its bodies and potencies that they are one, and if, further, the relations 
of individual beings to the universe in its totality are like the relation of the 
parts of an animal to the animal itself, it needs must be the case that all the 
potencies in the particular parts of this unique animal and in the 
psychological and intellectual motive powers of these parts should be such 
that there is in them one single spiritual force which connects all the spiritual 
and bodily potencies and which permeates the universe in one and the same 
penetration. If this were not the case, no order and no proportion would exist. 
And in this way it is true that God is the creator, supporter, and preserver of 
everything, and to this the Divine Words apply: ‘Verily, God supports the 
heavens and the earth lest they should decline.’S And it in no way follows 
from the fact that this one potency permeates many things that there should 
be a plurality in it, as those thought who said that from the First Principle 
there can in the first place emanate only one from which plurality can then 
emanate; for this statement can only be regarded as valid if the immaterial 
agent is compared to the material agent. Therefore the term ‘agent’ can only 
be applied equivocally to both the immaterial agent and the material. And this 
will explain to you the possibility of the procession of plurality from the 
Monad. 


Again, the existence of all other separate principles consists only in the 
forms in which they conceive the First Principle, and it is not impossible that 
this should be one identical thing, notwithstanding the difference of the forms 
in which they conceive it, in the same way as it is not impossible that a 
plurality should be conceived through one and the same form. And we find, 


198 


indeed, that all the heavenly bodies in their daily movement, and the sphere of 
the fixed stars, conceive one identical form’ and that they all, moving in this 
daily movement, are moved by one and the same mover, who is the mover of 
the sphere of the fixed stars; and we find, too, that they have also different 
particular movements. Therefore it needs must be that their movements 
proceed partly from different movers, partly namely through the connexion of 
their movements with the first sphere-from one unique mover . And just as 
the removal of an organ or a potency vital to the whole animal would 
invalidate all the organs and potencies of this animal, so the same applies to 
heaven with respect to its parts and its moving potencies, and in general with 
respect to the principles of the world and their parts in relation to the First 
Principle and in their mutual relations. According to the philosophers the 
world is closely similar to a single state: a state is upheld through one ruler 
and many deputies subordinate to him; all the deputies in the state are 
connected with the first ruler, because the authority of each of them is based 
on him alone, with respect to the ends and the order of the acts which lead to 
these ends for the sake of which these deputies exist; and so is the relation of 
the First Ruler in the world to His deputies. And it is evident to the 
philosophers that he who bestows on the immaterial existents their end is 
identical with him who bestows on them their existence, for according to them 
form and end are identical in this kind of existent and he who bestows on 
these existents both form and end is their agent. And therefore it is clear that 
the First Principle is the principle of all these principles, and that He is an 
agent, a form, and an ends And as to His relation to the sensible existents, He 
is-since He bestows on them the unity which causes their plurality and the 
unification of their plurality-the cause of all of them, being their agent, form, 
and end, and all the existents seek their end by their movement towards Him, 
and this movement by which they seek their end is the movement for the sake 
of which they are created, and in so far as this concerns all existents, this 
movement exists by nature, and in so far as this concerns man, it is voluntary. 
And therefore man is of all beings the one charged with duty and obligation. 
And this is the meaning of the Divine Words: ‘Verily, we offered the trust to 
the heavens and the earth and the mountains, but they refused to bear it and 


shrank from it; but man bore it: verily he is ever unjust and ignorant.’ 


199 


And the philosophers only assert that, although all these ruling principles 
proceed from the First Principle, it is only some of them that do so directly, 
whereas others, ascending gradually from the lower world to the higher, 
proceed mediately. For they discovered that certain parts of heaven exist for 
the sake of the movements of other parts, and they related them in each 
instance to a first principle, till they finally arrived at the absolutely First 
Principle; and so it was evident to them that there was one unique order and 
one unique act in which they all participate. But to ascertain the order, which 
he who contemplates reality and aspires to the knowledge of the First 
Principle perceives, is difficult, and what human understanding can grasp of it 
is only its general principle. What led the philosophers to believe in a 
gradation of these principles, in conformity with the spatial order of their 
spheres, is that they saw that the highest sphere seems in its action superior to 
what is under it, and that all the other spheres follow its movement . And 
therefore they believed that what was said about their order was based on 
their spatial order. But one might perhaps object that the order in the spheres 
is perhaps only based on their activity, not on their spatial order; for since it 
seemed that the activities and movements of the planets exist because of the 
movement of the sun, perhaps their movers in setting them in motion follow 
the sun, and the movement of the sun derives perhaps directly from the First. 
For this reason there are in this question no indubitable assertions, but only 
assertions more or less plausible and likely to be true. And since this is 
established, let us now return to our subject. 


Ghazali says: 


The second answer is: people say of the First Principle that it 
knows only itself, because they want to avoid the implication of 
plurality in it, for the statement that it ]snows another would 
imply a duality: its knowing itself and its knowing another. 
However, the same applies to the first effect: it must necessarily 
know only itself. If it knew another and not itself alone, there 
would have to be a different cause for its knowing another than 
that for its knowing itself, but there is no other cause than that 
for its knowing itself, namely the First Principle. So it can only 


200 


I say: 


know itself, and the plurality which arose in this way 
disappears. 


If it is said that it follows from its existence and from its 
knowing itself that it must know its principle, we answer: Does 
this necessity arise from a cause or without a cause? If the 
former is the case, there is no other cause than the one first 
cause from which only one effect can proceed, and indeed has 
proceeded, namely this first effect itself; how, therefore, could 
this second effect proceed from it? In the latter case, then, let 
the existence of the First Principle imply a plurality of existents 
without a cause, and let the plurality follow from them! But if 
such a thing cannot be imagined, because the necessary existent 
can be only one, and anything added to it must be a possible, 
and the possible needs a cause, then the following conclusion 
must be drawn concerning the effect: if it is an existent 
necessary by itself, then what the philosophers say is untrue, 
that there is only one necessary existent; if it is a possible,’ then 
it needs a cause; but it has no cause,’ and therefore it cannot 
know the existence of its cause. 


There is no special necessity for the first effect to have a 
possible existence; this is necessary for any effect. However, that 
the effect should know its cause is not necessary for its 
existence, just as the knowledge of its effect is not necessary for 
the existence of the cause; still, it seems more plausible that the 
cause should know its effect than that the effect should know its 
cause. Therefore the plurality which would arise from its 
knowing its principle is impossible; there is no principle for this 
knowledge and it is not a necessary consequence of an effect 
that it should know its principle; and out of this there is no 


issue. 


201 


This is a proof of one who affirms that the First Principle must, besides 
knowing itself, know its effect; for, if not, its knowing itself would be 
imperfect. 


The meaning of Ghazali’s objection is that the knowledge the effect has of its 
principle must either be based on a cause or be without a cause. In the former 
case, there must be a cause in the First Principle, but there is none; in the 
latter case, a plurality must follow from the First Principle, even if it does not 
know it; if, however, a plurality follows from it, it cannot be a necessary 
existent, for there can be only one necessary existent, and that from which 
there proceeds more than one is only a possible existent; but the possible 
existent needs a cause, and therefore their assertion that the First Principle is 
a necessary existent is false, even if it does not know its effect. He says also 
that if it is not a necessity of its existence that the effect should have 
knowledge of its cause, it even seems more fitting that it is not a necessity of 
its existence that the cause should know its effect. 


My answer to this is that all this is sophistical. If we assume that the cause is 
an intellect and knows its effect, it does not follow that this is an addition to 
the essence of the cause; on the contrary, it belongs to the essence itself, since 
the emergence of the effect is the consequence of its essences And it is not 
true that if the effect proceeds from the First Principle not because of a cause, 
but because of the essence of this principle, a plurality proceeds from it, for 
according to the thesis of the philosophers the emergence of the effect 
depends on the essence of the First Principle: if its essence is one, one 
proceeds from it; if many, many proceed from it. What he assumes in this 
discussion, namely, that every effect is a possible existent, is only true for the 
composite effect, for there cannot be a compound that is eternal, and 
everything that is of a possible existence is generated, according to the 
philosophers, as Aristotle has shown in different passages of his works; and 
we shall prove this more fully later in our discussion of the necessary being. 
What Avicenna calls the possible existent has only its name in common with 
what is in reality the possible existent; it is, therefore, by no means clear that 
it needs an agent in the way it is clear that the possible existent needs an 
agent. 


202 


Ghazali says: 


The third objection is: Is the self-knowledge of the first 
effect identical with its essence or not? If the former , this is 
impossible, for knower and known cannot be identical; if the 
latter, let the same apply to the First Principle, so that plurality 
will follow from the First Principle. And if the self-knowledge 
of the effect is not identical with the essence of the effect, there 
will not only be a triplicity in the effect, as they affirm, but a 
quadruplicity, to wit: its essence, its knowledge of itself, its 
knowledge of its principle, and its being a possible existent by 
itself, and to this it should perhaps be added that it is an 
existent necessary through another-and then it would be 
fivefold. From this you can see and measure the depth of their 


ignorance. 
I say: 


In this discussion of the intellects there are two points: first the question 
about what these intellects know or do not know (this question was fully 
treated by the ancients); secondly, the question of what proceeds from these 
intellects. What Ghazali mentions here as the theory of the philosophers is in 
fact the individual opinion of Avicenna on this latter problem. Ghazali exerts 
himself especially to refute him and his followers, in order to create the 
impression that he has refuted them all; and this is acting like one who is, as 
he puts it, in the depths of ignorance. But this theory is not found in the works 
of any of the ancients; and there is no proof of it except the supposition that 
from the one there can proceed only one. But this proposition does not apply 
in the same way to the agents which are forms in matter as to the agents 
which are forms separate from matter, and according to the philosophers an 
intellect which is an effect must necessarily know its principle, and there are 
here not two entities, i.e. the intellect and something additional to its essence, 
for, if so, it would be a compound, and the intellect, which is simple, cannot 
be composite. And the difference in the separate forms between cause and 
effect is that the First Cause exists by itself and the second cause exists 
through its relation with the First Cause, for the fact of its being an effect lies 


203 


in its substance and is not an additional entity, in contrast with material 
effects; e.g. colour is an entity which exists by itself in a body, but it is the 
cause of sight, in so far as it is related, and sight has no existence except in 
this relation; and in the same way substances which are separate from matter 
are substances which are of the nature of relation. For this reason the cause 
and the effect are unified in the forms separated from matter, and in the same 
way sensible forms are of the nature of relation, as has been proved in the 
book on psychology.’ 


Ghazali says: 


The fourth objection is that it can be said: Triplicity is not 
sufficient in the first effect, for the body of heaven which, 
according to the philosophers, proceeds from one entity out of 
the essence of its principle is composite, and this in three ways. 


The first way is that it is composed of form and matter, as is 
body generally, according to the philosophers, and both must 
have a principle, since matter differs from form and they are, 
according to the philosophers, interdependent causes, so that 
the one cannot come into being by means of the other without 


the intervention of another cause. 
I say: 


What he says here is that according to the philosophers the body of the 
heavens is composed of matter, form, and soul, and that therefore there must 
be in the second intellects from which the body of the heavens proceeds, four 
entities, namely, one from which the form proceeds, one from which the hyle 
proceeds-as both are interdependent, for matter is in one way a cause of form 
and form in one way a cause of matterb-one from which the soul proceeds, 
and one from which the mover of the second sphere proceeds. But the view 
that the body of the heavens is composed of form and matter like other bodies 
is falsely ascribed by Avicenna to the Peripatetics. On the contrary, according 
to them the body of the heavens is a simple body; if it were composite, it 
would, according to them, suffer corruption, and therefore they say that it 
neither comes into being nor perishes, and does not possess the potency for 
contraries. If it were as Avicenna says, it would be composite like a living 


204 


being, and if this were true, quadruplicity would be a necessary consequence 
for the man who asserted that from the one only one can proceed. And we 
have already stated that the way these forms are causes for each other, for the 
heavenly bodies, and for the sublunary world, and the way the First Cause is a 
cause for all of them, is quite different from all this. 


Ghazali says: 


The second way is that the highest sphere has a definite 
measure of size, and its determination by this special measure 
taken from among all other measures is an addition to the 
existence of its essence, since its essence might be smaller or 
bigger than it is; therefore, it must have a determinant for this 
measure, added to the simple entity which causes its existence. 
The same necessity does not exist for the existence of the 
intellect, which is pure existence and not specified by any 
measure taken from among other measures, and therefore may 


be said to need only a simple cause. 
I say: 


The meaning of this statement is that when the philosophers say that the 
body of the sphere proceeds as a third entity, which by itself is not simple (for 
it is a body possessing quantity), there are here in reality two entities, the one 
which provides the substantial corporeality, the other the definite quantity; 
therefore there must be in the intellect from which the body of the sphere 
proceeds more than one entity, and therefore the second cause is not triple 
but quadruple. But this is a false assumption, for the philosophers do not 
believe that body in its entirety’ proceeds from the separate principles; if 
anything proceeds from them, according to the philosophers, it is only the 
substantial form, and according to them the measures of the bodily parts 
follow from the forms; this, however, refers only to the forms in matter, but 
the heavenly bodies, since they are simple, are not susceptible of measure. 
Therefore, to assume that form and matter proceed from an abstract principle 
is by no means in conformity with philosophical principles, and is quite 
absurd. In reality, the agent in transitory things, according to the 
philosophers, produces neither the form nor the matter; it only makes a 


205 


compound out of matter and form. If the agent produced the form in matter, 
it would produce the form in something, not from something. This is not 
philosophical theory, and there is no sense in refuting it, as if it were. 


Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers: 


It might be said: If the sphere were bigger than it is, this 
greater size would be superfluous for the order of the universe; 
if smaller, it would not suffice for the intended order. 


I say: 


He means by this statement that the philosophers do not believe that, for 
example, the body of the sphere could be bigger or smaller than it is, for in 
either case the order intended in the universe would not be realized, and the 
sphere would not set the world in motion according to its natural power, but 
either too strongly or too weakly, both of which would involve the corruption 
of the world. A greater size of the world would not be a superfluity, as Ghazali 
says; no, out of both, bigness and smallness, the corruption of the world 
would result.’ 


Ghazali says, to refute the philosophers: 


We answer: Does the determination of the manner of this 
order suffice in itself for the existence of what possesses this 
order, or does it need a cause to effect it? If you believe it 
suffices, then you regard it as superfluous to assume causes at 
all, and you may well judge that from the order of these 
existents the existents themselves result without any additional 
cause; if, however, you believe it does not suffice, but a cause is 
necessary, this new cause will not suffice either for the 
specification of these measures, but will itself need a cause for 
its specifying.’ 


I say: 


The summary of this is that he makes the objection against them that in the 
body there are many things which cannot proceed from one agent, unless they 


admit that many acts can proceed out of one agent, or unless they believe that 


206 


many accidents of the body result from the form of the body and that the 
form of the body results from the agent. For, according to such an opinion, 
the accidents resulting from the body which comes into being through the 
agent do not proceed from the agent directly but through the mediation of the 
form. This is a conception permissible to the doctrines of the philosophers, 
but not to those of the theologians. However, I believe that the Mu’tazilites 
think as the philosophers do that there are things which do not directly 
proceed from the agent . We have already explained how the Monad is the 
cause of the order, and of the existence of all things which support this order, 


and there is no sense in repeating ourselves. 
Ghazali says: 


The third way is that in the highest heavens there are 
marked out two points, the poles, which are immovable and do 
not leave their position, whereas the parts of the equator 
change their position. Now either all the parts of the highest 
sphere are similar (and then there will not be a special 
determination of two points amongst all the points to be poles), 
or the parts of the sphere are different and some have a special 
character which others have not. What, then, is the principle of 
these differences? For the body of the heavens proceeds from 
only one and the same simple entity and the simple can cause 
only that which is simple of shape, namely the sphere, and that 
which is homogeneous, that is, has no special distinguishable 
character. And out of this there is no issue. 


I say: 


‘Simple’ has two meanings: first, simplicity can be attributed to that which is 
not composed of many part, although it is composed of form and matter, and 
in this way the four elements are called simple; secondly, it can be attributed 
to that which is not composed of form and matter capable of changing its 
form, namely to the heavenly bodies; further, simplicity can be attributed to 
the agglomerate which has the same definition for its whole and its part, even 
when it is composed of the four elements. The simple character which is 
attributed to the heavenly bodies can very well possess parts which are 


207 


differentiated by nature, as are the right and left sides of the sphere and the 
poles; for the globe, in so far as it is a globe, must have definite poles and a 
definite centre through which globes differ individually, and it does not follow 
from the fact that the globe has definite sides that it is not simple, for it is 
simple in so far as it is not composed of form and matter in which there is 
potency, and it is non-homogeneous in so far as the part which receives the 
place of the poles cannot be any part of the globe, but is a part determined by 
nature in each globe individually. If this were not so, globes could not have 
centres by nature through which they were differentiated; thus they are 
heterogeneous-in this special meaning of the word ‘heterogeneous’-but this 
does not imply that they are composed of bodies different by nature, nor that 
their agent is composed of many potencies, for every globe is one. Nor do the 
philosophers regard it as true that every point of whatever globe can be a 
centre and that only the agent specifies the points, for this is only true in 
artificial things, not in natural globes. And from the assumption that every 
point of the globe can be a centre, and that it is the agent which specifies the 
points, it does not follow that the agent is a manifold unless one assumes that 
there is in the empirical world nothing that can proceed from a single agent; 
for in the empirical world things are composed of the ten categories and 
therefore anything whatever in the world would need ten agents. But all this, 
to which the view in question leads, which is very much like babbling in 
metaphysics, is stupid and senseless talk. The artificial product in the 
empirical world is produced, indeed, by only one agent, even if it possesses 
the ten categories. How untrue is this proposition that the one can produce 
only one, if it is understood in the way Avicenna and Farabi understand it, 
and Ghazali himself in his Niche for Lights, where he accepts their theory of 
the First Principle.’ 


Ghazali says: 


One might say: ‘Perhaps there are in the principle different 
kinds of plurality which do not result from its being a principle, 
only three or four are manifest to us, and the rest we do not 
perceive, but our incapacity for observation does not shake our 
belief that the principle of plurality is plurality and that from 
the one no manifold can proceed.’ 


208 


I say: 


If the philosophers made such a statement, they would have to believe that 
there is in the first effect an infinite plurality, and one would necessarily have 
to ask them whence plurality comes in the first effect. And since they say that 
from the one no manifold proceeds, they would have to concede that the 
manifold cannot proceed from the One, but their statement that from the one 
only one proceeds contradicts their statement that what proceeds from the 
First Monad possesses plurality, for from the One one must proceed. Of 
course they can say that each term in the plurality of the first effect is a first 
term, but then there must be a plurality of first terms. It is most astonishing 
how this could remain hidden from Farabi and Avicenna, for they were the 
first who made these silly statements, and many followed them and attributed 
these theories to the philosophers. For when Farabi, Avicenna, and their 
school say that the plurality in the second principle arises through its self- 
knowledge and its knowing another, it follows for them that its essence has 
two natures or two forms, and it would be interesting to know which form 
proceeds from the First Principle and which does not. And there is a similar 
difficulty in their statement that the second principle is possible by itself, but 
necessary by another, for its possible nature must necessarily be different 
from its necessary nature, which it acquires from the necessary being. But the 
possible nature cannot become necessary, unless the nature of the possible 
can become necessary. Therefore there is in necessary natures no possibility 
at all, be it a possibility necessary by itself or a possibility necessary by 
another. All these are senseless statements and assertions, weaker than those 
of the theologians, extraneous to philosophy, and not congruous with its 
principles, and none of these affirmations reaches the level of rhetorical 
persuasion, to say nothing of dialectic persuasion. 


And therefore what Ghazali says in different passages of his books is true, that 
the metaphysics of Farabi and Avicenna are conjectural. 


Ghazali says: 


We answer: If you regard this as possible, say then that all 
existing things in their multiplicity (and indeed their number 
reaches thousands) derive from the first effect and one need not 


209 


limit this to the body of the extreme sphere’ and its soul, but all 
souls, heavenly and human, and all earthly and heavenly bodies 
can proceed from it, with the many diversities, belonging to 
them, which nobody has ever seen. But then the first effect will 
suffice. 


I say: 


This conclusion is true, especially when they imagine that the first act 
proceeding from the First Principle is the unity through which the first effect 
becomes a unique existent, notwithstanding the plurality in it. And indeed, if 
they allow an undetermined plurality in the first effect, it must be less or more 
than the number of existents, or equal to it; if less, they must introduce a third 
principle unless there is a thing without cause, if equal or more, the plurality 
assumed in it will be superfluous. 


Ghazali says: 


And then it follows that the First Cause by itself will suffice 
too. For if one regards it as possible that a plurality should arise 
inevitably, although without a cause, and although there is no 
necessity for it in the existence of the first effect, this will be 
permissible also with reference to the First Cause, and the 
existence of all things will be without a cause, although it is said 
that they follow inevitably and their number is not known. And 
if their existence without a cause can be imagined with 
reference to the First Cause, it can also be imagined with 
reference to the second cause; indeed, there is no sense in 
speaking of a reference to the first or to the second cause, since 
there is no distinction between them in time and place and 
neither the first nor the second cause can be characterized by 
its relation to things which do not differ from them in time and 
place and can exist without a cause. 


I say: 


He says that if a plurality in the first effect is permissible without a cause, 
because out of the First Cause there does not follow a plurality, 


210 


one may also suppose a plurality within the First Cause, and there is no need 
to assume a second cause and a first effect. And if the existence of something 
without cause within the First Cause is impossible, then it is also impossible 
within the second cause; indeed, our expression ‘second cause’ has no sense, 
since in fact they are one and the same thing, and the one is not different 
from the other either in time or in space, and if it is permissible that 
something should exist without a cause, neither the First Cause nor the 
second can be specially distinguished by this; it suffices that it refers to one of 
them and therefore it is not necessary to refer it to the second cause. 


Ghazali says by way of an answer in the name of the philosophers: 


It might be said: ‘The entities have become so many that 
they exceed thousands, but it seems absurd that a plurality of 
that extent exists in the first effect and for this reason we have 
multiplied the intermediates.’ 


Then he says in refutation of this: 


We answer, however: To say ‘it seems absurd’ is pure 
conjecture, and such a judgement should not be applied to 
intelligibles. But if one says that it is impossible, we ask: ‘Why is 
it impossible, what will refute it, and where is the criterion?’ 
For, once we exceed the one and believe that one, two, or three 
entities can arise in the first effect without a cause, what makes 
it impossible that there should be four, five, indeed, a thousand 
and many thousands , and who could fix the limit? No, if unity 
is once exceeded, nothing can be rejected. This proof again is 


decisive. 
I say: 


If, however, Avicenna and these other philosophers had answered that the 
first effect possesses plurality, and that necessarily any plurality becomes one 
through a unity which requires that plurality should depend on unity, and 
that this unity through which plurality becomes one is a simple entity which 
proceeds from an individual simple Monad, then they would have saved 
themselves from these objections of Ghazali, and disengaged themselves from 


211 


these false theories. But since Ghazali secured his point by ascribing a false 
assumption to the philosophers, and did not find anyone to give him a correct 
answer, he made merry and multiplied the impossibilities which can be 
deduced from their theory, for anyone who lets his horse canter in an empty 
space can make merry. But if he had known that he did not thereby refute the 
philosophers, he would not have been so delighted about it. The fundamental 
mistake of Avicenna and Farabi was that they made the statement that from 
the one only one can proceed, and then assumed a plurality in the one which 
proceeds. Therefore they were forced to regard this plurality as uncaused. And 
their assumption that this plurality was a definite plurality; which demanded 
the introduction of a third and fourth principle was a supposition not 
enforced by any proof. And generally, this assumption is not a legitimate 
assumption for a first and second principle, for they might be asked, ‘Why has 
only the second principle and rot the first this special character of possessing 
a plurality?’ All this is foolish and senseless talk. The fact is that Avicenna and 
Farabi did not know how the Monad was a cause in the system of Aristotle 
and the Peripatetics. Aristotle, in the twelfth book of his Metaphysics, 
expresses pride in his solution,’ and says that none of his predecessors could 
say anything about this problem. In the sense in which we have expounded 
the Aristotelian doctrine, this statement that out of the one only one can 
proceed is true, and the statement that out of the one a plurality proceeds is 
equally true. 


Ghazali says: 


Further, we affirm that the statement that out of the one 
only one can proceed is false in respect of the second effect, for 
out of it there emanates the sphere of the fixed stars, in which 
there are a thousand and twenty-odd stars , different in 
magnitude, shape, position, colour,’ and influence, be it of ill 
omen or auspicious, some in the shape of a ram, a bull, or a 
lion, ; others in the shape of a man; they influence one and the 
same place of the sublunary world differently in conferment of 
cold and warmth, fortune and misfortune, and their own 
measures are variable . On account of their differences it cannot 
be said that they are all of one kind; for if this could be said, it 


212 


might also be said that all the bodies of the world were of one 
and the same kind of corporeal nature, and that one cause 
sufficed for them all. But just as the differences in qualities, 
substances, and natures of the bodies of the sublunary world 
show that they themselves are different, in the same way the 
stars, no doubt, are shown to differ, and each of them will need 
a cause for its form, a cause for its matter, a cause for the 
special function in its nature, to bring warmth or cold or 
happiness or calamity, a cause for its being in the definite place 
it occupies, then again a cause for its special tendency to group 
itself with others in the shapes of different animals. And if this 
plurality can be imagined to be known in the second intellect, it 
can also be imagined in the first intellect; and then this first 
intellect will suffice. 


I say: 


He had already exhausted this difficulty which is of a type he uses 
abundantly in this book, and if the answer we have given in defence of the 
philosophers is valid, none of these impossibilities need follow. But if by this 
expression one understands that, from the simple numerically one, only one 
simple one-not something numerically one in one way, but plural in another- 
can proceed, and that its unity is the cause of the existence of plurality, then 
one can never escape from these doubts. And again, things only become 
many, according to the philosophers, through substantial differences, and 
differences through accidents-be they quantitative, qualitative, or in 
whichsoever of the nine categories of the accident-do not cause, according to 
them, differentiations in the substance,’ and the heavenly bodies, as we said, 
are not composed of matter and form and are not specifically different, since 
they have, according to the philosophers, no common genus (for, if so, they 
would be composite, not simple). But we have treated of this already, and 


there is no sense in repeating ourselves. 
Ghazali says: 


The fifth objection is to say: If we concede these inept 
assumptions and these erroneous judgements, how is it then 


213 


that they are not ashamed to say that from the fact that the first 
effect is of a possible existence, there results the existence of the 
highest sphere, and that from its knowledge of itself there 
follows the existence of the soul of the sphere and from its 
knowledge of the First Principle there follows the existence of 
an intellect? What is the difference between this and the 
statement that the existence of an unknown man is necessary , 
and that he is of a possible existence and knows himself and his 
Creator and then that from the fact that he is of a possible 
existence there follows the existence of a sphere? But it will be 
objected: What is the relation between his having a possible 
existence and the existence of a sphere following from him? 
And the same holds for the fact that from his knowing himself 
and his Creator there follow two other entities. But it would be 
ridiculous to say such a thing about a man or any other existent 
whatever, for the possibility of existence is a concept which 
does not change through the changing of the possible object, be 
it a man or an angel or a sphere. I do not know how any 
madman could content himself with any of these assertions, let 
alone the learned who split hairs in their discussions about 
intelligibles. 


I say: 


These are all theories of Avicenna and his followers, which are not true and 
are not built on the foundations of the philosophers; still they are not so inept 
as this man says they are, nor does he represent them in a true light. For the 
man whom he supposed to be of a possible existence through himself and 
necessary through another, knowing himself and his agent, is only a true 
representation of the second cause, when it is assumed in addition that 
through his essence and through his knowledge he is the agent of the 
existents, in the way this is assumed by Avicenna and his school of the second 
principle, and in the way all philosophers must admit it of the First Principle, 
God, glory be to Him. If this is admitted, it follows that from this man two 
things proceed: one in so far as he knows himself, the other, in so far as he 
knows his Creator, for he is supposed to act only because of his knowledge, 


214 


and it is not absurd, if he is supposed to act because of his essence, to say that 
what proceeds from him, in so far as lie has a possible existence, is different 
from what proceeds from him in so far as he has a necessary existence, since 
both these attributes exist in his nature. This theory, therefore, is not so 
ignominious as this man tries to represent it to be through this comparison, 
in order to cast odium on the theories of the philosophers and to make them 
despicable in the eyes of students.’ 


There is no difference between Ghazali’s comparison and a person who said: 
If you assume a being living through life, willing through will, knowing 
through knowledge, hearing, seeing, and speaking through audition, sight, 
and speech, and the whole world proceeds from him, it is possible that from 
man, living, knowing, hearing, seeing, speaking, the whole world proceeds, for 
if these attributes by themselves determine the existence of the world, it 
cannot make any difference in the effect through whichever being possessing 
these attributes they produce it. If this man Ghazali sought to speak the truth 
in this and erred, he might be forgiven; if, however, he understood how to 
deceive in these things and tried that, and if there were no necessity for him to 
do so, there is no excuse for him. And if he only wanted to show that he 
possessed no proof by which he could provide an answer to the question 
whence plurality proceeds, as might be inferred from what he says below, he 
speaks the truth, for Ghazali had not reached the degree of knowledge 
necessary for comprehending this problem, as will be seen from what he says 
later; and the reason is that he studied only the books of Avicenna, and 
through this the deficiency in his knowledge arose. 


Ghazali says: 


But if one should say to us: ‘Certainly, you have refuted their 
theory, but what do you say yourself? Do you affirm that from 
one thing two different things can in any way proceed? In that 
case you offend reason. Or will you say that in the First 
Principle there is plurality? In that case you abandon the 
doctrine of God’s unity. Or will you say that there is no plurality 
in the world? In that case you contradict the evidence of the 
senses. Or will you say that plurality occurs through 


215 


intermediates? In that case you are forced to acknowledge the 
theory of your opponents. We answer: ‘We have not made a 
deep inquiry in this book; our aimwhich we have attained-was 
only to disturb the claims of our opponents. To this we may add 
that the claim that the thesis that two proceed from one is an 
affront to reason, and the claim that the attribution of eternal 
attributes to the First Principle contradicts the doctrine of 
God’s unityboth these claims, we say, are vain and possess no 
proof. The impossibility that two should proceed from one is 
not known in the way the impossibility of one single person’s 
being in two places is known in short, it is known neither by 
intuitive necessity nor by deduction. What is the objection 
against saying: ‘The First Principle is provided with knowledge, 
power, will; He acts as He wants, He judges as He wants, He 
creates the dissimilar and the similar as He Hants and in the 
way He wants?’The impossibility of this is known neither by 
immediate necessity nor by deduction. But the prophets have 
brought us this truth, justifying it through their miracles, and 
we must accept it. To inquire, however, how God’s act proceeds 
from Him through His Will is vain and an illusory pursuit. 
Those who have sought to represent and understand this have 
arrived as a result of their inquiry at a first effect from which as 
a possible existent there proceeds a sphere, and from which, so 
far as it knows itself, there proceeds the soul of the sphere. But 
this is nonsense and is by no means an appropriate 
explanation. Let us therefore accept the principles of these 
things from the prophets, and let us believe in this, since the 
intellect does not regard it as impossible. And let us abandon 
the inquiry about quality, quantity, and quiddity,’ for the 
human powers do not suffice for this. And therefore the master 
of the Divine Law has said: Think about God’s creation, but do 
not think about God’s essence. 


I say: 


216 


His statement is true, that we have to refer to the Law of God everything 
which the human mind is unable to grasp. For the knowledge which results 
from revelation comes only as a perfection of the sciences of the intellect; that 
is, any knowledge which the weakness of the human mind is unable to grasp is 
bestowed upon man by God through revelation. This inability to comprehend 
things the knows ledge of which is, however, necessary in the life and 
existence of man, is either absolute-i.e. it is not in the nature of the intellect, 
in so far as it is intellect, to comprehend such a thing-or it is not in the nature 
of a certain class of men, and this kind of weakness is either a fundamental 
character of his disposition or something accidental through a lack of 
education. Revelation is a mercy bestowed on all these classes of men. 


And as to Ghazali’s words: 


Our aim-which we have attained-was only to disturb our 
opponents; this aim is not a proper one for him and is 
censurable in a learned man, for the intention of the learned, in 
so far as they are learned, must be to seek the truth, not to sow 
doubts and perplex minds. 


And as to his words: 


the impossibility that two should proceed from one is not 
known in the way the impossibility a single person’s being in 
two places is known; although these two propositions are not of 
the same degree of assent, still the proposition that from the 
simple unit there proceeds only one single unit keeps its 
evidence inside the empirical world. Propositions which are 
evident differ in their degree of evidence, as has been shown in 
the Posterior Analytics, and the reason for this is that when 
evident propositions are supported by imagination they receive 
a stronger degree of assent, and unsupported by imagination 
their assent is weakened; but only the masses rely on 
imagination, and he who is well trained in intellectual thought 
and renounces imagination accepts both propositions with the 
same degree of assent. 


217 


The strongest degree of evidence pertains to this proposition when a man 
makes an induction from transitory existents and sees that they only change 
their names and definitions through their acts and that, if any existent 
whatever could arise from any act and any agent whatever, the essences and 
definitions would become mixed and knowledge would be annihilated. The 
soul, for instance, distinguishes itself from the inorganic only through its 
special acts which proceed from it, and inorganic things are only 
distinguished from one another through the acts that are proper to them; and 
the same applies to souls. And if many acts were to proceed from a single 
potency, in the way that many acts proceed from composite potencies, there 
would be no difference between the simple and the composite essence and 
they would be indistinguishable for us. And again, if many acts could proceed 
from one single essence, an act without an agent would be possible, for an 
existent comes to be through an existent, not through a non-existent, and 
therefore the non-existent cannot come to be by itself; and if it is true that the 
mover of the privation and the transposer of its potency into act transposes it 
only through the actuality it possesses itself, of necessity the actuality it 
possesses must be of the same kind as the act it transposes If any effect 
whatever could proceed from any agent whatever, it would not be impossible 
that the effects should be actualized by themselves without an agent. And if 
many kinds of potency could be actualized through one and the same agent, 
this agent would itself have to possess these kinds or related kinds, for if it 
possessed only one of these kinds, all the other kinds would have to be 
actualized by themselves without a cause. It is not permissible to say: The only 
condition for the agent is that it exists as acting with an absolute action, not 
with a specified kind of action; for, in that case, any existent whatever would 
be able to perform any act whatever and what exists would be mixed;’ besides, 
the absolute, that is the universal, existent stands nearer to non-existence 
than the real individual existent. So those who denied the theory of universals 
denied the belief in a universal existent and in a universal becoming , whereas 
the champions of this theory regarded them as something midway between 
being and non-being; but if this were the case, it would follow that the 
universals could be a cause of existents. The proposition that from the one 
only one act can proceed is more evident for the empirical than for the divine 
world. For knowledge multiplies through the multiplying of the objects of 


218 


thought in the world, since the intellect knows these objects in the way that 
they exist in the world, and they are the cause of its knowledge. It is not 
possible for many objects of thought to be known through one act of thought, 
nor can one act of thought produce many effects in the empirical world, e.g. 
the knowledge of the artisan which produces, for example, a cupboard is 
different from the knowledge which produces a chair. But eternal wisdom and 
the eternal agent differ in this matter from temporal knowledge and the 
temporal agent. 


If I were asked ‘what is your own point of view in this question? You have 
denied Avicenna’s theory of the cause of plurality, but what do you say 
yourself? For it has been pointed out that the different schools of philosophy 
have three different answers to this question; that the plurality comes only 
through matter; that the plurality comes only through instruments; that the 
plurality comes through mediators. And it is said of the Peripatetics that they 
accept the theory which makes mediation the cause of plurality’-I cannot give 
in this book an answer to this question supported by a demonstrative proof. 
We find, however, neither in Aristotle nor in any of the known Peripatetics 
this theory which is ascribed to them, with the exception of Porphyry, the 
Tyrian, the author of the Introduction to Logic, and he is not among the most 
subtle of philosophers My opinion is that according to the principles of the 
Peripatetics the cause of plurality is a combination of three factors, the 
intermediates, the dispositions, and the instruments; and we have already 
explained how all these depend on the Monad and refer to it, for each of them 
exists through an absolute unity which is the cause of plurality. For it seems 
that the cause of the plurality of the separate intellects is the difference in 
their natures, by which they receive the knowledge they gain of the First 
Principle and which acquire from the First Principle a unity which by itself is 
one single act, but which becomes many through the plurality of the 
recipients, just as there are many deputies under the power of a king and 
many arts under one art. This we shall examine in another place, and if some 
part of it becomes clear it will suffice; otherwise we must take refuge in 
revelation. In so far as the differences depend on differences between the four 
causes, the question is clear. For the differentiation of the spheres arises from 
the differences of their movers, of their forms, of their matter, supposing they 


219 


have matter,’ and of their acts which serve a special end in the world, even if 
the philosophers did not believe that these spheres exist for the sake of these 
acts As to the differences which arise primarily in the sublunary world in the 
elements, as for instance the differences between fire and earth, and in short 
the opposites, they are based on the differentiation of matter and on their 
varying distances from their movers, which are the heavenly bodies. As to the 
difference between the two supreme movements, one of which is the agent of 
generation and the other the agent of corruption, they depend on the 
differentiation of the heavenly bodies and their motions, as is proved in the 
book On Generation and Corruption. For the difference which arises from the 
heavenly bodies resembles the difference which arises from the difference in 
the instruments. To sum up: the factors for the origination of plurality from 
the one Agent are three, according to Aristotle, and he refers to the One in the 
sense mentioned above, namely, that the One is the cause of the plurality. In 
the sublunary world the differences arise from the four causes, that is to say, 
the difference of the agents, the matter, the instruments, and the 
intermediaries which transmit the acts of the First Agent without its direct 
interference, and those intermediaries are very similar to the instruments. 
And an example of the differentiation which arises through the difference of 
the recipients, and out of the fact that certain differentiated things cause 
others, is colour. For the colour which arises in the air differs from the colour 
in the body, and the colour in the faculty of sight, ie. in the eye, from the 
colour in the air, and the colour in the common internal sense from the colour 
in the eye, and the colour in the imagination from the colour in the common 
internal sense, and the colour in the memorative and retentive faculty from 


the colour in the imagination; and all this has been explained in the book of 
psychology. 








THE FOURTH DISCUSSION 








SHOWING THAT THEY ARE UNABLE TO PROVE THE 
EXISTENCE OF A CREATOR OF THE WORLD 


Ghazali says: 


220 


We say: Mankind is divided into two categories; one, the 
men of truth who have acknowledged that the world has 
become and know by necessity that what has become does not 
become by itself but needs a creator, and the reasonableness of 
their view lies in their affirmation of a creator; the other, the 
materialists, believe the world, in the state in which it exists,, to 
be eternal and do not attribute a creator to it, and their doctrine 
is intelligible, although their proof shows its inanity. But as to 
the philosophers, they believe the world to be eternal and still 
attribute a creator to it. This theory is self-contradictory and 


needs no refutation. 
I say: 


The theory of the philosophers is, because of the factual evidence, more 
intelligible than both the other theories together. There are two kinds of 
agent: (t) the agent to which the object which proceeds from it is only attached 
during the process of its becoming; once this process is finished, the object is 
not any more in need of it-for instance, the coming into existence of a house 
through the builder; (2) the agent from which nothing proceeds but an act 
which has no other existence than its dependence on it. The distinctive mark 
of this act is that it is convertible with the existence of its object, i.e. when the 
act does not exist the object does not exist, and when the act exists the object 
exists-they are inseparable. This kind of agent is superior to the former and is 
more truly an agent, for this agent brings its object to being and conserves it, 
whereas the other agent only brings its objects to being, but requires another 
agent for its further conservation. The mover is such a superior agent in 
relation to the moved and to the things whose existence consists only in their 
movement. The philosophers, believing that movement is the act of a mover 
and that the existence of the world is only perfected through motion, say that 
the agent of motion is the agent of the world, and if the agent refrained for 
only one moment from its action, the world would be annihilated. They use 
the following syllogism: The world is an act, or a thing whose existence is 
consequent upon this act. Each act by its existence implies the existence of an 
agent. Therefore the world has an agent existing by reason of its existence. 
The man who regards it as necessary that the act which proceeds from the 


221 


agent of the world should have begun in time says: The world is temporal 
through an eternal agent. But the man for whom the act of the Eternal is 
eternal says: The world has come into being, from an eternal agent having an 
eternal act, i.e. an act without beginning or end; which does, however, not 
mean that the world is eternal by itself, as people who call the world eternal 
imagine it to be. 


Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers: 


The philosophers might answer: When we affirm that the 
world has a creator, we do riot understand thereby a voluntary 
agent who acts after not having acted, as we observe in the 
various kinds of agents, like tailors, weavers, and builders, but 
we mean the cause of the world, and we call it the First 
Principle, understanding by this that there is no cause for its 
existence, but that it is a cause of the existence of other things; 
and if we call this principle the Creator, it is in this sense. It is 
easy to establish by a strict proof an existent for the existence of 
which there is no cause. For we say that the world and its 
existents either have a cause or have not. If it has a cause, this 
cause itself either has or has not a cause, and the same can be 
said about the latter cause, and either we go on ad infinitum in 
this way, and this is absurd, or we arrive at a last term, and this 
end is the First Cause, which has no cause for its existence and 
which we call First Principle. And if the world existed by itself 
without cause, then it would be clear what the First Principle is, 
for we only mean by it an existent without a cause and which is 
necessarily eternal. However, it is not possible that the First 
Principle should be the heavens, for there are many of these and 
the proof of unity contradicts this, and its impossibility is 
shown on examination of the attribute of the principle. Nor can 
it be said that one single heaven, or one single body, the sun or 
any other body, can be the First Principle; for all these are 
bodies, and body is composed of matter and form, and the First 
Principle cannot be composite, as is clear on a second 


examination. Our intention is to show that an existent which 


222 


has no cause is eternal by necessity and by universal consent, 
and only about its qualities is there a divergence of opinion. 
And this is what we mean by a first principle. 


I say: 


This argument carries a certain conviction, but still it,is not true. For the 
term ‘cause’ is attributed equivocally to the four causesagent, form, matter, 
and end. Therefore if this were the answer of the philosophers, it would be 
defective. For if they were asked which cause they mean by their statement 
that the world has a first cause, and if they answered, ‘That agent whose act is 
uncreated and everlasting, and whose object is identical with its act’, their 
answer would be true according to their doctrine; for against this conception, 
in the way we expounded it, there is no objection. But if they answered ‘The 
formal cause’, the objection would be raised whether they supposed the form 
of the world to subsist by itself in the world, and if they answered, ‘We mean a 
form separate from matter’, their statement would be in harmony with their 
theory; but if they answered, ‘We mean a form in matter’, this would imply 
that the First Principle was not something incorporeal; and this does not 
accord with philosophical doctrine. Further, if they said, ‘It is a cause which 
acts for an end’, this again would agree with the philosophical doctrine. As 
you see, this statement is capable of many interpretations, and how can it be 
represented there as an answer of the philosophers? 


And as to Ghazali's words 


We call it the First Principle, understanding by this that 
there is no cause for its existence, but that it is a cause for the 
existence of other things. 


This again is a defective statement, for this might be said also of the first 
sphere, or of heaven in its entirety, or generally of any kind of existents which 
could be supposed to exist without a cause; and between this and the 
materialistic theory’ there is no difference. 


And as to Ghazali's words: 


It is easy to establish by a strict proof an existent for the 
existence of which there is no cause. 


223 


This again is a defective statement, for the causes must be specified, and it 
must be shown that each kind has an initial term without cause-that is, that 
the agents lead upwards to a first agent, the formal causes to a first form, the 
material causes to a first matter, and the final causes to a first end. And then it 
must still be shown that these four ultimate causes lead to a first cause. This is 
not clear from the statement as he expresses it here. 


And in the same way the statement in which he brings a proof for the 
existence of a first cause is defective, i.e. his statement: 


For we soy that the world and its existents either have a 


cause or have not .... 


For the term ‘cause’ is used in an equivocal way. And similarly the infinite 
regress of causes is according to philosophical doctrine in one way 
impossible, in another way necessary; impossible when this regress is 
essential and in a straight line and the prior cause is a condition of the 
existence of the posterior, not impossible when this regress is accidental and 
circular, when the prior is not a condition for the posterior and when there 
exists an essential first cause-for instance, the origin of rain from a cloud, the 
origin of a cloud from vapour, the origin of vapour from rain. And this is 
according to the philosophers an eternal circular process, which of necessity, 
however, presupposes a first cause. And similarly the coming into existence of 
one man from another is an eternal process, for in such cases the existence of 
the prior is not a condition for the existence of the posterior; indeed, the 
destruction of some of them is often a necessary condition. This kind of cause 
leads upwards to an eternal first cause which acts in each individual member 
of the series of causes at the moment of the becoming of its final effect; for 
instance, when Socrates engenders Plato, the ultimate mover, according to the 
philosophers, is the highest sphere, or the soul, or the intellect,z or all 
together, or God the Creator. And therefore Aristotle says that a man and the 
sun together engender a man, and it is clear that the sun leads upwards to its 
mover and its mover to the First Principle. Therefore the past man is not a 
condition for the existence of the future man. Similarly, when an artisan 
produces successively a series of products of craftsmanship with different 
instruments, and produces these instruments through instruments and the 


224 


latter again through other instruments, the becoming of these instruments 
one from another is something accidental, and none of these instruments is a 
condition for the existence of the product of craftsmanship except the firsts 
instrument which is in immediate contact with the work produced . Now the 
father is necessary for the coming into existence of the son in the same way as 
the instrument which comes into immediate contact with the product of 
craftsmanship is necessary for its coming into existence. And the instrument 
with which this instrument is produced will be necessary for the production of 
this instrument, but will not be necessary for the production of the product of 
craftsmanship unless accidentally. Therefore sometimes, when the posterior 
instrument is produced from the matter of the anterior, the destruction of the 
anterior is a condition for the existence of the posterior, for instance, when a 
man comes into being from a man who has perished, through the latter 
becoming first a plant, then sperm or menstrual blood? And we have already 
discussed this problem. Those, however, who regard an infinite series of 
essential causes as possible are materialists, and he who concedes this does 
not understand the efficient cause. And about the efficient cause there is no 
divergence of opinion among philosophers. 


And as to Ghazali's words: 


And if the world existed by itself without cause, then it 
would be clear what the First Principle is. 


He means that the materialists as well as others acknowledge a first cause 
which has no cause, and their difference of opinion concerns only this 
principle, for the materialists say that it is the highest sphere and the others 
that it is a principle beyond the sphere and that the sphere is an effect; but 
these others are divided into two parties, those who say that the sphere is an 
act that has a beginning and those who say that it is an eternal act. And having 
declared that the acknowledgement of a first cause is common to the 
materialists as well as to others, Ghazali says: 


However, it is not possible that the First Principle should be 
the heavens, for there are many of these and the proof of unity 
contradicts this; 


225 


Meaning that from the order of the universe it is evident that its directing 
principle is one, just as it appears from the order in an army that its leader is 
one, namely, the commander of the army. And all this is true. 


And as to Ghazali's words: 


Nor can it be said that one single heaven or one single body, 
the sun or any other body, can be the First Principle; for all 
these are bodies, and body is composed of matter and form, and 
the first body cannot be composite. 


I say: 


The statement that each body is composed of matter and form does not 
accord with the theory of the philosophers (with the exception of Avicenna) 
about the heavenly body, unless one uses ‘matter’ here equivocally. For 
according to the philosophers everything composed of matter and form has a 
beginning, like the coming into existence of a house and a cupboard; and the 
heavens, according to them, have not come into existence in this sense, and so 
they called them eternal, because their existence is coeternal with the First 
Principle. For since according to them the cause of corruption is matter, that 
which is incorruptible could not possess matter, but must be a simple entity. 
If generation and corruption were not found in sublunary bodies, we should 
not draw the conclusion that they were composed of matter and form, for the 
fundamental principle is that body is a single essence not less in its existence 
than in perception, and if there were no corruption of sublunary bodies, we 
should judge that they were simple and that matter was body. But the fact that 
the body of the heavens does not suffer corruption shows that its matter is 
actual corporeality. And the soul which exists in this body does not exist in it 
because this body requires, as the bodies of animals do, the soul for its 
continuance, nor because it is necessary for the existence of this body to be 
animated, but only because the superior must of necessity exist in the 
condition of the superior and the animate is superior to the inanimate. 
According to the philosophers there is no change in the heavenly bodies, for 
they do not possess a potency in their substance. They therefore need not 
have matter in the way the generable bodies need this, but they are either, as 


Themistius affirms, forms,z or possess matter in an equivocal sense of the 


226 


word. And I say that either the matters of the heavenly bodies are identical 
with their souls, or these matters are essentially alive, not alive through a life 
bestowed on them. 


Ghazali says: 


To this there are two answers. The first is that it can be said: 
Since it follows from the tenets of your school that the bodies of 
the world are eternal, it must follow too that they have no cause, 
and your statement that on a second examination such a 
conclusion must be rejected will itself be rejected when we 
discuss God's unity and afterwards the denial of attributes to 
God. 


I say: 


Ghazali means that since they cannot prove the unity of the First Principle, 
and since they cannot prove either that the One cannot be body-for since they 
cannot deny the attributes, the First Principle must, according to them, be an 
essence endowed with attributes, and such an essence must be a body or a 
potency in a body4-it follows that the First Principle which has no cause is the 
celestial bodies. And this conclusion is valid against those who might argue in 
the way he says the philosophers argue. The philosophers, however, do not 
argue thus, and do not say that they are unable to prove the unity and 
incorporeality of the First Principle. But this question will be discussed later. 


Ghazali says: 


The second answer, and it is the answer proper to this 
question, is to say: it is established as a possibility that these 
existents can have a cause, but perhaps for this cause there is 
another cause, and so on ad infinitum. And you have no right to 
assert that to admit an infinite series of causes is impossible, 
for we ask you, ‘Do you know this by immediate necessary 
intuition or through a middle term?’ Any claim to intuition is 
excluded, and any method of deductive proof is forbidden to 
you, since you admit celestial revolutions without an initial 


term; and if you permit a coming into existence for what is 


227 


without ends it is not impossible that the series should consist 
of causal relations and have as a final term an effect which has 
no further effect, although in the other direction the series does 
not end in a cause which has no anterior cause,’ just as the past 
has a final term, namely the everchanging present, but no first 
term. If you protest that the past occurrences do not exist 
together at one moment or at certain moments, and that what 
does not exist cannot be described as finite or infinite, you are 
forced to admit this simultaneous existence for human souls in 
abstraction from their bodies; for they do not perish, according 
to you, and the number of souls in abstraction from their 
bodies is infinite, since the series of becoming from sperm a to 
man and from man to sperm a is infinite, and every man dies, 
but his soul remains and is numerically different from the soul 
of any man who dies before, simultaneously, or afterwards, 
although all these souls are one in species. Therefore at any 


moment there is an infinite number of souls in existence. 


If you object that souls are not joined to each other, and that 
they have no order, either by nature or by position, and that 
you regard only those infinite existents as impossible which 
have order in space, like bodies which have a spatial order of 
higher and lower, or have a natural order like cause and effect, 
and that this is not the case with souls; we answer: 'This theory 
about position does not follow any more than its contrary;' you 
cannot regard one of the two cases as impossible without 
involving the other, for where is your proof for the distinction? 
And you cannot deny that this infinite number of souls must 
have an order, as some are prior to others and the past days and 
nights are infinite. If we suppose the birth of only one soul 
every day and night, the sum of souls, born in sequence one 
after the other, amounts at the present moment to infinity. 


The utmost you can say about the cause is that its priority to 
the effect exists by nature, in the way that its superiority to the 
effect is a matter of essence and not of space. But if you do not 


228 


regard an infinite sequence as impossible for real temporal 
priority, it cannot be impossible for natural essential priority 
either. But what can the philosophers mean when they deny the 
possibility of an infinite spatial superposition of bodies, but 
affirm the possibility of an infinite temporal sequence? Is this 
theory not really an inept theory without any foundation? 


I say: As to Ghazali's words: 


But perhaps for this cause there is another cause and so on 
ad infinitum ... and any method of deductive proof is 
forbidden to you, since you admit celestial revolutions without 
an initial term: To this difficulty an answer was given above, 
when we said that the philosophers do not allow an infinite 
causal series, because this would lead to an effect without a 
cause, but assert that there is such a series accidentally from an 
eternal cause-not, however, in a_ straight line, nor 
simultaneously, nor in infinite matters, but only as a circular 


process. 


What he says here about Avicenna, that he regarded an infinite number of 
souls as possible and that infinity is only impossible in what has a position, is 
not true’ and no philosopher has said it; indeed, its impossibility is apparent 
from their general proof which we mentioned, and no conclusion can be 
drawn against them from this assumption of an actual infinity of souls. 
Indeed, those who believed that the souls are of a certain number through the 
number of bodies and that they are individually immortal profess to avoid 
this assumption through the doctrine of the transmigration of souls. 


And as to Ghazali's words: 


But what can the philosophers mean when they deny the 
possibility of an infinite spatial superposition of bodies, but 
affirm the possibility of an infinite temporal sequence? 


I say: 


The difference between these two cases is very clear to the philosophers, for 
from the assumption of infinite bodies existing simultaneously there follows 


229 


an infinite totality and an actual infinite, and this is impossible. But time has 
no position, and from the existence of an infinite temporal series of bodies no 


actual infinite follows. 
Ghazali says on behalf of the philosophers: 


The philosophers might say: The strict proof of the 
impossibility of an infinite causal series is as follows: each 
single cause of a series is either possible in itself or necessary; if 
it is necessary, it needs no cause, and if it is possible, then the 
whole series needs a cause additional to its essence, a cause 
standing outside the series. 


I say: 


The first man to bring into philosophy the proof which Ghazali gives here 
as a philosophical one, was Avicenna, who regarded this proof as superior to 
those given by the ancients, since he claimed it to be based on the essence of 
the existent, whereas the older proofs are based on accidents consequent on 
the First Principle! This proof Avicenna took from the theologians, who 
regarded the dichotomy of existence into possible and necessary as self- 
evident, and assumed that the possible needs an agent and that the world in 
its totality, as being possible, needs an agent of a necessary existence. This was 
a theory of the Mu'tazilites before the Ash'arites,s and it is excellent, and the 
only flaw in it is their assumption that the world in its totality is possible, for 
this is not self-evident. Avicenna wanted to give a general sense to this 
statement, and he gave to the ‘possible’ the meaning of ‘what has a cause’, as 
Ghazali relates. And even if this designation can be conceded, it does not 
effect the division which he had in view. For a primary division of existence 
into what has a cause and what has no cause is by no means self-evident. 
Further, what has a cause can be divided into what is possible and what is 
necessary. If we understand by ‘possible’ the truly possible we arrive at the 
necessary-possibles and not at the necessary which has no cause; and if we 
understand by ‘possible’ that which has a cause and is also necessary, there 
only follows from this that what has a cause has a cause and we may assume 
that this cause has a cause and so ad infinitum. We do not therefore arrive at 
an existent without cause-for this is the meaning of the expression ‘entity of a 


230 


necessary existence'-unless by the possible which Avicenna assumes as the 
opposite of what has no cause we understand the truly possible, for in these 
possibles there cannot exist an infinite series of causes. But if by ‘possible’ is 
meant those necessary things which have a cause, it has not yet been proved 
that their infinite number is impossible, in the way it is evident of the truly 
possible existents, and it is not yet proved that there is a necessary existent 
which needs a cause, so that from this assumption one can arrive at a 
necessary entity existing without a cause. Indeed, one has to prove that what 
applies to the total causal series of possible entities applies also to the total 


causal series of necessary existents. 
Ghazali says: 


The terms ‘possible' and ‘necessary’ are obscure, unless one 
understands by ‘necessary’ that which has no cause for its 
existence and by ‘possible’ that which has a cause for its 
existence; then, by applying the terms as defined to the 
statement, we say: Each member of a causal series is possible in 
this sense of ‘possible’, namely, that it has a cause additional to 
its essence, but the series as a whole is not possible in this sense 
of ‘possible'." And if anything else is meant by ‘possible’, it is 
obscure. If it is objected that this makes the necessary existent 
consist of possible existents and this is impossible, we answer: 
By defining ‘necessary' and ‘possible’ as we have done, you 
have all that is needed and we do not concede that it is 
impossible. To say that it is impossible would be like saying 
that it is impossible that what is eternal should be made up of 
what is temporal, for time according to you philosophers is 
eternal, but the individual circular movements are temporal 
and have initial terms, though collectively they have no initial 
term; therefore, that which has no initial term consists of 
entities having initial terms, and it is true of the single units 
that they have a beginning, but not true of them collectively. In 
the same way it can be said of each term of the causal series that 
it has a cause, but not of the series as a whole. And so not 
everything that is true of single units is true of their collectivity, 


231 


for it is true of each single unit that it is one and a portion and a 
part, but not true of their collectivity; and any place on the 
earth which we choose is illuminated by the sun by day and is 
dark by night, and according to the philosophers each unit has 
begun, but not the whole. Through this it is proved that the 
man who admits temporal entities without a beginning, namely, 
the forms of the four elements,’ cannot at the same time deny 
an infinity of causes, and we conclude from this that because of 
this difficulty there is no way in which they can prove the First 
Principle, and their dichotomy is purely arbitrary. 


I say: 


The assumption of infinite possible causes implies the assumption of a 
possible without an agent, but the assumption of infinite necessary entities 
having causes implies only that what was assumed to have a cause has none, 
and this argument is true with the restriction that the impossibility of infinite 
entities which are of a possible nature does not involve the impossibility of 
infinite necessary entities. If one wanted to give a demonstrative form to the 
argument used by Avicenna one should say: Possible existents must of 
necessity have causes which precede them, and if these causes again are 
possible it follows that they have causes and that there is an infinite regress; 
and if there is an infinite regress there is no cause, and the possible will exist 
without a cause, and this is impossible. Therefore the series must end in a 
necessary cause, and in this case this necessary cause must be necessary 
through a cause or without a cause, and if through a cause, this cause must 
have a cause and so on infinitely; and if we have an infinite regress here, it 
follows that what was assumed to have a cause has no cause, and this is 
impossible. Therefore the series must end in a cause necessary without a 
cause, i.e. necessary by itself, and this necessarily is the necessary existent. 
And when these distinctions are indicated, the proof becomes valid . But if 
this argument is given in the form in which Avicenna gives it, it is invalid for 
many reasons, one of which is that the term ‘possible’ used in it is an 
equivocal one and that in this argument the primary dichotomy of all 
existents into what is possible and what is not possible, ice. this division 


comprising the existent qua existent, is not true. 


232 


And as to Ghazali's words in his refutation of the philosophers: 


We say: Each member of a causal series is possible in this 
sense of ‘possible’, namely, that it has a cause additional to its 
essence, but the whole series is not possible in this sense of 
‘possible’, 


I say: 


Ghazali means that when the philosophers concede that they understand by 
‘possible existent’ that which has a cause and by ‘necessary existent’ that 
which has no cause, it can be said to them ‘According to your own principles 
the existence of an infinite causal series is not impossible, and the series in its 
totality will be a necessary existent,’ for according to their own principles the 
philosophers admit that different judgements apply to the part and to the 
whole collectively. This statement is erroneous for many reasons, one of 
which is that the philosophers, as was mentioned before, do not allow an 
infinite series of essential causes, whether causes and effects of a possible’ or 
of a necessary nature, as we have shown. The objection which can be directed 
against Avicenna is that when you divide existence into possible and 
necessary and identify the possible existent with that which has a cause and 
the necessary existent with that which has none, you can no longer prove the 
impossibility of the existence of an infinite causal series, for from its infinite 
character it follows that it is to be classed with existents which have no cause 
and it must therefore be of the nature of the necessary existent, especially as, 
according to him and his school, eternity can consist of an infinite series of 
causes each of which is temporal. The fault in Avicenna's argument arises only 
from his division of the existent into that which has a cause and that which 
has none. If he had made his division in the way we have done, none of these 
objections could be directed against him. And Ghazali's statement that the 
ancients, since they admit an infinite number of circular movements, make 
the eternal consist of an infinite number of entities, is false. For the term 
‘eternal’, when it is attributed both to this infinite series and to the one 
eternal being, is used equivocally. 


And as to the words of Ghazali: 


233 


If it is objected that this makes the necessary existent 
consist of possible existents, and this is impossible, we answer: 
By defining ‘necessary’ and ‘possible’ as we have done you have 
all that is needed, and we do not concede that it is impossible. 


I say: 


Ghazali means that the philosophers understand by ‘necess: that which has 
no cause and by ‘possible’ that which has a cause, and that he, Ghazali, does 
not regard it as impossible that what has no cause should consist of an infinite 
number of causes, because, if he conceded that this was impossible, he would 
be denying the possibility of an infinity of causes, whereas he only wants to 
show that the philosophers' deduction of a necessary being is a petitio 
principii. 

Then Ghazali says: 


To say that it is impossible would be like saying that it is 
impossible that what is eternal should be made up of what is 
temporal, for time, according to you philosophers, is eternal, 
but the individual circular movements are temporal and have 
initial terms; therefore that which has no initial term consists of 
entities having initial terms, and it is true of the single units 
that they have a beginning, but not true of them collectively. In 
the same way it can be said of each term of the causal series that 
it has a cause, but not of the series as a whole. And so not 
everything that is true of single units is true of their collectivity, 
for it is true of each single unit that it is one and a portion and a 
part, but not true of their collectivity. 


I say: 


Ghazali means that it is not impossible that what has no cause should 
consist of infinite effects in the way the eternal, according to the philosophers, 
consists of temporal entities, which are infinite in number. For time, 
according to the philosophers, is eternal, and consists of limited temporal 
parts, and likewise the movement of heaven is eternal according to the 
philosophers, and the circular movements of which it consists are infinite. 


234 


And the answer is that the existence of an eternal consisting of temporal parts, 
in so far as they are infinite in number, is not a philosophical principle; on the 
contrary they deny it most strongly, and only the materialists affirm it. For the 
sum must consist either of a finite number of transitory members or of an 
infinite number. If the former is the case, it is generally admitted that the 
members must also be generically transitory. For the latter case there are two 
theories. The materialists believe that the totality is of a possible nature and 
that the collectivity must be eternal and without a cause . The philosophers 
admit this infinity and believe that such genera, because they consist of 
possible transitory constituents, must necessarily have an external cause, 
lasting and eternal, from which they acquire their eternity . It is not true 
either, as Ghazali seems to imply, that the philosophers believe that the 
impossibility of an infinite series of causes depends on the impossibility that 
the eternal should consist of an infinity of constituents. They affirm that the 
eternity of these generically different movements must lead to one single 
movement, and that the reason why there exist genera which are transitory in 
their individuals, but eternal as a whole, is that there is an existent, eternal 
partly and totally, and this is the body of the heavens. The infinite movements 
are generically infinite only because of the one single continuous eternal 
movement of the body of the heavens. And only for the mind does the 
movement of heaven seem composed of many circular movements. And the 
movement of the body of the heavens acquires its eternity-even if its 
particular movements are transitory-through a mover which must always 
move and through a body which also must always be moved and cannot stop 
in its motion, as happens with things which are moved in the sublunary 
world. 


About genera there are three theories, that of those who say that all genera 
are transitory, because the individuals in them are finite, and that of those 
who say that there are genera which are eternal and have no first or last term, 
because they appear by their nature to have infinite individuals; the latter are 
divided into two groups: those, namely the philosophers, who say that such 
genera can only be truly said to be everlasting, because of one and the same 
necessary cause, without which they would perish on innumerable occasions 
in infinite time; and those, namely the materialists, who believe that the 


235 


existence of the individuals of these genera is sufficient to make them eternal. 
It is important to take note of these three theories, for the whole controversy 
about the eternity or non-eternity of the world, and whether the world has an 
agent or not, is based on these fundamental propositions. The theologians and 
those who believe in a temporal creation of the world are at one extreme, the 
materialists at the other, while the philosophers hold an intermediate 
position. 


If all this is once established, you will see that the proposition that the man 
who allows the existence of an infinite series of causes cannot admit a first 
cause is false, and that on the contrary the opposite is evident, namely, that 
the man who does not acknowledge infinite causes cannot prove the existence 
of an eternal first cause, since it is the existence of infinite effects which 
demands the necessity of an eternal cause from which the infinite causes 
acquire their existence; for if not, the genera, all of whose individuals are 
temporal, would be necessarily finite. And in this and no other way can the 
eternal become the cause of temporal existents, and the existence of infinite 
temporal existents renders the existence of a single eternal first principle 
necessary, and there is no God but He. 


Ghazali, answering this objection in the name of the philosophers, says: 


The philosophers might say: The circular movements and 
the forms of the elements do not exist at the present moment; 
there actually exists only one single form of them, and what 
does not exist can be called neither finite nor infinite, unless 
one supposes them to exist in the imagination, and things 
which are only suppositions in the mind cannot be regarded as 
impossible, even if certain of these suppositions are supposed 
to be causes of other suppositions;' for man assumes this only 
in his imagination, and the discussion refers only to things in 
reality, not to things in the mind. The only difficulty concerns 
the souls of the dead and, indeed, some philosophers have 
arrived at the theory that there is only one eternal soul before it 
is united with bodies, and that after its separation from the 
bodies it becomes one again, so that it has no numerical 


236 


quantity and can certainly not be called infinite. Other 
philosophers have thought that the soul follows from the 
constitution of the body, that death is nothing but the 
annihilation of the soul, and that the soul cannot subsist by 
itself without the body. In that case souls have no existence 
except in respect of the living, and the living are beings limited 
in number, and their finitude is not denied, and those that have 
ceased to exist cannot be qualified at all, either by finitude or by 
infinity, except when they are supposed to exist in imagination. 


Then Ghazali says: 


We answer: This difficulty about the souls has come to us 
from Avicenna and Farabi and the most acknowledged 
philosophers, since they concluded that the soul was a 
substance subsistent by itself; and this is also the view taken by 
Aristotle and by the commentators on the ancient philosophers. 
And to those philosophers who turn aside from this doctrine we 
say: Can you imagine that at each moment something comes 
into being which will last for ever? A negative answer is 
impossible, and if they admit this possibility, we say: If you 
imagine that every day some new thing comes into being and 
continues to exist, then up to the present moment there will 
have been an infinite collection of existents and, even if the 
circular movement itself comes to an end, the lasting and 
endless existence of what has come into being during its 
revolution is not impossible. In this way this difficulty is firmly 
established, and it is quite irrelevant whether this survival 
concerns the soul of a man or a Jinni, the soul of a devil or an 
angel, or of any being whatever. And this is a necessary 
consequence of every philosophical theory which admits an 


infinity of circular movements. 
I say: 


The answer which lie gives in the name of the philosophers, that the past 
revolutions and the past forms of the elements which have come from each 


237 


others are non-existent, and that the non-existent can be called neither finite 
nor infinite, is not a true one. And as to the difficulty he raises against them as 
to their theory about souls, no such theory is held by any philosophers, and 
the transference of one problem to another is a sophistical artifice. 








THE FIFTH DISCUSSION 








TO SHOW THEIR INCAPACITY TO PROVE GOD’S UNITY AND 
THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF TWO NECESSARY EXISTENTS BOTH 
WITHOUT A CAUSE 


Ghazali says: 


The philosophers have two proofs of this. The first is to say, 
‘If there were two necessary existents, the species of necessary 
existence would be attributed to them both. ‘ But what is said to 
be a necessary existent must either be so through itself, and 
cannot be imagined to be so through another, or it must be so 
through a cause, and the essence of the necessary existent will 
be an effect; and its cause then determines its necessity of 
existence. ‘ ‘But’, say the philosophers, ‘we understand by 
“necessary existent” only an entity whose existence has no 
connexion with a cause. ‘ And the philosophers affirm that the 
species ‘man’ is asserted of Zaid and of Amr and that Zaid is not 
a man through himself-for in that case Amr would not be a 
man-but through a cause which makes both him and Amr a 
man; and the plurality of men arises from the plurality of 
matter in which humanity inheres, and its inherence in matter 
is an efficct which does not lie in the essence of humanity. The 
same is the case with necessary existence in respect to the 
necessary existent: if it is through itself a necessary existent, it 
must possess this qualification exclusively, and if it exists 
because of a cause, it is an effect and cannot be a necessary 


238 


existent. And from this it is clear that the necessary existent 
must needs be one. 


To this Ghazali objects and says: 


We say: Your statement that the species of necessary 
existence must belong to the necessary existent either through 
the necessary existent itself or through a cause is a self- 
contradictory disjunction, for we have already shown that the 
expression ‘necessary existence’ is obscure, unless we mean by 
it the denial of a cause, and so let us rather use the term which 
is really meant by it and say: To admit two existents without a 
cause, and without the one’s being a cause of the other, is not 
impossible. And your statement that what has no cause has 
none, either because of its own essence or through some cause, 
is a faulty disjunction, for one does not ask for the cause of a 
thing which is said to have no cause and to need no cause for its 
existence. And what sense is there in the statement that what 
has no cause has no cause either because of its own essence or 
through a cause? For to say ‘no cause’ is an absolute negation, 
and an absolute non-entity has no cause, and cannot be said to 
exist either by its own essence or not by its own essence. But if 
you mean by ‘necessary existence’ a positive qualification of the 
necessary existent, besides its being an existent without a cause 
for its existence, it is quite obscure what this meaning is. But 
the genuine meaning of this word is the negation of a cause for 
its existence, and this is an absolute negation about which it 
cannot be said that it is due to its essence or to a cause, such 
that the intended proof might be based on the supposition of 
this disjunction. To regard this as a proof is senseless and has 
no foundation whatever. On the contrary, we say that the 
meaning of its necessity is that it has no cause for its existence 
and no cause for its coming into existence, without there being 
any cause whatever for this; its being without a cause is, again, 
not caused by its essence; no, the fact that there is no cause for 
its existence and no cause for its being, has itself no cause 


239 


whatsoever. This disjunction cannot be applied even to positive 
qualities, not to speak of that which is really equivalent to a 
negation. For suppose one were to say: ‘Black is a colour 
because of its essence or through a cause, and if it is a colour 
because of its essence, then red cannot be a colour, and then the 
species of colouredness can exist only because of the essence of 
black; if, however, black is a colour because of a cause which 
has made it a colour, then black can be thought of as being 
without a colour, i. e. as not having been made a colour by a 
cause, for a determination added to an essence through a cause 
can be represented in the imagination as absent, even if it exists 
in reality. “ ‘But’, it will be objected, ‘this disjunction is false in 
itself, for one cannot say of black that it is a colour because of 
its essence, meaning by this that it cannot be through anything 
but its essence, and in the same way one cannot say that this 
existent is necessary because of its essence, i. e. that it has no 
cause because of its own essence, meaning by this that it cannot 
exist through anything but its essence. ‘ 


I say: 


This method of proving the unity of God is peculiar to Avicenna, and is not 
found in any of the ancient philosophers; its premisses are common-sense 
premisses, and the terms are used in a more or less equivocal way. For this 
reason many objections can be urged against it. Still, when those terms and 
the aim they intend are properly analysed, this statement comes near to being 
a proof. 


That this primary disjunction is faulty, as Ghazali asserts, is not true. He 
says that the meaning of ‘necessary existent’ is ‘that which has no cause’, and 
that the statement ‘that what has no cause, has no cause, either because of its 
own essence or through another cause’, and similarly the statement ‘that the 
necessary existent is a necessary existent, either because of its own essence or 
through another cause’ are meaningless statements. But this is by no means 
the case. For the meaning of this disjunction is only whether the necessary 
existent is such, because of a nature which characterizes it, in so far as it is 


240 


numerically one, ‘ or because of a nature which it has in common with others- 
for instance, when we say that Amr is a man because lie is Amr, or because of 
a nature he has in common with Khalid. If he is a man because he is Amr, 
then humanity does not exist in anyone else, and if he is a man because of a 
general nature, then he is composed of two natures, a general one and a 
special one and the compound is an effect; but the necessary existent has no 
cause, and therefore the necessary existent is unique. And when Avicenna’s 


statement is given in this form it is true. 
And Ghazali’s words: 


and an absolute non-entity has no cause and it cannot be 
said to exist either by its own essence or not by its own essence 
form a statement which is not true either. For there are two 
kinds of negation, the negation of a particular quality, proper to 
something (and this kind of negation must be understood in 
respect of the words ‘by its own essence’ used in this 
statement), and the negation of a quality, not particular to 
something (and this kind of negation must be understood here 
in respect of the term ‘cause’). 


Ghazali affirms that this disjunction is not even true of positive qualities 
and therefore certainly not of negative and he objects to thus disjunction by 
giving as ati example black acid colouredness. And lie means that now we say 
of black that it is a colour, either because of its essence or through a cause, 
neither alternative can be true, send both are false. For it black were a cause, 
because of its essence, red could not he a colour. just as if Amr were a man 
because of his essence, Khalid could not be cc man; on the other hand, if black 
were a colour through a cause, colour would have to be an addition to its 
essence, and an essence which receives an addition can be represented 
without this addition, and therefore this assumption would imply that black 
could be represented without colouredness, and this is absurd. But this 
argument, Ghazali is erroneous and sophistical, because of the equivocation 
in the terms ‘essence’ and ‘cause’. For if by ‘by its essence’ is understood the 
opposite of ‘by accident’, our statement that black is a colour because of its 
essence is true, and at the same time it is not impossible that other things, red 


241 


for instance, should be colours. And if by ‘cause’, in the expression that black 
is a colour through a cause, is understood something additional to its essence, 
i. e. that it is a colour through a cause external to black, it does not follow that 
black can be represented without colouredness. For the genus is an addition 
to the specific quality and the species, and the species or the specific quality 
cannot be represented without the genus, and only an accidental additional 
quality-not the essential additional quality-can be represented without the 
genus. And therefore our statement that black is a colour either because of its 
essence or through a cause is a disjunction of which, indeed, one of the 
alternatives must be true, i. e. black must be a colour either by black itself or 
through an entity additional to black. And this is what Avicenna meant by his 
assertion that the necessary existent must be a necessary existent, either 
through its own special character or through an addition which is not peculiar 
to it; if through the former, there cannot be two existents which are both 
necessary existents; if through the latter, both existents must be composed of 
a universal and of a peculiar entity, and the compound is not a necessary 
existent through itself. And if this is true, the words of Ghazali : ‘What 
prevents us from representing two existents which should both be of a 


necessary existence?’ are absurd. 


And if it is objected, ‘You have said that this statement comes near being a 
proof, but it seems to be a proper proof’, we answer: We said this only because 
this proof seems to imply that the difference between those two assumed 
necessary existents must lie either in their particularity, and then they 
participate in their specific quality, or in their species, and then they 
participate in their generic quality, and both these differences are found only 
in compounds, and the insufficiency of this proof lies in this, that it has been 
demonstrated that there are existents which are differentiated, although they 
are simple and differ neither in species nor individually, namely, the separate 
intellects. ‘ However, it appears from their nature that there must be in their 
existence a priority and posteriority of rank, for no other differentiation can 
be imagined in them. Avicenna’s proof about the necessary existent must be 
therefore completed in this way: If there were two necessary existents, the 
difference between them must consist either in a numerical difference, or in a 


specific difference, or in rank. In the first case they would agree in species; in 


242 


the second case in genus, and in both cases the necessary existent would have 
to be composite. In the third case, however, the necessary existent will have to 
be one, and will be the cause of all the separate existents. And this is the truth, 
and the necessary existent is therefore one. For there is only this tripartite 
disjunction, two members of which are false, and therefore the third case, 
which necessitates the absolute uniqueness of the necessary existent, is the 


true one. ‘ 
Ghazali says: 


The second proof of the philosophers is that they say: If we 
assumed two necessary existents, they would have to be similar 
in every way or different. If they were similar in every way, they 
could not be thought to be a plurality or a duality, since two 
blacks can have only a duality, when they are in two places, or 
in one place at different times, for black and movement can 
only exist in one place and be two at the same time, because 
they differ essentially. When the two essences, like the two 
blacks, do not differ and at the same time are simultaneous and 
in one place, they cannot be thought to be a plurality; if one 
could speak of two simultaneous blacks as being in the same 
place, any individual could be said to be two, although not the 
slightest difference could be perceived between the two. Since 
they cannot be absolutely similar, they must be different, but 
they cannot differ in time or in place, and they can therefore 
only differ in essence. But two things which differ in something 
must either participate in something or not participate in 
anything. The latter is impossible, for it would mean that they 
would participate neither in existence, ‘ nor in the necessity of 
existence, nor in being subsistent in themselves and not 
inhering in a substratum. But if they agree in something and 
differ in something, that in which they agree must be different 
from that through which they differ; there will therefore be 
composition in them, and it will be possible to analyse them in 
thought. But there is no composition in the necessary existent, 
and just as it cannot be divided quantitatively, so it cannot be 


243 


analysed by thought either, for its essence is not composed of 
elements which intellectual analysis could enumerate. ‘ The 
words ‘animal’ and ‘rational’, for instance, mean that which 
constitutes the essence of man, namely, animal and rational, 
and what is meant by the word ‘animal’ when one speaks of a 
man is different from what is meant by ‘rational’, and therefore 
man is composed of parts which are ordered in the definition 
by words which indicate these parts, and the term ‘man’ is 
applied to the whole of them. ‘ This composition, however, 
cannot be imagined in the necessary existent, while duality 
cannot be imagined except in this way. 


The answer is that we concede that duality can only be 
imagined where there is a differentiation, and that in two 
things, similar in every way, no difference can be imagined. But 
your statement that this kind of composition is impossible in 
the First Principle is a mere presumption, and where is your 
proof of it? 


Let us now treat this problem in detail. It belongs to their 
well-known theories that the First Principle can as little be 
analysed intellectually as divided quantitatively, and on this 
fundamental truth, according to the philosophers, the 
uniqueness of God must be based. 


I say: 


Ghazali does not know the mistake which is in this second proof, and he 
begins to discuss with the philosophers the question to which they give a 
negative answer, namely, if one may introduce a plurality into the definition 
of the necessary existent. He wants to consider this problem in detail, since 
the Ash’arites allow a plurality in God, regarding Him as an essence with 
attributes. ‘ The mistake in this second proof is that two different things can 
be essentially different and have nothing in common but their name, in the 
case where they have no common genus, either proximate or remote, for 
instance, the term ‘body’, attributed by the philosophers to both the body of 
the heavens and the transitory body, and the term ‘intellect’ attributed to the 


244 


intellect of man and the separate intellects, and the term ‘existent’ attributed 
to transitory things and to eternal. Such terms must be regarded as equivocal 
rather than as univocal, and therefore it does not follow that things which are 
differentiated must be composite. And since Ghazali, in his answer to this 
proof of the philosophers, limits himself in the way he has indicated, he 
begins first by stating their theory of God’s unity and then tries to refute the 
philosophers. 


Ghazali, expounding the philosophical theory, says: 


For the philosophers assert that God’s unity can only be 
perfected by establishing the singleness of God’s essence in 
every way, and by the denial of any possible plurality in Him. 
Now plurality can belong to things in five ways. ‘ 


First, to what can undergo division actually or in 
imagination, and therefore the single body is not absolutely 
one-it is one through the continuity which exists in it, which 
can suffer a decrease and can be quantitatively divided in 
imagination. This is impossible in the First Principle. 


Secondly: a thing may be divided by thought, not 
quantitatively, into two different concepts, as for instance the 
division of body into matter and form, for although neither 
matter nor form can subsist separately, they are two different 
things in definition and in reality, and it is by their composition 
that a unity results, namely body. This also must be denied of 
God, for God cannot be a form or a matter in a body, or be the 
compound of both. There are two reasons why God cannot be 
their compound, first because this compound can be divided 
into quantitative parts, actually or in imagination, secondly, 
because this compound can be divided conceptually into form 
and matter, and God cannot be matter, because matter needs a 
form, and the necessary existent is self-sufficient in every 
respect and its existence cannot be conjoined with the 
condition of something else besides it, and God cannot be form, 
because form needs matter. 


245 


Thirdly: the plurality through attributes implied in 
knowledge, power, and will; if these attributes had a necessary 
existence, the essence and these attributes would participate in 
necessary existence and the necessary existent must be a 
plurality, and its uniqueness would be denied. 


Fourthly: the rational plurality which results from the 
composition of genus and species. For black is black and 
colour, and blackness is not colouredness for the intellect, but 
colouredness is a genus, and blackness a specific difference, and 
therefore black is composed of genus and species; and 
animality is for the mind something different from humanity, 
for man is a rational animal, animal is a genus and rational a 
specific difference, and man is composed of genus and species, 
and this is a kind of plurality, and the philosophers affirmed 
that this kind also must be denied of the First Principle. 


Fifthly: the plurality which results from the duality of a 
quiddity and the existence of this quiddity; for man before his 
existence has a quiddity, and existence occurs to it and enters 
into relation with it, and in this way the triangle has a quiddity, 
namely, it is a figure surrounded by three sides, and existence is 
not a component of this quiddity, and therefore the intellect can 
perceive the quiddity of man and the quiddity of a triangle 
without knowing whether they exist in the external world or 
not. z If existence were a component of the quiddity to which it 
is added, the fixation of this quiddity in the mind before its 
existence could not be imagined. Existence stands in a relation 
to quiddity, whether in a necessary inseparable relation, for 
instance, heaven, or in an accidental relation occurring after a 
thing’s non-existence, like the quiddity of man in respect of 
Zaid or Amr and the quiddity of accidents and forms which 
occur. ‘ And the philosophers affirm that this kind of plurality 
also must be denied of the First Principle. They say that the 
First Principle has no quiddity to which existence is joined, but 
existence is necessary to it, as is quiddity to the other entities. 


246 


Therefore necessary existence is at once a quiddity, a universal 
reality and a real nature, in the same way as a man, a tree, and 
heaven are quiddities. For if the necessary existent needed a 
quiddity for its existence, it would be consequent on this 
essence and would not constitute it, and the consequent is 
something secondary and an effect, so that the necessary 
existent would be an effect, and that would be in opposition to 
its being necessary. 


I say: 


These arc the theories of the philosophers which Ghazali mentions on the 
subject of their denial of plurality in the Monad. Then he begins to show how 
they contradict themselves on this question. We must now first examine these 
statements which he ascribes to them, and explain the degree of consent they 
reach; we shall then investigate the contradictions of the philosophers which 
he mentions, and his methods of opposing them on this problem. 


The first kind of division which, according to Ghazali, the philosophers 
deny of the First Principle, is the quantitative division, either in supposition 
or in reality. Everyone who believes that the First Principle is not a body, 
whether he believes that a body is composed of atoms or not, agrees about 
this. The proof of this is that the First Principle is not a body, and its 
discussion will follow. 


The second kind is the qualitative division, like the division of body into 
matter and form, and this according to the doctrine of those, namely, the 
philosophers, who believe that body is composed of matter and form and this 
is not the place to discuss the truth of either of these theories. This division 
also is denied of the First Principle by everyone who believes that the First 
Principle is not body. As to the denial of the corporeality of the First Principle 
in so far as it is essentially a necessary existent, the discussion of this will 
follow later, when we give a complete account of the whole argument used in 
this matter. For as to Ghazali’s words that the necessary existent does not 
need another, i. e. it does not consist of anything else, but that body consists 
of form and matter and neither of them are necessary existents, for form 


cannot dispense with matter and matter cannot dispense with form-there is 


247 


here a problem; for according to the philosophers the body of the heavens is 
not composed of matter and form, but is simple, and it has sometimes been 
thought that it is a necessary existent by its own essence; but this problem will 
be treated later, and I do not know of any philosopher who has believed that 
the body of the heavens is composed of matter and form, with the sole 
exception of Avicenna. We have already spoken on this question in another 
place, and shall discuss it still later on. 


The third kind is the denial of the plurality of attributes in the necessary 
existent, for if these attributes were of a necessary existence, the necessary 
existent would be more than one, since the essence also is a necessary 
existent. And if the attributes were caused by- the essence, they could not be 
necessary existents, and attributes of the necessary existent would not be 
necessary existents, otherwise the term ‘necessary existent’ would comprise 
the necessary existent and that which is not a necessary existent, and this is 
impossible and absurd. And this is a proof which comes very near to being an 
absolute truth, when it is conceded that the ‘necessary existent’ must indicate 
an immaterial existent, and in such existents, which subsist by themselves 
without being bodies, there cannot be imagined essential attributes of which 
their essence is constituted, not to speak of attributes which are additional to 
their essence, that is, the so-called accidents, for when accidents are imagined 
to be removed, the essence remains, which is not the case with the essential 
attributes. And therefore it is right to attribute essential attributes to their 
subject, since they constitute its identity, but it is not right to attribute non- 
essential attributes to it, except through derivative words, for we do not say of 
a man that he is knowledge, but we only say that he is an animal and that he is 
knowing;; however, the existence of such attributes in what is incorporeal is 
impossible, since the nature of these attributes is extraneous to their subject, 
and for this reason they are called accidents and are distinct from what is 
attributed essentially to the subject, be it a subject in the soul or in the 
external world. If it is objected that the philosophers believe that there are 
such attributes in the soul, since they believe that the soul can perceive, will, 
and move, although at the same time they hold that the soul is incorporeal, we 
answer that they do not mean that these attributes are additional to the 
essence, but that they are essential attributes, and it is of the nature of 


248 


essential attributes not to multiply the substratum which actually supports 
them; they are a plurality only in the sense that the thing defined becomes a 
plurality through the parts of the definitions, that is, they are only a subjective 
plurality in the mind according to the philosophers, not an actual plurality 
outside the soul. For instance, the definition of man is ‘rational animal’, but 
reason and life are not actually distinguishable from each other outside the 
soul in the way colour and shape are. And therefore he who concedes that 
matter is not a condition for the existence of the soul must concede that in the 
separate existences there is a real oneness existing outside the soul, although 
this oneness becomes a plurality through definition . This is the doctrine of 
the Christians concerning the three hypostases in the divine Nature. They do 
not believe that they are attributes additional to the essence, but according to 
them they are only a plurality in the definition-they are a potential, not an 
actual, plurality. Therefore they say that the three are one, i. e. one in act and 
three in potency. We shall enumerate later the reprehensible consequences 
and absurdities which arise from the doctrine that the First Principle 
possesses attributes additional to His essence. 


The fourth kind of plurality is that which occurs to a thing because of its 
genus and specific difference; this plurality comes very near to that which 
belongs to a thing because of its matter and form, for there are only 
definitions for that which is composed of matter and form, and not for simple, 
non-compound things, and nobody need disagree about denying a plurality 
through definition to the First Principle. 


The fifth kind of plurality is the plurality of essence and existence. 
Existence in the nature of things is a logical concept which affirms the 
conformity of a thing outside the soul with what is inside the soul. Its 
meaning is synonymous with the true, and it is this that is meant by the 
copula in categorical propositions. The term ‘existence’ is used in two senses; 
the first synonymous with the true, when we ask, for instance, if something 
exists or not, or whether a certain thing has such and such a quality or not. 
The second sense stands in relation to the existing things as their genus, in the 
way the existent is divided into the ten categories, and into substance and 
accident. When by existent is understood the true, there is no plurality 
outside the souks when by existent is understood what is understood by entity 


249 


and thing, the term ‘existent’ is attributed essentially to God and analogically 
to all other things in the way warmth is attributed to fire and to all warm 
things? This is the theory of the philosophers. 


But Ghazali based his discussion on the doctrine of Avicenna, and this is a 
false doctrine, for Avicenna believed that existence is something additional to 
the essence outside the soul and is like an accident of the essence. And if 
existence were a condition for the being of the essence and a condition for the 
essence of the necessary existent, the necessary existent would be composed 
of the conditioning and the conditioned and it would be of a possible 
existence. Avicenna affirms also that what exists as an addition to its essence 
has a cause. Now, existence for Avicenna is an accident which supervenes on 


the essence, and to this Ghazali refers when he says: 


For man before his existence has a quiddity and existence 
occurs to it and enters into relation with it, and in this way the 
triangle has a quiddity, namely, it is a figure surrounded by 
three sides, and existence is not a component of this quiddity, 
and therefore the intellect can perceive the quiddity of man and 
the quiddity of a triangle without knowing whether they exist in 
the exterior world or not. 


This shows that the term ‘existence’ which he uses here is not the term 
which signifies the most universal genus of all entities, nor the term which 
indicates that a thing exists outside the soul. For the term ‘existence’ is used in 
two meanings, the former signifies the true and the latter the opposite of non- 
existence, and in this latter sense it is that which is divided into the ten 
categories and is like their genus. This essential sense which refers to the 
things which exist in the real world outside the soul is prior to the sense it has 
in the existents of second intention, ‘ and it is this sense which is predicated of 
the ten categories analogically, and it is in this sense that we say of the 
substance that it exists by itself and of the accident that it exists through its 
existing in the existent which subsists by itself. As to the existent which has 
the meaning of the ‘true’, all the categories participate in it in the same way, 
and the existent which has the meaning of the ‘true’ is something in the mind, 
namely that a thing is outside the soul in conformity with what it is inside the 


250 


soul, and the knowledge of this is prior to the knowledge of its quiddity; that 
is, knowledge of the quiddity of a thing cannot be asked for, unless it is known 
that it exists. ‘ And as to those quiddities which precede in our minds the 
knowledge of their existence, they are not really quiddities, but only nominal 
definitions, and only when it is known that their meaning exists outside the 
soul does it become known that they are quiddities and definitions. And in 
this sense it is said in the book of the Categories that the intelligible universals 
of things become existent through their particulars, and that the particulars 
become intelligible through their universals. s And it is said in the De Anima 
that the faculty by which it is perceived that a thing is a definite particular and 
exists is another faculty than the faculty by which the quiddity of the definite 
particular is perceived, b and it is in this way that it is said that particulars 
exist in the external world and universals in the mind? And there is no 
difference in the meaning of the ‘true’, whether it concerns material existents 
or separate existents. The theory that existence is an addition to the quiddity 
and that the existent in its essence does not subsist by its-and this is the 
theory of Avicenna-is a most erroneous theory, for this would imply that the 
term ‘existence’ signified an accident outside the soul common to the ten 
categories. And then it can be asked about this accident when it is said to 
exist, if ‘exist’ is taken here in the meaning of the ‘true’ or whether it is meant 
that an accident exists in this accident, and so on ad infinitum, which is 
absurd, as we have shown elsewhere. ‘ I believe that it is this meaning of 
‘existence’ which Ghazali tried to den) of the First principle, and indeed in this 
sense it must be denied of all existents and a fortiori of the First Principle, 
since it is a false theory. 


Having mentioned this sense of unity in the statements of the philosophers, 
Ghazali now proceeds to describe . the ways in which they contradict 
themselves in his opinion, and lie says: 


Now notwithstanding all this, the philosophers affirin of 
God that He is the First and a principle, an existent, a substance, 
a monad, that He is eternal, everlasting, knowledge and knower 
and known, an agent and a creator, that He is endowed with will 
and power and life, that He is the lover and the beloved, the 
enjoyer and the enjoyed, that He is generous, and the absolute 


251 


good, and they believe that all this is meant by the term ‘one’, 
and does not imply airy plurality. And this indeed is something 
very wonderful. 


Now we must first state their theory clearly in order to 
understand it well, and then we shall occupy ourselves with its 
refutation, for it is an absurd undertaking to refute a theory 
before it is well understood. Now the central point for- the 
understanding of their doctrine is that they say that the essence 
of the Principle is one, and the plurality of terms arises only 
through bringing something in relation to it or through 
bringing it in relation to something, or through denying 
something of it; for the negation of something does not cause 
plurality in that of which it is denied, nor does the 
establishment of relation produce a plurality. Therefore they 
do not deny the plurality of the negations and the relations, and 
it is thus their task to refer all the qualities mentioned to 


negation and relation. 


They say that when God is said to be the First this means a 
relation to all the existents after Him. When He is said to be a 
principle, it signifies that the existence of everything else 
depends on Him and is caused by Him; it means therefore a 
relation to an effect. And when He is said to exist, it means that 
He is apprehended, and when He is said to be a substance it 
means that He is the being of which it is denied that it inheres 
in a substratum and this is a negation. When He is said to be 
eternal, it means that His non-existence in the past is denied; 
and when He is said to be everlasting, it means that His non- 
existence in the future is denied, and the terms ‘eternal’ and 
‘everlasting’ are reduced to an existence not preceded nor 
followed by a non-existence. When He is said to be a necessary 
existent, it means that there is no cause for His existence and 
that He is the cause of everything else, and this is a combination 
of negation and relation: the denial of a cause for His existence 


252 


is a negation, and making Him the cause of everything else is a 


relation. 


When He is said to be intellect, this means that He is free 
from matter and everything free from matter is intellect, i. e. 
thinks its own substance, is self-conscious, and knows 
everything else, and the essence of God is such: He is free from 
matter and therefore-for these two expressions have the same 
meaning-He is an intellect. When He is said to be knowing, it 
means that His essence which is intellect has an object of 
thought, namely His essence, for He is self-conscious and 
knows His own self, and His essence is the known and the 
knower for all that is one, since He is the known in so far as He 
is a quiddity, abstract from matter, not hidden from His essence 
which is intellect in the sense that it is a quiddity abstract from 
matter, from which nothing is hidden; and because He thinks 
His own self, He is knowing, and because He is His own object 
of thought, He is an object known, and since He thinks through 
His own essence, not through something additional to His own 
essence, He is intellect, and it is not impossible that the knower 
and the thing known should be one, for the knower, when he 
knows that he knows, knows it because he is a knower, so that 
knower and known are in a way the same; although our intellect 
is in this respect different from the intellect of the First 
Principle, for the intellect of the First Principle is eternally in 
act, whereas our intellect is sometimes in potency, sometimes in 
act. And when He is said to be a creator, an agent and an 
originator and to have the other attributes of action, it means 
that His existence is eminent, from which the existence of the 
universe emanates in a necessary emanation, and that the 
existence of everything derives from Him and is consequent on 
His existence in the way that light is consequent on the sun and 
heat consequent on fire. But the relation of the world to God 
resembles the relation of light to the sun only in this, that both 
are effects, and not in any other way, for-the sun is not aware of 


253 


the emanation of light from it, nor fire of the emanation of heat 
from it; for this is mere nature. But the First is conscious of 
Himself and is aware that His essence is the principle of 
everything else, and the emanation of everything which 
emanates from Him is known to Him, and He is not inattentive 
to anything that proceeds from Him. Nor can He be compared 
to one of us who puts himself between a sick man and the sun, 
for then it is the case that because of him, but not through his 
choice (although he does it consciously and not unwillingly 
either), the sick man is protected against the sun’s heat, and it 
is his body which causes the shadow, but it is his soul, not his 
body, which knows that the shadow is falling and is pleased 
about it. But this does not apply to the First: in Him the agent is 
at the same time the knower and the one that is pleased; that is, 
He is not unwilling, and He is conscious that His perfection 
consists in the emanation proceeding from Him. Yes, even if it 
were possible to assume that the man’s body causing the 
shadow were identical with the knower of the shadow, who is 
pleased with it, even then he would not be similar to the First. 
For the First is both knower and agent, and His knowledge is 
the principle of His act; and His consciousness of Himself as the 
principle of the universe is the cause of the emanation of the 
universe and the existing order; and the existing order is the 
consequence of the order thought of, in the sense that it occurs 
through Him and that He is the agent of the universe without 
there being an addition to His knowledge of the universe, since 
His knowledge of the universe is the cause of the emanation of 
the universe from Him, and His knowledge of the universe does 
not add anything to His self-consciousness, for He could not be 
self-conscious if He did not know that He is the principle of the 
universe, the object of His knowledge is in first intention His 
own essence, and the universe is the object of His knowledge in 


¢ 


second intention, ‘ and this is the meaning of His being an 
agent. And when it is said that He has power, nothing is meant 


but that He is an agent in the way we have stated, namely, that 


254 


His existence is the existence from which the powers emanate 
through the emanation of which the arrangement of the world 
is ordered in the most perfect way possible in accomplishment 
and beauty. And when it is said that He is willing, nothing is 
meant but that He is not inattentive to what emanates from 
Him and that He is not opposed to it; no, He knows that in the 
emanation of the universe His own perfection is attained, and it 
is permissible to say in this sense that He is satisfied, and it is 
permissible to say of the satisfied that He is willing; and His will 
is nothing but His very power and His power is nothing but His 
very knowledge and His knowledge nothing but His very 
essence, so that everything is reduced to His very essence. For 
His knowledge of things is not derived from things, for 
otherwise He would acquire His quality and perfection through 
another, and this is impossible in the necessary existent. But 
our knowledge is twofold: partly knowledge of a thing which 
results from its form like our knowledge of the form of heaven 
and earth, partly knowledge of our own invention, when we 
represent in ourselves the form of a thing we do not see and 
then produce it; in this case the existence of the form is derived 
from the knowledge and not the knowledge from the existence. 
Now the knowledge the First has is of the second category, for 
the representation of the order in Himself is the cause of the 
emanation of the order from Him. Indeed, if the mere presence 
of the form of a picture or of writing in our souls were sufficient 
for the occurrence of this form, then our knowledge would be 
identical with our power and our wills but through our 
deficiency our representation does not suffice to produce the 
form, but we need besides a new act of will which results from 
our appetitive faculty, so that through these two the power 
which moves our muscles and our nerves in our organs can 
enter into motion, and through the movement of our muscles 
and nerves our hand or any other member can move, and 
through its movement the pen or any other external instrument 


can come into motion and through the movement of the pen 


255 


the matter, e. g. the ink, can move, and so the form is realized 
which we represented in our souls. Therefore the very existence 
of this form in our souls is not a power and an act of will; no, in 
us power lies in the principle which moves our muscles and this 
form moves the mover which is the principle of the power. But 
this is not the case with the necessary existent, for He is not 
composed of bodies from which the powers in His extremities 
originate, and so His power, His will, His knowledge, and His 


essence are all one. 


When it is said that He is living, nothing is meant but that 
He is conscious of the knowledge through which the existent 
which is called His act emanates from Him. For the living is the 
doer, the perceiver, and the meaning of the term is His essence 
in relation to His acts in the way we have described, not at all 
like our life, which can be only perfected through two different 
faculties from which perception and action result. But His life 
again is His very essence. 


And when it is said that He is generous, what is meant is 
that the universe emanates from Him, but not for an end which 
refers to Himself, for generosity is perfected by two conditions: 
first that the receiver of the benefit has profit of what is given to 
him, for the giving of something to one who is not in need of it 
is not called generosity; secondly, that the benefactor is not 
himself in need of generosity, so that he himself becomes a 
benefactor through a need he experiences himself, and anyone 
who is generous out of a desire for praise and approbation or to 
avoid blame seeks a reward and is not generous. But true 
generosity belongs to God alone, for He does not seek to avoid 
blame, nor does He desire a perfection acquired through praise, 
and the term ‘generosity indicates His existence in relation to 
His act and with the denial of an end, and this does not imply a 
plurality in His essence. 


256 


When He is said to be the absolute good, it means that His 
existence is free from any imperfection and from any possibility 
of non-existence, for badness has no essence, but refers to the 
non-existence of an essence or to the absence of the goodness of 
the essence. , For existence itself, in so far as it is existence, is 
good, and therefore this term refers to the negation of the 
possibility of non-existence and of badness. Sometimes ‘good’ 
means that which is the cause of the order in things, and the 
First is the principle of the order of everything and therefore He 
is good; and in this case the term signifies existence in a certain 


kind of relation. 


When He is said to be a necessary existent, this existence is 
meant with the denial of a cause for His existence and the 
impossibility of a cause for His non-existence, in the beginning 
and at the end. 


When it is said that He is the lover and the beloved, the 
enjoyer and the enjoyed, it means that He is every beauty and 
splendour and perfection, and that He is beloved and desired by 
the possessor of this perfection and the only meaning of 
‘enjoyment’ is the perception of appropriate perfection. If it 
could be imagined of a single man that he knew his own 
perfection in comprehending all intelligibles, if he could 
comprehend them, that he knew the beauty of his own form, the 
perfection of his power, the strength of his limbs, in short if he 
perceived in himself the presence of all perfection of which he 
was capable, he would love his perfection and enjoy it, and his 
enjoyment would only be incomplete through the possibility of 
its loss and its diminution, for the joy which refers to the 
transitory, or to what is feared to be transitory, is not perfect. ‘ 
But the First possesses the most perfect splendour and the most 
complete beauty, since all perfection is possible to Him and 
present in Him, and He perceives this beauty, secure against the 
possibility of its diminution and loss, and the perfection He 
possesses is superior to all perfection, and His love and His 


257 


enjoyment of this perfection are superior to all love and to all 
enjoyment, and His enjoyment cannot be compared in any way 
to our enjoyment and is too glorious to be called enjoyment, 
joy, and delight, for we have no expressions for such concepts, 
and using these terms metaphorically for Him, we must be 
conscious of the great difference, just as when we apply to Him 
metaphorically our terms, ‘willing’, choosing’, ‘acting’, we are 
convinced of the great distance between His will, power, and 
knowledge, from our will, power, and knowledge, and it is not 
impossible that this term ‘enjoyment’ should be regarded as 
improper and that another term should be used. , What we want 
to express is that His state is more glorious than the conditions 
of the angels, and more desirable, and the condition of the 
angels is more glorious than our condition; and if there were no 
other joy than in bodily desire and sex, the condition of the ass 
and the pig would be superior to the state of the angels, but the 
angels, who are separate from matter, have no other joy than 
the joy arising from the knowledge of their share in perfection 
and beauty, the cessation of which is not to be feared. But the 
joy of the First is superior to the joy of the angels, and the 
existence of the angels which are intellects separate from matter 
is possible in its essence and necessary of existence through 
another, and the possibility of non-existence is a kind of 
badness and imperfection, and nothing is absolutely free from 
badness except the First, and He is the absolute good and He 
possesses the utmost splendour and beauty; further, He is the 
beloved, whether anyone else loves Him or not, as He is the 
knower and the known, whether anyone else knows Him or not. 
And all these concepts refer to His essence and to His 
perception and to His knowledge of His essence, and the 
knowledge of His essence is His very essence, for He is pure 
intellect, and all this leads back to one single notion. 


This is the way to set forth their doctrine, and these things 
can be divided into that which may be believed (but we shall 


258 


show that according to their own principles they must regard it 
as untrue) and into that which may not be believed (and we 
shall show its falsehood). We shall now return to the five classes 
of plurality and to their claim to deny them, and shall show 
their inability to establish their proof, and shall treat each 
question separately. 


I say: 


The greater part of what he mentions in his description of the philosophical 
theories about God as being one, notwithstanding the plurality of attributes 
ascribed to Him, he has stated accurately, and we shall not argue with him 
about it, with the exception of his statement that to Him the designation of 
‘intellect’ is a negation; for this is not true-on the contrary it is the most 
special appellation for His essence according to the Peripatetics, in contrast to 
Plato’s opinion that the intellect is not the First Principle and that intellect 
cannot be attributed to the First Principle? Nor is his statement that in the 
separate intellects there is potency, non-existence, and badness a 
philosophical theory. But we shall now return to his refutations in these five 
questions. 








THE SIXTH DISCUSSION 








TO REFUTE THEIR DENIAL OF ATTRIBUTES 
Ghazali says: 


The philosophers agree-exactly as do the Mu’tazilites-that it 
is impossible to ascribe to the First Principle knowledge, power, 
and will, and they affirm that we have received these terms 
through the Divine Law, and that they may be used as verbal 
expressions, but that they refer to one essence as we have 
explained previously, and that it is not permissible to accept an 
attribute additional to its essence in the way we may consider, 
as regards ourselves, our knowledge, power, and will, as 
attributes of ourselves, additional to our essence. And they 


259 


affirm that this causes a plurality, because if these attributes are 
supposed to occur to us in the course of our development, we 
know that they are additional to our essence, because they 
constitute new facts; on the other hand, if they are supposed to 
be simultaneous with our existence without any time-lag, their 
simultaneity does not prevent them from being an addition to 
our essence. ; For when one thing is added to another and it is 
known that they are not identical, it is thought, even if they are 
simultaneous, that they are two. Therefore the fact that these 
qualities would be simultaneous with the essence of the First 
does not prevent them from being extraneous to its essence, 
and this causes a plurality in the necessary existent, and this is 
impossible; and therefore they all agree in the denial of the 
attributes. 


I say: 


The difficulty for the man who denies a plurality of attributes consists in 
this: that different attributes are reduced to one essence, so that for instance 
knowledge, will, and power would mean one and the same thing and signify 
one single essence, and that also knowledge and knower, power and 
possessing power, will and willer would have one and the same meaning. The 
difficulty for the man, however, who affirms that there exist both an essence 
and attributes additional to the essence, consists in this: that the essence 
becomes a condition for the existence of the attributes and the attributes a 
condition for the perfection of the essence, and that their combination would 
be a necessary existent, that is, one single existent in which there is neither 
cause nor effect. And this latter difficulty cannot be really solved when it is 
assumed that there exists an essentially necessary existent, for this implies 
that it must be one in every way and can in no way be composed of the 
condition and the conditioned and of cause and effect, for such a composition 
would have to be either necessary or possible; (t) if necessary, it would be 
necessary through another, not through itself, since it is difficult to assume an 
eternal compound as existing through itself, i. e. as not having a cause for its 
composition, and this is especially difficult for the man who believes that 
every accident is temporal, ‘ since the fact of being a compound would be an 


260 


eternal accident; (2) if possible, a cause would be needed to join together the 
effect and the cause. Now, according to philosophical principles it is quite 
impossible that there should be a compound existing by itself, having eternal 
attributes, since the composition would be a condition of its existence; and its 
parts could not be agents for the composition, for the composition would 
have to be a condition for their existence. Therefore, when the parts of any 
natural compound are disjoined, their original name can be only applied to 
them equivocally, e. g. the term ‘hand’, used of the hand which is a part of the 
living man and the hand which has been cut off; and every compound is for 
Aristotle transitory and a fortiori cannot be without a cause? 


But as to the system of Avicenna, with its division of the necessary existent 
from the possible existent, it does not lead to the denial of an eternal 
compound; for when we assume that the possible ends in a necessary cause 
and that the necessary cause must either have a cause or not, and in the 
former case must end in a necessary existent which has no cause, this 
reasoning leads through the impossibility of an infinite regress to a necessary 
existence which has no efficient causenot, however, to an existent which has 
no cause at all, for this existent might have a formal or a material cause, 
unless it is assumed that everything which has matter and form, or in short 
every compound, must have an external cause; but this needs a proof which 
the demonstration based on the principle of the necessary existent does not 
contain, even if we do not consider the mistake in it we have already 
mentioned. And for exactly the same reason the proof of the Ash’arites that 
every temporal occurrence needs a cause does not lead to an eternal First 
Principle which is not composite, but only to a First Principle which is not 
temporal. 


As to the fact that knower and knowledge are one, it is not impossible, but 
necessary, that such pairs of things lead up to the unity of their concepts; e. g. 
if the knower knows through knowledge, that through which he becomes a 
knower is more apt to be a knower, for the quality which any thing acquires 
from another is in itself more apt to possess the concept which is acquired, e. 
g. if the living bodies in our sublunary world are not alive by themselves, but 
through a life which inheres in them, then necessarily this life through which 


261 


the non-living acquires life is alive by itself, or there would be an infinite 
regress; and the same is the case with knowledge and the other attributes. 


Now, it cannot be denied that one essence can have many attributes related, 
negative, or imaginary, in different ways without this implying a plurality in 
the essence, e. g. that a thing is an existent and one and possible or necessary, 
1 for when the one identical entity is viewed in so far as something else 
proceeds from it, it is called capable and acting, and in so far as it is viewed as 
differentiating between two opposite acts, it is called willing, and in so far as it 
is viewed as perceiving its object, knowing, and in so far as it is viewed as 
perceiving and as a cause of motion, it is called living, since the living is the 
perceiving and the self-moving. What is impossible is only a single simple 
existence with a plurality of attributes, existing by themselves, and especially 
if these attributes should be essential and exist in act, and as to these 
attributes existing in potency, it is not impossible, according to the 
philosophers, that something should be one in act and a plurality in potency, 
and this is the case according to them, with the parts of the definition in their 
relation to the thing defined. 


And as to Ghazali’s words: 


And they affirm that this causes a plurality... that they are 


two. 


He means by them that the fact that these attributes are simultaneous with 
the essence does not prevent them from being necessarily a plurality by 
themselves, just as, if their existence were posterior to the essence, or if some 
of them were posterior to others, mind would not conceive them as being one. 


After stating the view of the philosophers, Ghazali says: 


But it must be said to the philosophers: How do you know 
the impossibility of plurality of this kind? for you are in 
opposition to all the Muslims, the Mu’tazilites excepted, and 
what is your proof of it? If someone says: ‘Plurality is 
impossible, since the fact that the essence is regarded as one is 
equivalent to the impossibility of its having a plurality of 
attributes’ this is just the point under discussion, and the 


262 


impossibility is not self-evident, and a proof is needed. They 
have indeed two proofs. The first is that they say that, when 
subject and attribute are not identical, either both, subject and 
attribute, can exist independently of the other, or each will need 
the other, or only one of them will depend on the other. In the 
first case they will both be necessary existents, and this implies 
an absolute duality and is impossible. In the second case 
neither of them will be a necessary existent, because the 
meaning of a necessary existent is that it exists by itself and 
does not depend in any way on anything else, and when a thing 
requires something else, that other is its cause, since, if this 
other were annulled, its existence would be impossible and it 
would therefore exist not by itself but through another. In the 
third case the one which was dependent would be an effect and 
the necessary existent would be the other, on which it would be 
dependent, and that which was an effect would need a cause 
and therefore this would necessarily involve connecting the 
essence of the necessary existent with a cause. ‘ 


I say: 


When their opponents concede to the philosophers that there is an existent 
necessary by itself and that the meaning of the necessary existent is that it has 
no cause at all, neither in its essence through which it subsists, or through 
something external, they cannot escape the conclusion which the 
philosophers forced upon them: that if the attributes existed through the 
essence, the essence would be an existent necessary through itself, and the 
attributes would be necessary through something different from themselves, 
and the essence of the necessary existent would exist by itself, but the 
attributes would be necessary through something different from themselves, 
and essence and attributes together would form a compound. z But the 
Ash/arites do not concede to the philosophers that the existence of a necessary 
existent, subsisting by itself, implies that it has no cause whatsoever, for their 
argument leads only to the denial of an efficient cause additional to the 


essence. 5 


263 


Ghazali says: 


The objection against this is to say: The case to be accepted 
is the last, but we have shown in the fifth discussion that you 
have no proof for your denial of the first case, that of absolute 
duality; what is affirmed by you in the fifth discussion can only 
be justified by basing it upon your denial of plurality in this and 
the following discussions: how can you therefore base this 
discussion upon what” is itself the upshot of this discussion?’ 
But the correct solution is to say: ‘The essence does not need 
the attributes for its subsistence, whereas the attributes need a 
subject, as is the case with us ourselves. ‘ There remains their 
statement that what is in need of something else is not a 


necessary existent. 


One may ask them: Why do you make such a statement, if 
you understand by ‘necessary existent’ only that which has no 
efficient cause, and why is it impossible to say that, just as there 
is no agent for the essence of the necessary existent, which is 
eternal, there is no agent for its attributes, which are equally 
eternal? If, however, you understand by ‘necessary existent’ that 
which has no receptive cause, we answer that that is not implied 
in this conception of the necessary existent, which, according to 
this conception is all the same eternal and has no agent; and 


what is wrong with this conception? 


If it is answered that the absolute necessary existent is that 
which has no efficient cause and no receptive cause, x for if a 
receptive cause for it were conceded, it would be conceded that 
it was an effect-we say: To call the receptive essence a receptive 
cause is one of your technical terms, and there is no proof of 
the real existence of a necessary existent corresponding to your 
terminology; all that. is proved is that there must be a final term 
to the series of causes and effects, and no more, and this series 
can end in a unit with eternal attributes which have no more an 


agent than the essence itself, and are supposed to be in the 


264 


essence itself. But let us put aside this term ‘necessary existent’, 
which is full of possible confusion. The proof indeed only 
demonstrates the end of the series and nothing more, and your 
further claims are pure presumption. 


If it is said: In the same way as the series of efficient causes 
must have an end, the series of receptive causes must have an 
end, since if every existent needed a substratum to inhere in it 
and this substratum again needed a substratum, this would 
imply an infinite series, just as this would be the case if every 
existent needed a cause and this cause again another cause-we 
answer: You are perfectly right and for this very reason we say 
that the series has an end and that the attribute exists in its 
essence and that this essence does not exist in something else, 
just as our knowledge exists in our essence and our essence is 
its substratum, but does not exist itself in a substratum. The 
series of efficient causes comes to an end for the attribute at the 
same time as for the essence, since the attribute has an agent no 
more than the essence has, still the essence provided with this 
attribute does not cease to exist, although neither itself nor its 
attribute has a cause. As to the receptive causes, its series can 
only end in the essence, for how could the negation of a cause 
imply the negation of a substratum? The proof does not 
demonstrate anything but the termination of the series, and 
every method by which this termination can be explained is 
sufficient to establish the proof which demands the existence of 
the necessary existent. But if by ‘necessary existent’ is 
understood something besides the existent which has no 
efficient cause and which brings the causal series to an end, we 
do not by any means concede that this is necessary. And 
whenever the mind regards it as possible to acknowledge an 
eternal existent which has no cause for its existence, it regards 
it as possible to acknowledge an eternal subject for which there 
is no cause, either for its essence or for its attribute. 


As to Ghazali’s words: 


265 


We have shown in the fifth discussion that you have no 
proof for your denial of the first case, that of absolute duality; 
what is affirmed by you in the fifth discussion can only be 
justified by basing it upon your denial of plurality. 


I say: 


Ghazali means the philosophers’ denial that subject and attribute are both 
subsistent by themselves, for from this it follows that they are independent of 
each other and that both are independent gods, which is a dualistic theory, 
since there is no connexion through which attribute and subject could become 
a unity. And since the philosophers used as an argument for the denial of this 
kind of plurality the fact that it has dualism as its consequence, ‘ and a 
demonstration ought to proceed in the opposite sense, namely, that dualism 
would have to be denied, because of the impossibility of plurality, he says that 
their proof is circular and that they proved the principle by the conclusion. 


Their objection, however, was not based upon the facts themselves, but on 
the theory of their opponents who deny dualism. And you have learned in 
another place that there are two kinds of refutation, one based on the 
objective facts, the other based on the statement of the opponent, and 
although the former is the true kind of refutation, the second type may also be 
used . 


As to Ghazali’s words: 


But the correct solution is to say: ‘The essence does not need 
the attributes for its subsistence, whereas the attributes need a 
subject, as is the case with us ourselves. ‘ There remains their 
statement that what is in need of another is not a necessary 


existent. 
I say: 


Ghazali means that, when this tripartite division which they use to deny 
plurality is submitted to them, the facts lead them to establish that (i) the 
necessary existent cannot be a compound of attribute and subject; (2) the 
essence cannot be a plurality of attributes, for they cannot accept these things 


266 


according to their principles. Then he starts to show that the impossibility 
which they strive to deduce from this division is not strict. 


As to Ghazali’s words: 


One may ask them: Why do you make such a statement, if 
you understand by ‘necessary existent’ only that which has no 
efficient cause, and why is it impossible to say that, just as there 
is no agent for the essence of the necessary existent, which is 
eternal, there is no agent for its attributes, which are equally 


eternal? 
I say: 


All this is an objection to Avicenna’s method of denying the attributes by 
establishing the necessary existent which exists by itself, but in this question 
the most convincing method of showing the necessity of unity and forcing it 
as a consequence upon the Ash/’arites is the method of the Mu’tazilites. For the 
latter understand by ‘possible existence’ the truly possible, ‘ and they believe 
that everything below the First Principle is such. Their opponents, the 
Ash’arites, accept this, and believe also that every possible has an agent, and 
that the series comes to an end through what is not possible in itself. The 
Mu’tazilites concede this to them, but they believe that from this concession it 
follows that the First, which is the final term of the series of possibility, is not 
a possible, and that this implies its absolute simplicity. The Ash/arites, 
however, say that the denial of true possibility does not imply simplicity, but 
only eternity and the absence of an efficient cause, and therefore there is 
among the Ash/’arites no proof of the simplicity of the First through the proof 


based on the necessary existent. z 
And Ghazali says: 


If it is answered that the absolute necessary existent is that 
which has no efficient cause and no receptive cause, for if a 
receptive cause for it were conceded, it would be conceded that 


it was an effect. 


I say: 


267 


Ghazali means that, if the philosophers say that the proof has led to a 
necessary existent which has no efficient cause, it has, according to them, no 
receptive cause either, and that according to the philosophers the assumption 
of essence and attributes implies the assumption of a receptive cause. 


Then Ghazali, answering this, says:. 


We say: To call the receptive essence a receptive cause is one 
of your technical terms, and there is no proof for the real 
existence of a necessary existent corresponding to your 
terminology; all that is proved is that there must be a final term 
to the series of causes and effects. 


I say: 


Ghazali means that the Ash’arites do not concede that this essence in which 


¢ 


the attributes inhere is a receptive cause, ‘ so as to be forced to admit an 
efficient cause for it. He says that the proof of the philosophers does not lead 
to an existent which has no receptive cause, let alone proving the existence of 
what has no essence and no attributes. It only proves that it has no efficient 
cause. This objection is a necessary consequence of their own proof. Even if 
the Ash’arites had accepted the philosophical theory that what has no efficient 
cause has no receptive cause, their own statement would not have been 
overthrown, for the essence which they assume only receives attributes which 
do not belong to the First, since they assume that the attributes are additional 
to the essence of the First, and they do not admit essential attributes in the 


way the Christians do. 
And as to Ghazali’s words: 


If it is said: In the same way as the series of efficient causes 
must have an end, the series of receptive causes must have an 
end, since if every existent needed a substratum to inhere in it 
and this substratum again needed a substratum, this would 
imply an infinite series, just as this would be the case if every 
existent needed a cause and this cause again another causewe 
answer: You are perfectly right and for this very reason we say 
that the series has an end and that the attribute exists in its 


268 


essence and that this essence does not exist in something else, 
just as our knowledge exists in our essence and our essence is 


its substratum, but does not exist itself in a substratum. 
I say: 


This statement has no connexion with this discussion either with respect to 
the philosophical theories he mentions or with respect to the answers he 
gives, and it is a kind of sophism, for there exists no relation between the 
question, whether the receptive causes must or must not have an end, and the 
problem which is under discussion, namely whether it is a condition of the 
First Agent that it should have a receptive cause. For the inquiry about the 
finiteness of receptive causes differs from the inquiry about the finiteness of 
efficient causes, since he who admits the existence of receptive causes admits 
necessarily that their series must end in a primary receptive cause which is 
necessarily external to the First Agent, just as he admits the existence of a 
First Agent external to the receptive matter. For if the First Agent possessed 
matter, this matter would not exist numerically and individually either in the 
first recipient or in the inferior recipients of other things; ‘ no, if the First 
Agent possessed matter, this matter would have to be a matter peculiar to it, 
and in short it would belong to it; that is, either it would be its primary matter 
or we should arrive at a first recipient, and this recipient would not be of the 
genus which is the condition for the existence of all the other existents 
proceeding from the First Agent. ‘ But if matter were the condition for the 
existence of the First Agent, it would be a condition for the existence of all 
agents in their actions, and matter would not only be a condition for the 
existence of the agent’s act-since every agent acts only on a recipient -but it 
would be a condition for the existence of the agent itself, and therefore every 
agent would be a body. ; 


All this the Ash’arites neither admit nor deny. But when the philosophers 
tell them that an essence to which such an attribute is ascribed must be a 
body, they answer: ‘Such an attribute is ascribed by you to the soul and yet, 
according to you, the soul is not a body. ‘ This is the limit to which dialectical 
arguments in this question can be carried. But the demonstrations are in the 
works of the ancients which they wrote about this science, and especially in 


269 


the books of Aristotle, not in the statements of Avicenna about this problem 
and of other thinkers belonging to Islam, if anything is to be found in them on 
this question. For their metaphysical theories are pure presumptions, since 
they proceed from common, not particular, notions, i. e. notions which are 


extraneous to the nature of the inquiry. 
And as to Ghazali’s words: 


The series of efficient causes comes to an end for the 
attribute at the same time as for the essence, since the attribute 
has an agent no more than the essence has, still the essence 
provided with this attribute does not cease to exist, although 
neither itself nor its attribute has a cause. 


I say: 


This is a statement which is not accepted by their opponents, the 
philosophers; on the contrary, they affirm that it is a condition of the First 
Agent that it should not receive an attribute, because reception indicates 
matter and it is therefore not possible to assume as the final term of the causal 
series an agent of any description whatsoever, but only an agent which has 
absolutely no agent, and to which no attribute-from which it would follow that 
it had an agent-can be ascribed. For the assumption of the existence of an 
attribute of the First Agent existing in a receptive cause which would be a 
condition for its existence is thought by the philosophers to be impossible. 
Indeed, anything for the existence of which there is a condition can only be 
connected with this condition through an external cause, for a thing cannot 
itself be the cause of its connexion with the condition of its existence, just as it 
cannot be the cause of its own existence. For the conditioned, if it were not 
connected with its condition, would have to exist by itself, and it needs an 
efficient cause to connect the condition with it, since a thing cannot be the 
cause of the existence of the condition of its own existence; but all these are 
common notions. And in general one cannot imagine that it is possible to 
arrive by this method, as applied to this problem, at something near evidence, 
because of the equivocation in the term ‘existent necessary by itself, and in 
the term ‘possible by itself, necessary through another’, and the other 
preliminary notions which are added to them. 


270 


Ghazali says: 


The second proof of the philosophers is that they say that 
the knowledge and the power in us do not enter the quiddity of 
our essence, but are accidental, and when these attributes are 
asserted of the First, they too do not enter the quiddity of its 
essence, but are accidental in their relation to it, even if they are 
lasting; for frequently an accident does not separate itself from 
its quiddity and is a necessary attribute of it, but still it does not 
therefore become a constituent of its essence. And if it is an 
accident, it is consequent on the essence and the essence is its 
cause, and it becomes an effect, and how can it then be a 


necessary existent? 
Then Ghazali says, refuting this: 


This proof is identical with the first, notwithstanding the 
change of expression. For we say: If you mean by its being 
consequent on the essence, and by the essence’s being its cause, 
that the essence is its efficient cause, and that it is the effect of 
the essence, this is not true, for this is not valid of our 
knowledge in relation to our essence, since our essence is not 
an efficient cause of our knowledge. If you mean that the 
essence is a substratum and that the attribute does not subsist 
by itself without being in a substratum, this is conceded, and 
why should it be impossible? For if you call this ‘consequent’ or 
‘accident’ or ‘effect’? or whatever name you want to give it, its 
meaning does not change, since its meaning is nothing but 
“existing in the essence in the way attributes exist in their 
subjects’. And it is by no means impossible that it should exist 
in the essence, and be all the same eternal and without an agent. 
All the proofs of the philosophers amount to nothing but the 
production of a shock by the use of a depreciating expression: 
‘possible’, ‘permissible’, ‘consequent’, ‘connected’, ‘effect’-but 
all this may be ignored. For it must be answered: If by this you 
mean that it has an agent, it is not true, and if only it is meant 


271 


that it has no agent, but that it has a substratum in which it 
exists, then let this meaning be indicated by any expression you 
want, and still it will not become impossible. 


I say: 


This is using many words for one idea. But in this question the difference 
between the opponents consists in one point, namely: ‘Can a thing which has 
a receptive cause be without an agent or not?’ Now it belongs to the principles 
of the theologians that the connexion of condition and conditioned appertains 
to the domain of the permissible’ and that whatever is permissible needs for 
its realization and actualization an agent which actualizes it and connects the 
condition with the conditioned, and that the connexion is a condition for the 
existence of the conditioned and that it is possible neither that a thing should 
be the cause of the condition of its existence, nor that the condition should be 
the efficient cause of the existence of the conditioned, for our essence is not 
the efficient cause of the existence of the knowledge which exists in it, but our 
essence is a condition for the existence of the knowledge existing in it. And 
because of all these principles it is absolutely necessary that there should exist 
an efficient cause which brings about the connexion of condition and 
conditioned, and this is the case with every conjunction of a condition and a 
conditioned. But all these principles are annulled by the philosophical theory 
that heaven is eternal, although it possesses essence and attributes, for the 
philosophers do not give it an agent of the kind which exists in the empirical 
world, as would be the consequence of these principles; they only assume that 
there is a proof which leads to an eternal connexion through an eternal 
connecting principle, and this is another kind of connexion, differing from 
that which exists in transitory things. But all these are problems which need a 
serious examination. And the assumption of the philosophers that these 
attributes do not constitute the essence is not true, for every essence is 
perfected by attributes through which it becomes more complete and 
illustrious, and, indeed, it is constituted by these attributes, since through 
knowledge, power, and will we become superior to those existents which do 
not possess knowledge, and the essence in which these attributes exist is 


common to us and to inorganic things. How therefore could such attributes be 


272 


accidents consequent on our essence? All these are statements of people who 
have not studied well the psychological and accidental attributes. 


Ghazali says: 


And often they shock by the use of a depreciating 
expression in another way, and they say: This leads to ascribing 
to the First a need for these attributes, so that it would not be 
self-sufficient absolutely, since the absolutely self-sufficient is 
not in need of anything else. ‘ 


Then Ghazali says, refuting this: 


This is an extremely weak verbal argument, for the 
attributes of perfection do not differ from the essence of the 
perfect being in such a way that he should be in need of 
anything else. And if he is eternally perfect through knowledge, 
power, and life, how could he be in need of anything, or how 
could his being attached to perfection be described as his being 
in need? It would be like saying that the perfect needs no 
perfection and that he who is in need of the attributes of 
perfection for his essence is imperfect; the answer is that 
perfection cannot mean anything but the existence of 
perfection in his essence, and likewise being self-sufficient does 
not mean anything but the existence of attributes that exclude 
every need in his essence. How therefore can the attributes of 
perfection through which divinity is perfected be denied 
through such purely verbal arguments? 


I say: 


There are two kinds of perfection: perfection through a thing’s own self and 
perfection through attributes which give their subject its perfection, and these 
attributes must be in themselves perfect, for if they were perfect through 
perfect attributes, we should have to ask whether these attributes were perfect 
through themselves or through attributes, and we should have therefore to 
arrive at that which is perfect by itself as a final term. Now the perfect through 
another will necessarily need, according to the above principles if they are 


273 


accepted, a bestower of the attributes of perfection; otherwise it would be 
imperfect. But that which is perfect by itself is like that which is existent by 
itself, and how true it is that the existent by itself is perfect by itselfllf 
therefore there exists an existent by itself, it must be perfect by itself and self- 
sufficient by itself; otherwise it would be composed of an imperfect essence 
and attributes perfecting this essence. If this is true, the attribute and its 
subject are one and the same, and the acts which are ascribed to this subject 
as proceeding necessarily from different attributes exist only in a relative way. 


Ghazali says, answering the philosophers: 


And if it is said by the philosophers: When you admit an 
essence and an attribute and the inherence of an attribute in the 
essence, you admit a composition, and every compound needs a 
principle which composes it, and just because a body is 
composed, God cannot be a body-we answer: 


Saying that every compound needs a composing principle is 
like saying that every existent needs a cause for its existence, 
and it may be answered 


The First is eternal and exists without a cause and without a 
principle for its existence, and so it may be said that it is a 
subject, eternal, without a cause for its essence, for its attribute 
and for the existence of its attribute in its essence; indeed all 
this is eternal without a cause. But the First cannot be a body, 
because body is a temporal thing which cannot be free from 
what is temporal’: however, he who does not allow that body 
has a beginning must be forced to admit that the first cause can 
be a body, and we shall try later to force this consequence on 
the philosophers. 


I say: 


Composition is not like existence, because composition is like being set in 
motion, namely, a passive quality, additional to the essence of things which 
receive the composition, z but existence is a quality which is the essence itself, 
and whoever says otherwise is mistaken indeed. Further, the compound 


274 


cannot be divided into that which is compound by itself and that which is 
compound through another, so that one would finally come to an eternal 
compound in the way one arrives, where existents are concerned, at an eternal 
existent, and we have treated this problem in another place. ; And again: If it 
is true, as we have said, that composition is something additional to existence, 
then one may say, if there exists a compound by itself, . then there must exist 
also something moved by itself, and if there exists something moved by itself, 
then also a privation will come into existence by itself, for the existence of a 
privation is the actualization of a potency, and the same applies to motion 
and the thing moved. But this is not the case with existence, for existence is 
not an attribute additional to the essence, and every existent which does not 
exist sometimes in potency and sometimes in act is an existent by itself, 
whereas the existence of a thing as moved occurs only when there is a moving 
power, and every moved thing therefore needs a movers 


The distinctive point in this problem is that the two parts in any compound 
must be either (i) mutually a condition for each other’s existence, as is, 
according to the Peripatetics, the case with those which are composed of 
matters and forms, b or (2) neither of them a condition for the existence of the 
other, or (3) exclusively one the condition for the other. 


In the first case the compound cannot be eternal, because the compound 
itself is a condition for the existence of the parts and the parts cannot be the 
cause of the compound, nor the compound its own cause, for otherwise a 
thing might be its own cause, and this kind of compound, therefore, is 
transitory and needs an agent for its actualization. ‘ 


In the second case-and for these compounds it is not in the nature of either 
of their parts that it implies the other-there is no composition possible 
without a composing factor, external to the parts, since the composition is not 
of their own nature so that their essence might exist through their nature or 
be a consequence of their nature; and if their nature determined the 
composition and they were both in themselves eternal, their composition 
would be eternal, but would. need a cause which would give it unity, since no 
eternal thing can possess unity accidentally. 


275 


In the third case, and this is the case of the non-essential attribute and its 
subject, if the subject were eternal and were such as never to be without this 
attribute, the compound would be eternal. But if this were so, and if an eternal 
compound were admitted, the Ash’arite proof that all accidents are temporal 
would not be true, since if there were an eternal compound there would be 
eternal accidents, one of which would be the composition, whereas the 
principle on which the Ash’arites base their proof of the temporalitylof 
accidents is the fact that the parts of which a body, according to them, is 
composed must exist first separately; if, therefore, they allowed an eternal 
compound, it would be possible that there should be a composition not 
preceded by a separation, and a movement, not preceded by a rest, and if this 
were permissible, it would be possible that a body possessing eternal 
accidents should exist, and it would no longer be true for them that what 
cannot exist without the temporal is temporal. And further, it has already 
been said that every compound is only one because of a oneness existing in it, 
and this oneness exists only in it through something which is one through 
itself. And if this is so, then the one, in so far as it is one, precedes every 
compound, and the act of this one agent-if this agent is eternal-through which 
it gives all single existents which exist through it their oneness, is everlasting 
and without a beginning, not intermittent; for the agent whose act is attached 
to its object at the time of its actualization is temporal and its object is 
necessarily temporal, but the attachment of the First Agent to its object is 
everlasting and its power is everlastingly mixed with its object. And it is in 
this way that one must understand the relation of the First, God, praise be to 
Him, to all existents. But since it is not possible to prove these things here, let 
us turn away from them, since our sole aim was to show that this book of 
Ghazali does not contain any proofs, but mostly sophisms and at best 
dialectical arguments. But proofs are very rare, and they stand in relation to 
other arguments as unalloyed gold to the other minerals and the pure pearl to 
the other jewels. ‘ And now let us revert to our subject. 


Ghazali says: 


All their proofs where this problem is concerned are 
imaginary. Further, they are not able to reduce all the qualities 
which they admit to the essence itself, for they assert, that it is 


276 


knowing, and so they are forced to admit that this is something 
additional to its mere existence, and then one can ask them: 
‘Do you concede that the First knows something besides its 
essence?’ Some of them concede this, whereas others affirm that 
it only knows its own self. The former position is that taken by 
Avicenna, for he affirms that the First knows all things in a 
universal timeless way, but that it does not know individuals, 
because to comprehend their continual becoming would imply 
a change in the essence of the knower. z But, we ask, is the 
knowledge which the First has of all the infinite number of 
species and genera identical with its self-knowledge or not? If 
you answer in the negative, you have affirmed a plurality and 
have contradicted your own principle; if you answer in the 
affirmative, you are like a man claiming that man’s knowledge 
of other things is identical with his self-knowledge and with his 
own essence, and such a statement is mere stupidity. And it 
may be argued: ‘The definition of an identical thing is that its 
negation and affirmation cannot be imagined at the same time, 
and the knowledge of an identical thing, when it is an identical 
thing, cannot at the same time be imagined as existing and not 
existing. And since it is not impossible to imagine a man’s self- 
knowledge without imagining his knowledge of something else, 
it may be said that his knowledge of something else is different 
from his self-knowledge, since, if they were the same, the 
affirmation or negation of the one would imply the affirmation 
or negation of the other. For it is impossible that Zaid should be 
at one and the same time both existing and not existing, but the 
existence of self-knowledge simultaneously with the non- 
existence of the knowledge of something else is not impossible, 
nor is this impossible with the self-knowledge of the First and 
its knowledge of something else, for the existence of the one can 
be imagined without the other and they are therefore two 
things, whereas the existence of its essence without the 
existence of its essence cannot be imagined, and if the 
knowledge of all things formed a unity, it would be impossible 


277 


to imagine this duality. Therefore all those philosophers who 
acknowledge that the First knows something besides its own 
essence have undoubtedly at the same time acknowledged a 
plurality. 


I say: 


The summary of this objection to the proposition that the First knows both 
itself and something else is that knowing one’s self is different from knowing 
something else. But Ghazali falls here into confusion. For this can be 
understood in two ways: first, that Zaid’s knowledge of his own individuality 
is identical with his knowledge of other things, and this is not true; secondly, 
that man’s knowledge of other things, namely of existents, is identical with the 
knowledge of his own essence, and this is true. ‘ And the proof is that his 
essence is nothing but his knowledge of the existents. z For if man like all 
other beings knows only the quiddity which characterizes him, and if his 
quiddity is the knowledge of things, then man’s self-knowledge is necessarily 
the knowledge of all other things, for if they were different his essence would 
be different from his knowledge of things. This is clear in the case of the 
artisan, for his essence, through which he is called an artisan, is nothing but 
his knowledge of the products of art. ; And as to Ghazali’s words, that if his 
self-knowledge were identical with his knowledge of other things, then the 
negation of the one would be the negation of the other and the affirmation of 
the one the affirmation of the other, he means that if the self-consciousness of 
man were identical with his knowledge of other things, he could not know his 
own self without knowing the other things; that is, if he were ignorant of other 
things, he would not know his own self, and this proposition is in part true, in 
part false. For the quiddity of man is knowledge, and knowledge is the thing 
known in one respect and is something different in another. And if he is 
ignorant of a certain object of knowledge, he is ignorant of a part of his 
essence, and if he is ignorant of all knowables, he is ignorant of his essence; 
and to deny man this knowledge is absolutely the same as to deny man’s 
selfconsciousness, for if the thing known is denied to the knower in so far as 
the thing known and knowledge are one, man’s self-consciousness itself is 
denied. But in so far as the thing known is not knowledge, it is not man, and 
to deny man this knowledge does not imply the denial of man’s self- 


278 


consciousness. And the same applies to individual men. For Zaid’s knowledge 
of Amr is not Zaid himself, and therefore Zaid can know his own self, while 
being ignorant of Amr. 


Ghazali says: 


If it is said: ‘The First does not know other things in first 
intention. No, it knows its own essence as the principle of the 
universe, and from this its knowledge of the universe follows in 
second intention, since it cannot know its essence except as a 
principle, for this is the true sense of its essence, and it cannot 
know its essence as a principle for other things, without the 
other things entering into its knowledge by way of implication 
and consequence; it is not impossible that from its essence 
consequences should follow, and this does not imply a plurality 
in its essence, and only a plurality in its essence is impossible’- 
there are different ways of answering this. First your assertion 
that it knows its essence to be a principle is a presumption; it 
suffices that it knows the existence of its essence, and the 
knowledge that it is a principle is an addition to its knowledge 
of its essence, since being a principle is a relation to the essence 
and it is possible that it should know its essence and not this 
relation, and if this being-a-principle were not a relation, its 
essence would be manifold and it would have existence and be a 
principle, and this forms a duality. And just as a man can know 
his essence without knowing that he is an effect, for his being 
an effect is a relation to his cause, so the fact that the First is a 
cause is a relation between itself and its object. This 
consequence is implied in the mere statement of the 
philosophers that it knows that it is a principle, since this 
comprises the knowledge of its essence and of its being a 
principle, and this is a relation, and the relation is not the 
essence, and the knowledge of the relation is not the knowledge 
of the essence and we have already given the proof of this, 
namely that we can imagine knowledge of the essence, without 
the knowledge of its being a principle, but knowledge of the 


279 


essence without the knowledge of the essence cannot be 


imagined, since the essence is an identical unity. 
I say: 


The proposition which the philosophers defend against Ghazali in this 
question is based on philosophical principles which must be discussed first. 
For if the principles they have assumed and the deductions to which, 
according to them, their demonstration leads, are conceded, none of the 
consequences which Ghazali holds against them follows. The philosophers 
hold, namely, that the incorporeal existent is in its essence nothing but 
knowledge, for they believe that the forms’ have no knowledge for the sole 
reason that they are in matter; but if a thing does not exist in matter, it is 
known to be knowing, and this is known because they found that when forms 
which are in matter are abstracted in the soul from matter they become 
knowledge and intellect, for intellect is nothing but the forms abstracted from 
matter, z and if this is true for things which by the principle of their nature are 
not abstracted, then it is still more appropriate for things which by the 
principle of their nature are abstracted to be knowledge and intellect. And 
since what is intelligible in things is their innermost reality, and since intellect 
is nothing but the perception of the intelligibles, our own intellect is the 
intelligible by itself, in so far as it is an intelligible, and so there is no 
difference between the intellect and the intelligible, except in so far as the 
intelligibles are intelligibles of things in the nature of which there is no 
intellect and which only become intellect because the intellect abstracts their 
forms from their matters, and through this our intellect is not the intelligible 
in every respect. But if there is a thing which does not exist in matter, then to 
conceive it by intellect is identical with its intelligible in every respect, and 
this is the case with the intellectual conception of the intelligibles. And no 
doubt the intellect is nothing but the perception of the order and arrangement 
of existing things, but it is necessary for the separate intellect that it should 
not depend on the existing things in its intellectual conception of the existing 
things and of their order, and that its intelligible should not be posterior to 
them, for every other intellect is such that it follows the order which exists in 
the existents and perfects itself through it, and necessarily falls short in its 
intellectual conception of the things, and our intellect, therefore, cannot 


280 


adequately fulfil the demands of the natures of existing things in respect of 
their order and arrangement. But if the natures of existing things follow the 
law of the intellect and our intellect is inadequate to perceive the natures of 
existent things, there must necessarily exist a knowledge of the arrangement 
and order which is the cause of the arrangement, order and wisdom which 
exist in every single being, and it is necessary that this intellect should be the 
harmony which is the cause of the harmony which exists in the existents, and 
that it should be impossible to ascribe to its perception knowledge of 
universals, let alone knowledge of individuals, ‘ because universals are 
intelligibles which are consequent on and posterior to existents, z whereas on 
the contrary the existents are consequent on this intellect. And this intellect 
necessarily conceives existents by conceiving the harmony and order which 
exist in the existents through its essence, not by conceiving anything outside 
its essence, for in that case it would be the effect, not the cause, of the existent 
it conceives, and it would be inadequate. 


And if you have understood this philosophical theory, you will have 
understood that the knowledge of things through a universal knowledge is 
inadequate, for it knows them in potency, and that the separate intellect only 
conceives its own essence, and that by conceiving its own essence it conceives 
all existents, since its intellect is nothing but the harmony and order which 
exist in all beings, and this order and harmony is received by the active 
powers which possess order and harmony and exist in all beings and are 
called natures by the philosophers. For it seems that in every being there are 
acts which follow the arrangement and order of the intellect, and this cannot 
happen by accident, nor can it happen through an intellect which resembles 
our intellect; no, this can only occur through an intellect more exalted than all 
beings, and this intellect is neither a universal nor an individual. And if you 
have understood this philosophical theory, all the difficulties which Ghazali 
raises here against the philosophers are solved; but if you assume that yonder 
intellect resembles our own, the difficulties mentioned follow. For the intellect 
which is in us is numerable and possesses plurality, but this is not the case 
with yonder intellect, for it is free from the plurality which belongs to our 
intelligibles and one cannot imagine a difference in it between the perceiver 
and the perceived, whereas to the intellect which is in us the perception of a 


281 


thing is different from the perception that it is a principle of a thing, and 
likewise its perception of another is different in a certain way from the 
perception of itself. Still, our intellect has a resemblance to yonder intellect, 
and it is yonder intellect which gives our intellect this resemblance, for the 
intelligibles which are in yonder intellect are free from the imperfections 
which are in our intellect: for instance, our intellect only becomes the 
intelligible in so far as it is an intelligible, because there exists an intellect 
which is the intelligible in every respect. The reason for this is that everything 
which possesses an imperfect attribute possesses this attribute necessarily 
through a being which possesses it in a perfect way. For instance, that which 
possesses an insufficient warmth possesses this through a thing which 
possesses a perfect warmth, and likewise that which possesses an insufficient 
life or an imperfect intellect possesses this through a thing which possesses a 
perfect life or a perfect intellect. ‘ And in the same way a thing which 
possesses a perfect rational act receives this act from a perfect intellect, and if 
the acts of all beings, although they do not possess intellects, are perfect 
rational acts, then there exists an intellect through which the acts of all beings 


become rational acts. 


It is weak thinkers who, not having understood this, ask whether the First 
Principle thinks its own essence or if it thinks something outside its essence. 
But to assume that it thinks something outside its essence would imply that it 
is perfected by another thing, and to assume that it does not think something 
outside its essence would imply that it is ignorant of existents. One can only 
wonder at these people who remove from the attributes which are common to 
the Creator and the created, all the imperfections which they possess in the 
created, and who still make our intellect like His intellect, whereas nothing is 
more truly free from all imperfection than His intellect. This suffices for the 
present chapter, but now let us relate the other arguments of Ghazali in this 


chapter and call attention to the mistakes in them. 
Ghazali says: 


The second way to answer this assertion is to say that their 
expression that everything is known to it in second intention is 


without sense, for as soon as its knowledge comprehends a 


282 


thing different from itself, in the way it comprehends its own 
essence, this First Principle will have two different objects of 
knowledge and it will know them both, for the plurality and the 
difference of the object known imply a plurality in the 
knowledge, since each of the two objects known receives in the 
imagination the discrimination which distinguishes it from the 
other. And therefore the knowledge of the one cannot be 
identical with the knowledge of the other, for in that case it 
would be impossible to suppose the existence of the one 
without the other, and indeed there could not be an other at all, 
since they would both form an identical whole, and using for it 
the expression ‘second intention’ does not make any difference. 
Further, I should be pleased to know how he who says that not 
even the weight of an atom, either in heaven or earth, escapes 


¢ 


God’s knowledge, ‘ intends to deny the plurality, unless by 
saying that God knows the universe in a universal way. 
However, the universals which form the objects of His 
knowledge would be infinite, and still His knowledge which is 
attached to them would remain one in every respect, 


notwithstanding their plurality and their differentiation. 
I say: 


The summary of this is found in two questions. The first is, ‘How can its 
knowledge of its own self be identical with its knowledge of another? The 
answer to this has already been given, namely that there is something 
analogous in the human mind which has led us to believe in the necessity of 
its being in the First Intellect. 


The second question is whether its knowledge is multiplied through the 
plurality of its objects known and whether it comprehends all finite and 
infinite knowables in a way which makes it possible that its knowledge should 
comprehend the infinite. The answer to this question is that it is not 
impossible that there should exist in the First Knowledge, notwithstanding its 
unity, a distinction between the objects known, and it is not impossible, 
according to the philosophers, that it should know a thing, different from 


283 


itself, and its own essence, through a knowledge which differs in such a way 
that there should exist a plurality of knowledge. The only thing which is 
absolutely impossible according to them is that the First Intellect should be 
perfected through the intelligible and caused by it, and if the First Intellect 
thought things different from itself in the way we do, it would be an effect of 
the existent known, not its cause, and it has been definitely proved that it is 
the cause of the existent. The plurality which the philosophers deny does not 
consist in its knowing through its own essence, but in its knowing through a 
knowledge which is additional to its essence; the denial, however, of this 
plurality in God does not imply the denial of a plurality of things known, 
except through dialectics, and Ghazali’s transference of the problem of the 
plurality which is in the knowledge, according to the philosophers, to the 
problem of plurality which is in the things known themselves, is an act of 
sophistry, because it supposes that the philosophers deny the plurality which 
is in the knowledge through the things known, in the way they deny the 
plurality which arises through the duality of substratum and inherent. 


But the truth in this question is that there is not a plurality of things known 
in the Eternal Knowledge like their numerical plurality in human knowledge. 
For the numerical plurality of things known in human knowledge arises from 
two sources: first the representations, and this resembles spatial plurality; 
secondly the plurality of what is known in our intellect, namely the plurality 
which occurs in the first genus-which we may call being-through its division 
into all the species which are subsumed under it, for our intellect is one; with 
respect to the universal genus which comprises all species existing in the 
world, whereas it becomes manifold through the plurality of the species. And 
it is clear that when we withhold the idea of the universal from the Eternal 
Knowledge, this plurality is in fact abandoned and there only remains in the 
Divine a plurality the perception of which is denied to our intellect, for 
otherwise our knowledge would be identical with this eternal knowledge, and 
this is impossible. And therefore what the philosophers say is true, that for the 
human understanding there is a limit, where it comes to a stand, and beyond 
which it cannot trespass, and this is our inability to understand the nature of 
this knowledge. And again, our intellect is knowledge of the existents in 
potency, not knowledge in act, and knowledge in potency is less perfect than 


284 


knowledge in act; and the more our knowledge is universal, the more it comes 
under the heading of potential knowledge and the more its knowledge 
becomes imperfect . But it is not true of the Eternal Knowledge that it is 
imperfect in any way, and in it there is no knowledge in potency, for 
knowledge in potency is knowledge in matter. Therefore the philosophers 
believe that the First Knowledge requires that there should be a knowledge in 
act and that there should be in the divine world no universal at all and no 
plurality which arises out of potency, like the plurality of the species which 
results from the genus. And for this reason alone we are unable to perceive 
the actually infinite, that the things known to us are separated from each 
other, and if there exists a knowledge in which the things known are unified, 
then with respect to it the finite and the infinite are equivalent. 


The philosophers assert that there are definite proofs for all these 
statements, and if we understand by ‘plurality in knowledge’ only this 
plurality and this plurality is denied of the Divine, then the knowledge of God 
is a unity in act, but the nature of this unity and the representation of its 
reality are impossible for the human understanding, for if man could perceive 
the unity, his intellect would be identical with the intellect of the Creator, and 
this is impossible. And since knowledge of the individual is for us knowledge 
in act, we know that God’s knowledge is more like knowledge of the individual 
than knowledge of the universal, although it is neither the one nor the other. 
And he who has understood this understands the Divine Words: ‘Nor shall 
there escape from it the weight of an atom, either in the heavens or in the 
earth’, and other similar verses which refer to this idea. 


Ghazali says: 


Avicenna, however, has put himself in opposition to all the 
other philosophers who, in order not to commit themselves to 
the consequence of plurality, took the view that the First only 
knows itself; how, then, can he share with them the denial of 
plurality Still he distinguished himself from them by admitting 
its knowledge of other things, since he was ashamed to say that 
God is absolutely ignorant of this world and the next and knows 
only His own self-whereas all others know Him, and know also 


285 


their own selves and other things, and are therefore superior to 
Him in knowledge-and he abandoned that blasphemous 
philosophical theory, refusing to accept it. Still he was not 
ashamed of persisting in the denial of this plurality in every 
respect, and he affirmed that God’s knowledge of Himself and 
of other things, yes, of the totality of things, is identical with His 
essence without this implying any contradiction, and this is the 
very contradiction which the other philosophers were ashamed 
to accept, because of its obviousness. And thus no party among 
the philosophers could rid itself of a blasphemous doctrine, and 
it is in this manner that God acts towards the man who strays 
from His path and who believes that he has the power through 
his speculation and imagination to fathom the innermost 
nature of the Divine. 


I say: 


The answer to all this is clear from what we have said already, namely that 
the philosophers only deny that the First Principle knows other things than its 
own self in so far as these other things are of an inferior existence, so that the 
effect should not become a cause, nor the superior existence the inferior; for 
knowledge is identical with the thing known. They do not, however, deny it, in 
so far as it knows these other things by a knowledge, superior in being to the 
knowledge by which we know other things; on the contrary, it is necessary 
that it should know them in this way, because it is in this way that the other 
things proceed from the First Agent. As to the inquiry about the possibility of 
a plurality of things known in the Eternal Knowledge, that is a second 
question, and we have mentioned it, and it is not because of this that the 
philosophers sought refuge in the theory that the First knows only its own 
self, as Ghazali wrongly supposes; no, only because in short-as we have 
declared already-its knowledge should not be like our knowledge which 
differs from it in the extreme. And Avicenna wanted only to combine these 
two statements, that it knows only its own essence and that it knows other 
things by a knowledge superior to man’s knowledge of them, since this 
knowledge constitutes its essence, and this is clear from Avicenna’s words 
that it knows its own self and other things besides itself, and indeed all things 


286 


which constitute its essence, although Avicenna does not explain this, as we 
have done. And, therefore, these words of his are not a real contradiction, nor 
are the other philosophers ashamed of them; no, this is a statement about 
which, explicitly or implicitly, they all agree. And if you have grasped this well, 
you will have understood Ghazali’s bad faith in his attack on the philosophers, 
although he agrees with them in the greater part of their opinions. 


Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers: 


It may be said that if it is asserted that the First knows its 
own self as a principle by way of relation, the knowledge of two 
correlatives is one and the same, for the man who knows the 
son knows him through one single knowledge in which the 
knowledge of the father, of fatherhood, and sonhood are 
comprised, so that the objects of knowledge are manifold, but 
the knowledge is one. ‘ And in the same way the First knows its 
essence as a principle for the other things besides itself and so 
the knowledge is one, although what is known is manifold. 
Further, if the First thinks this relation in reference to one 
single effect and its own relation towards it, and this does not 
imply a plurality, then a plurality is not implied by an addition 
of things which generically do not imply a plurality. ‘ And 
likewise he who knows a thing and knows his knowing this 
thing, knows this thing through this knowledge, and therefore 
all knowledge is self-knowledge connected with the knowledge 
of the thing known, ‘ and the known is manifold, but knowledge 
forms a unity. ; An indication of this is also that you theologians 
believe that the things known to God are infinite, but His 
knowledge is one, and you do not attribute to God an infinite 
number of cognitions; if, indeed, the manifoldness of the known 
implied a plurality in the knowledge itself, well, let there then 
be an infinite number of cognitions in the essence of God. But 
this is absurd. 


Then Ghazali says, answering the philosophers: 


287 


We say: Whenever knowledge is one in every respect, it 
cannot be imagined that it should be attached to two things 
known; on the contrary, this determines a certain plurality, 
according to the assumption and tenet of the philosophers 
themselves about the meaning of ‘plurality’, so that they even 
make the excessive claim that if the First had a quiddity to 
which existence were attributed, this would imply a plurality. 
And they do not think that to a single unity possessing reality 
existence also can be attributed; no, they assert that the 
existence is brought in relation to the reality and differs from it 
and determines a plurality, and on this assumption it is not 
possible that knowledge should attach itself to two objects of 
knowledge without this implying a greater and more important 
kind of plurality than that which is intended in the assumption 
of an existence, brought in relation to a quiddity. And as to the 
knowledge of a son and similarly of other relative concepts, 
there is in it a plurality, since there must necessarily be 
knowledge of the son himself and the father himself, and this is 
a dual knowledge, and there must be a third knowledge, and 
this is the relation; indeed, this third knowledge is implied in 
the dual knowledge which precedes it, as they are its necessary 
condition, for as long as the terms of relation are not known 
previously, the relation itself cannot be known, and there is 
thus a plurality of knowledge of which one part is conditioned 
through another. Likewise when the First knows itself as related 
to the other genera and species by being their principle, it needs 
the knowledge of its own essence and of the single genera and it 
must further know that there exists between itself and those 
genera and species the relation of being a principle, for 
otherwise the existence of this relation could not be supposed 
to be known to it. And as to their statement that he who knows 
something knows that he is knowing through this knowledge 
itself, so that the thing known can be manifold, but the 
knowledge remains one, this is not true; on the contrary, he 
knows that he knows through another knowledge, and this ends 


288 


in a knowledge to which he does not pay attention and of which 
he is no longer conscious, and we do not say that there is an 
infinite regress, but there is a final term of knowledge attached 
to the thing known, and he is unconscious of the existence of 
the knowledge, but not of the existence of the known, like a 
man who knows the colour black and whose soul at the moment 
of his knowing it is plunged in the object of his knowledge, the 
colour black, and who is unconscious of his knowing this colour 
black and whose attention is not centred on it, for if it were, he 
would need another knowledge till his attention came to a 
stand. ‘ And as to the affirmation of the philosophers that this 
can be turned against the theologians concerning the things 
known by God, for they are infinite, whereas God’s knowledge 
according to the theologians is one, we answer, ‘We have not 
plunged ourselves into this book to set right, but to destroy and 
to refute, and for this reason we have called this book “The 
Incoherence of the Philosophers”, not “The Establishment of 
the Truth”, and this argument against us is not conclusive. ‘ 


And if the philosophers say: “We do not draw this 
conclusion against you theologians in so far as you hold the 
doctrine of a definite sect but in so far as this problem is 
applied to the totality of mankind, and the difficulty for all 
human understanding is the same, and you have no right to 
claim it against us in particular, for it can be turned against you 
also, and there is no way out of it for any party’-we answer: ‘No, 
but our aim is to make you desist from your claim to possess 
knowledge of the essential realities through strict proofs, and to 
make you doubt. And when your impotence becomes evident, 
we say that there are men who hold that the divine realities 
cannot be attained through rational inquiry, for it is not in 
human power to apprehend them and it was for this reason that 
Muhammad, the Lord of the Law, said “Ponder over God’s 
creation, but do not ponder over God’s essence”. Why then do 
you oppose this group of men who believe in the truth of the 


289 


prophet through the proof of his miracles, ‘ who confine the 
judgement of the intellect to a belief in God, the Sender of the 
Prophets, who guard themselves against any rational 
speculation about the attributes, who follow the Lord of the Law 
in his revelations about God’s attributes, who accept his 


» « 


authority for the use of the terms “the knowing” “the wifer”, 
“the powerful”, “the living”, who refuse to acknowledge those 
meanings which are forbidden and who recognize our 
impotence to reach the Divine Intellect? You only refute these 
men in so far as they are ignorant of the methods of 
demonstration and of the arrangement of premisses according 
to the figures of the syllogisms, and you claim that you know 
these things by rational methods; but now your impotence, the 
breakdown of your methods, the shamelessness of your claim to 
knowledge, have come to light, and this is the intention of our 
criticism. And where is the man who would dare to claim that 


theological proofs have the strictness of geometrical proofs?’; 
I say: 


All this prolix talk has only a rhetorical and dialectical value. And the 
arguments which he gives in favour of the philosophers about the doctrine of 
the unity of God’s knowledge are two, the conclusion of which is that in our 
concepts there are conditions which do not through their plurality bring 
plurality into the concepts themselves, just as there appear in the existents 
conditions which do not bring plurality into their essences, for instance that a 
thing should be one and exist and be necessary or possible. And all this, if it is 
true, is a proof of a unique knowledge comprising a multitude, indeed an 


infinite number, of sciences. 


The first argument which he uses in this section refers to those mental 
processes which occur to the concept in the soul and which resemble the 
conditions in the existents with respect to the relations and negations, which 
exist in them; for it appears from the nature of the relation which occurs in 
the concepts that it is a condition through which no plurality arises in the 
concepts, ‘ and it is now argued that the relation which presents itself in the 


290 


related things belongs to this class of conditions. Ghazali objects to this that 
the relation and the terms of the relation form a plurality of knowledge, and 
that for instance our knowledge of fatherhood is different from our 
knowledge of the father and the son. Now the truth is that the relation is an 
attribute additional to the terms of the relation outside the soul in the 
existents, but as to the relation which exists in the concepts, it is better suited 
to be a condition than an attribute additional to the terms of the relation; 
however, all this is a comparison of man’s knowledge with the Eternal 
Knowledge, and this is the very cause of the mistake. Everyone who concerns 
himself with doubt about the Eternal Knowledge and tries to solve it by what 
occurs in human knowledge does indeed transfer the knowledge from the 
empirical to the Divine concerning two existents which differ in an extreme 
degree, not cxistents which participate in their species or genus, but which are 


totally unlike. 


The second proof is that we know a thing through a single knowledge and 
that we know that we know by a knowledge which is a condition in the first 
knowledge, not an attribute additional to it, and the proof of this is that 
otherwise there would arise an infinite series. Now Ghazali’s answer, that this 
knowledge is a second knowledge and that there is no infinite series here, is 
devoid of sense, for it is self-evident that this implies such a series, and it does 
not follow from the fact that when a man knows a thing but is not conscious 
that he knows the fact that he knows, that in the case when lie knows that he 
knows, this second knowledge is an additional knowledge to the first; no, the 
second knowledge is one of the conditions of the first knowledge and its 
infinite regress is therefore not impossible; if, however, it were a knowledge 
existing by itself and additional to the first knowledge, an infinite series could 


not occur. ‘ 


As to the conclusion which the philosophers force upon the theologians, 
that all the theologians recognize that God’s knowledge is infinite and that at 
the same time it is one, this is an negumentum ad hominem, not an objective 
argument based on the facts themselves. And from this there is no escape for 
the theologians, unless they assume that the knowledge of the Creator differs 
in this respect from the knowledge of the creature, and indeed there is no one 
more ignorant than the man who believes that the knowledge of God differs 


291 


only quantitatively from the knowledge of the creature, that is that He only 
possesses more knowledge. All these are dialectical arguments, but one may 
be convinced of the fact that God’s knowledge is one and that it is not an 
effect of the things known; no, it is their cause, and a thing that has numerous 
causes is indeed manifold itself, whereas a thing that has numerous effects 
need not be manifold in the way that the effects form a plurality. And there is 
no doubt that the plurality which exists in the knowledge of the creature must 
be denied of God’s knowledge, just as any change through the change of the 
objects known must be denied of Him, and the theologians assume this by one 
of their fundamental principles. ‘ But the arguments which have been given 
here are all dialectical arguments. 


And as to his statement that his aim here is not to reach knowledge of the 
truth but only to refute the theories of the philosophers and to reveal the 
inanity of their claims, this is not worthy of him-but rather of very bad men. 
And how could it be otherwise? For the greater part of the subtlety this man 
acquired-and he surpassed ordinary people through the subtlety he put in the 
books he composed-he only acquired from the books of the philosophers and 
from their teaching. And even supposing they erred in something, he ought 
not to have denied their merit in speculative thought and in those ideas 
through which they trained our understanding. Nay more, if they had only 
invented logic, he and anyone else who understands the importance of this 
science ought to thank them for it, and he himself was conscious of the value 
of logic and urged its study and wrote treatises about it, and he says that there 
is no other way to learn the truth than through this science, and he had even 
such an exaggerated view of logic that he extracted it from the book of God, 
the holy Qur’an. ‘ And is it allowed to one who is indebted to their books and 
to their teaching to such an extent that he excelled his contemporaries and 
that his fame in Islam became immense, is it really allowed to such a man to 
speak in this way of them, and to censure them so openly, so absolutely, and 
condemn their sciences? And suppose they erred in certain theological 
questions, we can only argue against their mistakes by the rules they have 
taught us in the logical sciences, and we are convinced that they will not 
blame us when we show them a mistake which might be found in their 


opinions. And indeed their aim was only the acquisition of truth, and if their 


292 


only merit consisted in this, it would suffice for their praise, although nobody 
has said anything about theological problems that can be absolutely relied 
upon and nobody is guaranteed against mistakes but those whom God 
protects in a divine, superhuman way, namely the prophets, and I do not 
know what led this man to this attack against such statements; may God 
protect me against failings in word and in deed and forgive me if I fail! 


And what he says of the belief held by those who follow the Divine Law in 
these things is in agreement with what is said by the renowned philosophers, 
for when it is said that God’s knowledge and attributes cannot be described 
by, or compared to, the attributes of the creature, so that it cannot even be 
asserted that they are essence or an addition to the essence, this expresses the 
thought of genuine philosophers and other true thinkers, and God is the 
Saviour, the Leader. 


Ghazali says: 


It may be said, ‘This difficulty applies only to Avicenna in 
so far as he says that the First knows other things, but the 
acknowledged philosophers are in agreement that it does not 
know anything besides itself, and this difficulty is therefore set 
aside. ‘ 


But we answer, ‘What a terrible blasphemy is this doctrine! 
Verily, had it not had this extreme weakness, later philosophers 
would not have scorned it, but we shall draw attention to its 
reprehensible character, for this theory rates God’s effects 
higher than Himself, since angel and man and every rational 
being knows himself and his principle and knows also of other 
beings, but the First knows only its own self and is therefore 
inferior to individual men, not to speak of the angels; indeed, 
the animals besides their awareness of themselves know other 
things, and without doubt knowledge is something noble and 
the lack of it is an imperfection. And what becomes of their 
statement that God, because He is the most perfect splendour 
and the utmost beauty, is the lover and the beloved? But what 
beauty can there be in mere existence which has no quiddity, no 


293 


essence, which i observes neither what occurs in the world nor 
what is a consequence or proceeds from its own essence? And 
what deficiency in God’s whole world could be greater? And an 
intelligent man may well marvel at a group of men who 
according to their statement speculate deeply about the 
intelligibles, but whose inquiry culminates in a Lord of Lords 
and Cause of causes who does not possess any knowledge about 
anything that happens in the world. What difference is there 
then between Him and the dead, except that He has self- 
consciousness? And what perfection is there in His self- 
knowledge, if He is ignorant of everything else? And the 
blasphemy of this doctrine releases us from the use of many 


words and explanations. 


Further, there may be said to them: ‘Although you plunge 
yourselves in these shameful doctrines, you cannot free 
yourselves from plurality, for we ask: “Is the knowledge He has 
of His essence identical with His essence or not?” If you say, 
“No”, you introduce plurality, and if you say they are identical, 
what then is the difference between you and a man who said 
that a man’s knowledge of his essence was identical with his 
essence, which is pure foolishness? For the existence of this 
man’s essence can be conceived, while he gives no attention to 
his essence, ‘ whereas when afterwards his attention returns, he 
becomes aware of his essence. Therefore his awareness of his 
essence differs from his essence. ‘ 


If it is argued: ‘Certainly a man can be without knowledge of 
his essence, but when this knowledge occurs to him, he 
becomes a different being’, we answer: ‘Non-identity cannot be 
understood through an accident and conjunction, for the 
identical thing cannot through an accident become another 
thing and that other thing, conjoined with this, does not 
become identical with it, but keeps its individual otherness. 
And the fact that God is eternally self-conscious does not prove 
that His knowledge of His essence is identical with His essence, 


294 


for His essence can be imagined separately and the occurrence 
of His awareness afterwards, and if they were identical this 


could not be imagined. 


And if it be said: “His essence is intellect and knowledge, 
and He has not an essence in which afterwards knowledge 
exists’, we answer: ‘The foolishness of this is evident, for 
knowledge is an attribute and an accident which demands a 
subject, and to say, “He is in His essence intellect and 
knowledge” is like saying, “He is power and will, and power and 
will exist by themselves”, and this again is like saying of black 
and white, quantity, fourness and threeness and all other 
accidents that they exist by themselves. And in exactly the same 
way as it is impossible that the attributes of bodies should exist 
by themselves without a body which itself is different from the 
attributes, it is known to be impossible that attributes like the 
knowledge, life, power, and will of living beings should exist by 
themselves, for they exist only in an essence. For life exists in an 
essence which receives life through it, and the same is the case 
with the other attributes. And therefore they do not simply 
content themselves with denying to the First all qualities (and 
not merely its real essence and quiddity); no, they deny to it 
also its very existence by itself and reduce it to the entities of 
accidents and attributes which have no existence by themselves; 
and besides we shall show later in a special chapter their 
incapacity to prove that it is conscious either of itself or of 
other things. ‘ 


I say: 


The problem concerning the knowledge of the Creator of Himself and of 
other things is one of those questions which it is forbidden to discuss in a 
dialectical way, let alone put them down in a book, for the understanding of 
the masses does not suffice to understand such subtleties, and when one 
embarks on such problems with them the meaning of divinity becomes void 
for them and therefore it is forbidden to them to occupy themselves with this 


295 


knowledge, since it suffices for their blessedness to understand what is within 
their grasp. The Holy Law, the first intention of which is the instruction of the 
masses, z does not confine itself to the explanation of these things in the 
Creator by making them understood through their existence in human beings, 
for instance by the Divine Words: ‘Why dost thou worship what can neither 
hear nor see nor avail thee aught?’, ‘ but enforces the real understanding of 
these entities in the Creator by comparing them even to the human limbs, for 
instance in the Divine Words: ‘Or have they not seen that we have created for 
them of what our hands have made for them, cattle and they are owners 
thereof? and the Divine Words, “I have created with my two hands’. s This 
problem indeed is reserved for the men versed in profound knowledge to 
whom God has permitted the sight of the true realities, and therefore it must 
not be mentioned in any books except those that are composed according to a 
strictly rational pattern, that is, such books as must be read in a rational order 
and after the acquisition of other sciences the study of which according to a 
demonstrative method is too difficult for most men, even for those w_ o 
possess by nature a sound understanding, although such men are very scarce. 
But to discuss these questions with the masses is like bringing poisons to the 
bodies of many animals, for which they are real poisons. Poisons, however, 
are relative, and what is poison for one animal is nourishment for another. 
The same applies to ideas in relation to men; that is, there are ideas which are 
poison for one type of men, but which are nourishment for another type. And 
the man who regards all ideas as fit for all types of men is like one who gives 
all things as nourishment for all people; the man, however, who forbids free 
inquiry to the mature is like one who regards all nourishment as poison for 
everyone. But this is not correct, for there are things which are poison for one 
type of man and nourishment for another type. ‘ And the man who brings 
poison to him for whom it is really poison merits punishment, although it 
may be nourishment for another, and similarly the man who forbids poison to 
a man for whom it is really nourishment so that this man may die without it, 
he too must be punished. And it is in this way that the question must be 
understood. But when the wicked and ignorant transgress and bring poison to 
the man for whom it is really poison, as if it were nourishment, then there is 
need of a physician who through his science will exert himself to heal that 
man, and for this reason we have allowed ourselves to discuss this problem in 


296 


such a book as this, and in any other case we should not regard this as 
permissible to us; on the contrary, it would be one of the greatest crimes, or a 
deed of the greatest wickedness on earth, and the punishment of the wicked is 
a fact well known in the Holy Law. And since itis impossible to avoid the 
discussion of this problem, let us treat it in such a way as is possible in this 
place for those who do not possess the preparation and mental training 
needed before entering upon speculation about it. 


So we say that the philosophers, when they observed all perceptible things, 
found that they fell into two classes, the one a class perceptible by the senses, 
namely the individual bodies existing by themselves and the individual 
accidents in these bodies, and the other a class perceptible by the mind, 
namely, the quiddities and natures of these substances and accidents. And 
they found that in these bodies there are quiddities which exist essentially in 
them, and I understand by the ‘quiddities’ of bodies attributes existing in 
them, through which these bodies become existent in act and specified by the 
act which proceeds from them; and according to the philosophers these 
quiddities differ from the accidental attributes, because they found that the 
accidents were additions to the individual substance which exists by itself and 
that these accidents were in need of the substances for their existence, 
whereas the substances do not need the accidents for their own existence. And 
they found also that those attributes which were not accidents were not 
additional to the essence, but that they were the genuine essence of the 
individual which exists by itself, so that if one imagined these attributes 
annulled, the essence itself would be annulled. Now, they discovered these 
qualities in individual bodies through the acts which characterize each of 
them; for instance they perceived the attributes through which plants by their 
particular action become plants’ and the attributes through which animals by 
their particular actions become animals, and in the same way they found in 
the minerals forms of this kind which are proper to them, through the 
particular actions of minerals. Then, when they had investigated these 
attributes, they learned that they were in a substratum of this essence and this 
substratum became differentiated for them, because of the changing of the 
individual existents from one species into another species and from one genus 


into another genus through the change and alteration of these attributes; for 


297 


instance the change of the nature of fire into air by the cessation of the 
attribute from which the actuality of fire, through which fire is called fire, 
proceeds, and its change into the attribute from which the actuality peculiar 
to air, through which air is called air, proceeds. They also proved the existence 
of this substratum through the capacity of the individual essence to receive an 
actuality from another, just as they proved by the actuality the existence of 
form, for it could not be imagined that action and passivity proceed from one 
and the same natures They believed therefore that all active and passive 
bodies are composed of two natures, one active and the other passive, and 
they called the active nature form, quiddity, and substance, and the passive 
part subject, ultimate basis of existenceb and matter. And from this it became 
clear to them that the perceptible bodies are not simple bodies as they appear 
to be to the senses, nor compounded of simple bodies, since they are 
compounded of action and passivity; and they found that what the senses 
perceive are these individual bodies, which are compounded of these two 
things which they called form and matter and that what the mind perceives of 
these bodies are these forms which only become concepts and intellect when 
the intellect abstracts them from the things existing by themselves, i. e. what 
the philosophers call substratum and matter. ? And they found that the 
accidents also are divided in the intellect in a way similar to those two 
natures, s although their substratum in which they exist in reality is the 
bodies compounded of these two natures. And when they had distinguished 
the intelligibles from the sensibles and it had become clear to them that in 
sensible things there are two natures, potency and act, they inquired which of 
these two natures was prior to the other and found that the act was prior to 
the potency, because the agent was prior to its object, ‘ and they investigated 
also causes and effects, which led them to a primary cause which by its act is 
the first cause of all causes, and it followed that this cause is pure act and that 
in it there is no potency at all, since if there were potency in it, it would be in 
part an effect, in part a cause, and could not be a primary cause. And since in 
everything composed of attribute and subject there is potency and act, it was a 
necessary implication for them that the First could not be composed of 
attribute and subject, and since everything free from matter was according to 
them intellect, it was necessary for them that the First should be intellect. 


298 


This in summary is the method of the philosophers, and if you are one of 
those whose mind is sufficiently trained to receive the sciences, and you are 
steadfast and have leisure, it is your duty to look into the books and the 
sciences of the philosophers, so that you may discover in their works certain 
truths (or perhaps the reverse) ; but if you lack one of these three qualities, it 
is your duty to keep yourself to the words of the Divine Law, and you should 
not look for these new conceptions in Islam; for if you do so, you will be 


neither a rationalist nor a traditionalist. ‘ 


Such was the philosophers’ reason for their belief that the essence which 
they found to be the principle of the world was simple and that it was 
knowledge and intellect. And finding that the order which reigns in the world 
and its parts proceeds from a knowledge prior to it, they judged that this 
intellect and this knowledge was the principle of the world, which gave the 
world existence and made it intelligible. This is a theory very remote from the 
primitive ideas of mankind and from common notions, so that it is not 
permitted to divulge it to the masses or even to many people; indeed, the man 
who has proved its evidence is forbidden to reveal it to the man who has no 
power to discover its truth, for he would be like his murderer. And as to the 
term ‘substance’ which the philosophers give to that which is separate from 
matter, the First has the highest claim on the term ‘substance’, the terms 
‘existent’, ‘knowing’, ‘living’, and all the terms for the qualities it bestows on 
the existents and especially those attributes which belong to perfection, for 
the philosophers found that the proper definition of substance was what 
existed by itself and the First was the cause of everything that existed by itself. 


To all the other reproofs which he levels against this doctrine no attention 
need be paid, except in front of the masses and the ordinary man, to whom, 
however, this discussion is forbidden. 


And as to Ghazali’s words: 


What beauty can there be in mere existence which has no 
quiddity, no essence, which observes neither what occurs in the 
world nor what is a consequence or proceeds from its own 


essence?... 


299 


-this whole statement is worthless, for if the philosophers assume a 
quiddity free from a substratum it is also void of attributes, and it cannot be a 
substratum for attributes except by being itself in a substratum and being 
composed of the nature of potency and the nature of act. The First possesses a 
quiddity that exists absolutely, and all other existents receive their quiddity 
only from it, and this First Principle is the existent which knows existents 
absolutely, because existents become existent and intelligible only through the 
knowledge this principle has of itself; for since this First Principle is the cause 
of the existence and intelligibility of existents, of their existence through its 
quiddity and of their intelligibility through its knowledge, it is the cause of the 
existence and intelligibility of their quiddities. The philosophers only denied 
that its knowledge of existents could take place in the same way as human 
knowledge which is their effect, whereas for God’s knowledge the reverse is 
the case. For they had established this superhuman knowledge by proof. 
According to the Ash’arites, however, God possesses neither quiddity nor 
essence at all but the existence of an entity neither possessing nor being a 
quiddity cannot be understood, ‘ although some Ash/’arites believed that God 


¢ 


has a special quiddity by which He differs from all other existents, ‘ and 
according to the Sufis it is this quiddity which is meant by the highest name of 


God. 
And as to Ghazali’s words: 


Further, there may be said to them: ‘Although you plunge 
yourself in these shameful doctrines, you cannot free yourselves 
from plurality, for we ask: “Is the knowledge He has of His 
essence identical with His essence or not?” If you say, “No”, you 
introduce plurality, and if you say, “they are identical”, what 
then is the difference between you and a man who said that a 
man’s knowledge of his essence was identical with his essence?’ 


I say: 


This is an extremely weak statement, and a man who speaks like this 
deserves best to be put to shame and dishonoured. For the consequence he 
draws amounts to saying that the perfect one, who is free from the attributes 
of becoming and change and imperfection, might have the attribute of a being 


300 


possessing imperfection and change. For a man indeed it is necessary, in so 
far as he is composed of a substratum and knowledge, which exists in this 
substratum, that his knowledge should differ from his essence in such a way 
as has been described before, since the substratum is the cause of change in 
the knowledge and the essence. And since man is man and the most noble of 
all sentient beings only through the intellect which is conjoined to his essence, 
but not by being essentially intellect, it is necessary that that which is intellect 
by its essence should be the most noble of all existents and that it should be 
free from the imperfections which exist in the human intellect. ‘ 


And as to Ghazali’s words: 


And if it be said: His essence is intellect and knowledge and 
He has not an essence in which afterwards knowledge exists, we 
answer: ‘The foolishness of this is evident, for knowledge is an 
attribute and an accident which demands a subject, and to say 
“He is in His essence intellect and knowledge” is like saying “He 
is power and will, and power and will exist by themselves”, and 
this again is like saying of black and white, fourness and 
threeness, and all other accidents that they exist by themselves. 


¢ 


I say: 


The error and confusion in his statement is very evident, for it has been 
proved that there is among attributes one that has a greater claim to the term 
‘substantiality than the substance existing by itself, and this is the attribute 
through which the substance existing by itself becomes existing by itself. For 
it has been proved that the substratum for this attribute is something neither 
existing by itself nor existing in actuality; no, its existing by itself and its 
actual existence derive from this attribute, and this attribute in its existence is 
like that which receives the accidents, although certain of these attributes, as 
is evident from their nature, need a substratum in the changeable things, 
since it is the fundamental law of the accidents, that they exist in something 
else, whereas the fundamental law of the quiddities is that they exist by 
themselves, except when, in the sublunary world, these quiddities need a 
substratum through being in transitory i things. But this attribute is at the 


301 


greatest distance from the nature of an accident, and to compare this 
transcendent knowledge to sublunary accidents is extremely foolish, indeed 
more foolish than to consider the soul an accident like threeness and 


fourness. 


And this suffices to show the incoherence and the foolishness of this whole 
argument, and let us rather call this book simply ‘The Incoherence’, not ‘The 
Incoherence of the Philosophers’. And what is further from the nature of an 
accident than the nature of knowledge, and especially the knowledge of the 
First? And since it is at the greatest distance from the nature of an accident, it 
is at the greatest distance from having a necessity for a substratum. 








THE SEVENTH DISCUSSION 








TO REFUTE THEIR CLAIM THAT NOTHING CAN SHARE WITH 
THE FIRST ITS GENUS, AND BE DIFERENTIATED FROM IT 
THROUGH A SPECK DIFERENCE, AND THAT WITH RESPECT TO 
ITS INTELLECT THE DIVISION INTO GENUS AND SPECK 
DIFFERENCE CANNOT BE APPLIED TO IT, 


Ghazali says: 


Indeed, they are all of this opinion, and they deduce from 
this that, since nothing can share its genus, it cannot be 
differentiated through a specific difference and cannot have a 
definition, since a definition is constructed out of genus and 
specific difference and what has no composition cannot have a 
definition, for a definition is a kind of composition. ‘ And they 
affirm that, since the First is said to resemble the first effect in 
being an existent and a substance and a cause for other things, 
and to differ from it in other respects, this certainly does not 
imply sharing in its genus; no, it is nothing but a sharing in a 
common necessary attribute. The difference between genus and 


necessary attribute consists in their content, not in universality, 


302 


according to logical theory, for the genus, namely, the essential 
universal, is the answer to the question what the thing is, and is 
subsumed under the quiddity of the thing defined, and 
constitutes its essence: a man’s being alive is subsumed under 
the quiddity of man, i. e. his animality, and is his genus, but his 
being born and created are his necessary attributes, and, 
although they are universals which can never be separated from 
him, are not subsumed under his quiddity, according to logical 
theory, about which there can be no misgiving. ; And the 
philosophers affirm that existence is never subsumed under the 
quiddity of things, but stands in a relation to the quiddity, 
either necessarily and inseparably, like its relation to heaven, or 
subsequently, after their nonexistence, like its relation to 
temporary things, and that the sharing of existence does not 
imply a sharing in genus. And as to its sharing in ‘being a cause 
to other things’ with all the other causes, this is a necessary 
relation which likewise cannot be subsumed under the quiddity, 
s for neither the fact of being a principle nor existence 
constitutes the essence, but they are necessary attributes of the 
essence, consequent upon the constitution of the essence out of 
the parts of its quiddity, and this community is only the sharing 
of a necessary common attribute consecutive to the essence, not 
a community of genus. Things therefore are only defined by 
their constituents, and if they are defined by the necessary 
attributes this is only a description’ to differentiate them, not to 
define their essential forms; for the triangle is not defined by 
the fact that its angles are equal to two right angles, although 
this is a necessary and common attribute of all triangles, but it 
is defined as a figure bounded by three sides. And the same 
applies to its being a substance, and the meaning of its being a 
substance is that it is an existent which does not exist in a 
substratum. ‘ And the existent is not a genus, since, as it is 
related to a negation, namely not being in a substratum, it 
cannot become a constituent genus; indeed, even if it could be 
brought into a relation to something positive and it could be 


303 


said that it existed in a substratum, it could not become a genus 
in the accident. And the reason is that the man who knows 
substance by its definition, which is rather its description, 
namely that it is an existent which does not exist in a 
substratum, does not know whether it exists, and a fortiori does 
not know whether it exists in a substratum or not; no, the 
meaning of the description of substance is that it is the existent 
which does not exist in a substratum, i. e. that it is a certain 
reality which, when it does exist, does not exist in a substratum, 
but we do not mean that it actually exists at the time of the 
definition, and its community is not the community of the 
genus, for only the constituents of the quiddity form the 
community of the genus which needs also a specific differences 
But the First has no other quiddity, except necessary existence, 
and necessary existence is its real nature and its own quiddity, 
exclusively confined to it, and since necessary existence is 
exclusively confined to the First, it cannot be shared by others, 
it cannot have a specific difference, and it cannot have a 
definition. 


I say: 


Here ends what Ghazali says of the philosophical views about this question, 
and it is partly true, partly false. As to his statement that no other thing can 
share with the First its genus and be distinguished from it through a specific 
difference, if he means by this the genus and the difference that are predicated 
univocally, it is true, for anything of this description is composed of a 
common form and a specific form, and such things possess a definition. But if 
by ‘genus’ is meant what is predicated analogically, I mean pier prius et 
piosterius, then it can have a genus, e. g. existent, or thing, or identity, or 
essence, and it can have a kind of definition, and this kind of definition is 
used in the sciences-for instance, when it is said of the soul that it is the 
entelechy of the natural organic body, a and when it is said of the substance 
that it is the existent which does not exist in a substratum -but these 
definitions do not suffice for knowledge of the thing, and they are only given 
to indicate through it the different individuals which fall under such 


304 


definitions and to represent their peculiarities. But as to his statement that 
according to the philosophers the term ‘existence’ only indicates a necessary 
attribute of the essences of things, this is not true, and we have already 
explained this in another place and none of the philosophers has said this but 
Avicenna. Having denied that existence is a genus, predicted either univocally 
or equivocally, Avicenna affirmed that it was a term which signified a 
common necessary attribute of things. But the difficulty he found in regarding 
existence as an essence can be held up against him when it is regarded as a 
necessary attribute, for if it were a necessary attribute, this necessary attribute 
could not be given as an answer to the question what a thing is. I And further, 
if ‘existence’ really signifies a necessary attribute in things, does it signify this 
necessary attribute univocally, or equivocally, or in some other mode of 
attribution? And if it has a univocal meaning, how can there be an accident 
univocally predicated of things essentially different (I believe that Avicenna 
regarded this as possible)? z It is, however, impossible, because from different 
things the congruous and identical can only derive, when these different 
things agree in one nature, since necessarily a single necessary attribute must 
come from one nature, just as a single act can proceed only from one nature. 
And since this is impossible, the term ‘existence’ indicates essences which 
have analogical meanings, essences some of which are more perfect than 
others; and therefore there exists in the things which have such an existence a 
principle which is the cause of that which exists in all the other things of this 
genus, just as our term ‘warm’ is a term which is predicated per prius et 
posterius of fire and all other warm things, and that of which it is asserted 
first, i. e. fire, is the cause of the existence of warmth in all other things, and 
the same is the case with substance, intellect, and principle and such terms 
(most metaphysical terms are of this kind), and such terms can indicate both 
substances and accidents. 


And what he says of the description of substance is devoid of sense, but 
existence is the genus of substance and is included in its definition in the way 
the genera of the sublunary things are included in their definitions, and 
Farabi proved this in his book about demonstration, and this is the 
commonest view amongst philosophers. Avicenna erred in this only because, 
since he thought that the ‘existent’? means the ‘true’ in the Arabic language, 


305 


and that what indicates the true indicates an accident4-the true, however, 
really indicates one of the second, predicates, i. e. a predicable-he believed 
that when the translator used the word ‘existent’ it meant only the ‘true’. This, 
however, is not so, for the translators meant only to indicate what is also 
meant by ‘entity’ and ‘thing’. Farabi explains this in his Book of the Letters and 
he shows that one of the reasons for the occurrence of this mistake is that the 
term ‘existent’ in Arabic is a derivative in form and that a derivative signifies 
an accident, and in fact an accident is linguistically a derivative. But since the 
translators did not find in Arabic a term which signified that concept which 
the ancient philosophers subdivided into substance and accident, potency and 
act, a term namely which should be a primitive symbol, some translators 
signified that concept by the term ‘existent’, not to be understood as having a 
derivative meaning and signifying therefore an accident, but as having the 
same meaning as ‘essence’. It is thus a technical term, not an idiomatic word. 
Some translators, because of the difficulty attached to it, decided to use for the 
concept, which the Greek language tried to express by deriving it from the 
pronoun which joins the predicate and the subject, the term which expresses 
this, because they thought that this word comes nearer to expressing this 
meaning, and they used instead of the term ‘existent’ the term ‘haeceitas’, but 
the fact that its grammatical form is not found in Arabic hindered its use, and 
the other party therefore preferred the term ‘existent’. -, And the term 
‘existent’ which signifies the true does not signify the quiddity, and therefore 
one may often know the quiddity without knowing the existence, and this 
meaning of ‘existent? of necessity does not signify the quiddity in the 
compound substance, but is in the simple substance identical with the 
quiddity; and this meaning is not what the translators intended by ‘existence’, 
for they meant the quiddity itself, and when we say of the existent that it is in 
part substance, in part accident, the sense meant by the translators must be 
understood, and this is the sense which is predicated analogically of different 
essences of things. When we say, however, that substance exists, it must be 
understood in the sense of the true. And therefore if we have understood the 
well-known discussion of the ancient philosophers, whether the existent is 
one or more than one, which is found in the first book of Aristotle’s Physics 
where he conducts a discussion with the ancient philosophers Parmenides 
and Melissus, s we need only understand by ‘existent’ that which signifies the 


306 


essence. And if the ‘existent’? meant an accident in a substratum, then the 
statement that the existent was one would be self-contradictory. ‘ And all this 
is clear for the man who is well grounded in the books of the philosophers. 


And having stated the views of the philosophers, Ghazali begins to refute 
them, and says: 


This is the sense of the doctrine of the philosophers. And 
the discussion with them consists of two parts: a question and a 
refutation. The question is: This is the simple narration of your 
doctrine, but how do you know the impossibility of this with 
respect to God, so as to build on it the refutation of dualism, 
since you say that a second God would have to participate in 
something and differ from the first in something, and that 
which partly possesses something in common with another, 
partly is different from it, is compound, whereas that He should 


be compound is absurd? 
I say: 


I have already said that this is only valid for something which possesses a 
common feature through a genus which is predicated univocally, not 
analogically. For if, by the assumption of a second God, a God were assumed 
of the same rank of divinity as the first, then the name of God would be 
predicated univocally, and He would be a genus, and the two Gods would have 
to be separated by a specific distinction and both would be compounded of a 
genus and a specific distinction, and the philosophers do not allow a genus to 
an eternal being; but if the term ‘existence’ is predicated per prius et posterius, 


the prior will be the cause of the posterior. 
Ghazali says, refuting the philosophers: 


But we say: How do you know the impossibility of this kind 
of composition? For there is no proof except your denial of the 
attributes, which has been mentioned, namely that the 
compound of genus and species is an aggregate of parts; thus if 
it is possible for one or for a collection of the parts to exist 
without the others, this single one will be the necessary existent 


307 


and the others will not be necessary; and if it is possible neither 
for the parts to exist without the totality, nor for the totality to 
exist without the parts, then the whole is an effect needing 
something else as its cause. We have already discussed this in 
the case of the attributes, and have shown that their plurality is 
not impossible, since an end of the causal series is admitted and 
all that is proved is that there is an end of the causal series. For 
those enormous difficulties which the philosophers have 
invented concerning the inherence of attributes in the 
necessary existent there is no proof whatever. If the necessary 
existent is what the philosophers describe it to be, namely to 
possess no plurality and not to need anything else for its 
existence, then there is no proof of the existence of this 
necessary existent; the only thing proved is that there is an end 
of the causal series, and we have exhausted this subject in our 
discussion of attributes. And for this kind of plurality it is still 
more obvious, for the division of a thing into genus and specific 
difference is not like the division of the subject into essence and 
attribute, since, indeed, the attribute is not the essence and the 
essence is not the attribute, but the species is not in every way 
different from the genus, for whenever we mention the species, 
we mention the genus with an addition, and when we speak of a 
man we only mention animal with the addition of reason. ‘ And 
to ask whether humanity can be free from animality is like 
asking whether humanity can be without itself, when something 
is added to it. And indeed genus and species are more distant 
from plurality than attribute and subject. ‘ And why should it be 
impossible that the causal series should end in two causes, one 
the cause of the heavens and the other the cause of the 
elements, or one the cause of the intellects and the other the 
cause of all bodies, and that there should be between those two 
causes a conceptual difference and separation as between 
redness and warmth when they exist in one and the same place? 
For they differ in content without our being obliged to assume 
in the redness a compound of genus and specific difference 


308 


through which this difference is established; indeed, if it 
possesses a plurality, this kind of plurality does not impair the 
singleness of its essence, and why should this be impossible 
with respect to the causes? Through this there is shown the 
weakness of their refutation of the existence of two Gods. 


I say: 


Composition out of genus and specific difference is exactly the same as the 
composition of a thing in potency and a thing in act, for the nature which is 
indicated by the genus does not actually exist at any time without the 
presence of the nature which is called specific difference and form. ; And 
everything which is composed of these two natures is, according to the 
philosophers, transitory, and possesses an agent, for the specific difference is 
one of the conditions for the existence of the genus in so far as the genus is in 
potency and does not exist without the specific difference. And the 
conjunction of either with its partner is in a certain way a condition for the 
existence of the other. And as a thing cannot itself be a cause of the condition 
of its existence, it necessarily possesses a cause which provides it with 
existence by conjoining the condition and the conditioned. Also, according to 
the philosophers the recipient is in reality something which possesses only 
potency, and if it is actually, then only accidentally; and what is received is 
actuality, and if it is potency, then only accidentally; for the recipient and the 
thing it receives are only distinguished by the fact that one of them is 
potentially something else, whereas actually it is the thing received and 
whatever is potentially another thing must necessarily receive this other thing 
and lose the thing it actually is. ‘ Therefore, if there should exist a recipient in 
actuality and a thing received in actuality, both would exist by themselves, but 
the recipient is necessarily body, for only body, or what is in a body, possesses 
receptivity primarily, and receptivity cannot be attributed to accidents and 
forms, nor to the plane, the line, and the point, ‘ nor in general to what cannot 
be divided. As regards an incorporeal agent, this has been already proved, and 
as to an incorporeal recipient, or a recipient not embedded in matter, such a 
recipient is impossible, although there is a problem for the philosophers 
about the potential intellects And indeed, if the compound has a subject and 
an attribute which is not additional to its essence, b it is transitory and 


309 


necessarily a body, and if it has a subject and an attribute additional to its 
essence, without its having any potency in its substance even in respect of this 
attribute, as is the case according to the ancients with the body of the heavens, 
? it possesses quantity of necessity and is a body. For, if from such an essence, 
supporting the attribute, bodiliness were taken away, it would no longer be a 
perceptible recipient, and equally the sensory perception of its attribute would 
be annulled and its attribute and subject would both become intellect, and 
they would be reduced to one single simple entity, for from the nature of the 
intellect and the intelligible it is evident that they are both one and the same 
thing, since plurality exists in them accidentally, namely through the 
substratum. ‘ And in short, when the philosophers assume an essence and 
attributes additional to the essence, this amounts to their assuming an eternal 
body with accidents inherent in it, and they do not doubt that if they took 
away the quantity which is corporeity, the perceptible element in it would be 
annulled, and neither substratum nor inherent would exist any more; but if, 
on the other hand, they regarded the substratum and the inherent as 
abstracted from matter and body, the substratum and inherent would of 
necessity be both intellect and intelligible; but this is the Unique, the 
Uncompounded, God, the Truth. 


As to his statement that the whole mistake of the philosophers consists in 
their calling the First the ‘necessary existent’, and that if instead they called it 
‘the causeless”, the conclusion which they draw about the First, concerning 
the necessary attributes of the necessary existent, would not follow-this 
statement is not true. For since they assume an existent which has no cause, it 
follows necessarily that it is in itself a necessary existent, just as, when a 
necessary existent existing by itself is assumed, it follows necessarily that it 
has no cause, and if it has no cause it is more appropriate that it should not be 
divided into two things, cause and effect. The assumption of the theologians 
that the First is composed of an attribute and a subject implies that it has an 
efficient cause, ‘ and that therefore it is neither a first cause nor a necessary 
existent, and this is in contradiction to their assumption that it is one of those 
existents of which the attribute and the subject are reduced to one single 
simple entity; but there is no sense in repeating this and expatiating on it. 


310 


And as to his statement that it is not impossible of God, the First, that He 
should be composed of a substratum and an attribute additional to the 
substratum, and that therefore a fortiori it is not impossible that He should be 
composed of a substratum and an attribute which is identical with its 
substratum, we have already explained the way in which this is not 
impossible, namely when both are abstract from matter. 


And as to his statement that their refutation of dualism does not prevent 
the possibility of the existence of two Gods, one of whom would be, for 
instance, the cause of heaven and the other the cause of the earth, or one the 
cause of the intelligible and the other the cause of the sensible in the bodies, 
and that their differentiation and distinction need not determine a 
contradiction, as there is no contradiction in redness and warmth which exist 
in one place-this statement is not true. For if the production and creation of 
the existent is assumed to be the effect of one nature and of one essence, not 
of two different natures, it would necessarily follow that if a second thing of 
this nature were assumed, similar in nature and intellect to the first, they 
would share in one attribute and differ in another. And their difference would 
come about either through the kind of differentiation which exists between 
individuals or through the kind of differentiation which exists between 
species. In the latter case the term ‘God’ would be predicated of them 
equivocally, and this is in contradiction with their assumption, for the species 
which participate in the genus are either contraries or stand between 
contraries, and this is wholly impossible. And if they were individually 
differentiated, they would both be in matter, and this is in opposition to what 
is agreed about them. But if it is assumed that one of these natures is superior 
to the other and that this nature is predicated of them per prius et posterius, 
then the first nature will be superior to the second and the second will be 
necessarily its effect, so that for instance the creator of heaven will be the 
creator of the cause which creates the elements; and this is the theory of the 
philosophers. And both theories lead to the acceptance of a first cause; that of 
those who believe that the First acts through the mediation of many causes, 
and that of those who believe that the First is directly the cause of all other 
things without mediation. But according to the philosophers this latter theory 
cannot be true. For it is evident that the worlds exist through cause and effect, 


311 


and it is inquiry concerning these causes which leads us to a first cause for 
everything. And if some of these different principles were wholly independent 
of others-that is, if some were not the cause of others-then the world could not 
be a single well connected whole, and to the impossibility of this the Divine 
Words refer, ‘Were there in both heaven and earth Gods beside God, both 
surely would have been corrupted’. 


Ghazali says: 


It may be said: This is impossible so far as the difference 
which exists between these two essences is either a condition 
for their necessary existence (and in that case it will exist in 
both the necessary existents, and then they will not differ 
anyhow), or neither the one nor the other specific difference is a 
condition (and since the necessary existence is able to exist 
without the things that are not a condition for it, the necessary 
existence will be perfected by something else). 


But we reply: This is exactly the same answer as you gave 
concerning the attributes and we have already discussed it, ‘ 
and the source of confusion throughout this problem is the 
expression ‘necessary existent’; let us therefore get rid of this 
term; and indeed, we do not accept that demonstration proves a 
necessary existent, if anything else is meant by it but an eternal 
existent which has no cause, and if this is meant by it, let us 
abandon the term ‘necessary existent’ and let it be proved that 
an existent which has no cause and no agents cannot have a 
plurality and a distinctive mark, but indeed there is no proof of 
it. There remains therefore your question whether this specific 
difference is a condition of the causeless character of this 
causeless existent, and this is nonsense. For we have shown that 
there is no cause for its being without a cause, so as to make it 
possible to ask for its condition. It would be like asking whether 
blackness is a condition for the colour’s becoming a colour, and 
if it is a condition, why redness is then a colour. And the answer 
is: as to the essential nature of colour, i. e. in so far as the 


312 


essence of colouredness is asserted in the intellect, neither of 
them is a condition, < and as to its existence, each of them is a 
condition for its existence, but not individually, since a genus 
cannot exist in reality without a specific differences And 
likewise the man who accepts two causes as starting-points of 
the series must say that they are differentiated through a 
specific difference, and both differences are a condition for 
their existence, no doubt, though not through their 
individuality. 


I say: 


The summary of what he says here of the proof of the philosophers is that 
they say that the specific difference through which the duality in the necessary 
existent occurs is either a condition or not a condition for necessary existence. 
If the specific difference through which they are distinguished is a condition 
for both the necessary existents, they will no longer be separated in their 
necessary existence and the necessary existent will be of necessity one and the 
same, just as, if black were to be a condition for the necessity of colour and 
white a condition for colouredness, they could not differ in colouredness. If, 
on the other hand, the specific difference does not enter into the essence of 
necessary existence, then both these necessary existents will have necessary 
existence only by accident, and their duality will not be based on their both 
being necessary existents. This, however, is not true, for the species are a 
condition for the existence of the genus, and both colours are a condition for 
the existence of the genus, though not individually (for in this case they could 
not exist together in the existence of the colour). 


Ghazali opposes this statement with two arguments. The first is that this 
can only happen in so far as ‘necessary existent’ means a special nature; 
according to the theologians, however, this is not the case, for they 
understand by ‘necessary existent?’ only something negative, namely 
something which has no cause, and since negative things are not caused, how 
can, for the denial of the causeless, an argument like the following be used: 
‘That which distinguishes one causeless entity from another causeless entity is 
either a condition of its being causeless or not; if it is a condition, there 


313 


cannot be any plurality or differentiation; and if it is not a condition, it cannot 
occasion a plurality in the causeless, which therefore will be one. ‘ However, 
the erroneous part in Ghazali’s reasoning is that he regards the causeless as a 
mere negation, and, as a negation has no cause, he asks how it could possess a 
condition which is the cause of its existence. But this is a fallacy, for particular 
negations, which are like infinite terms and which are used for distinguishing 
between existents, , have causes and conditions which determine this negation 
in them, just as they have causes and conditions which determine their 
positive qualities; and in this sense there is no difference between positive and 
negative attributes, and the necessity of the necessary existent is a necessary 
attribute of the causeless and there is no difference between saying ‘the 
necessary existent’ or ‘the causeless’. 


And the nonsense comes from those who talk like Ghazali, not from his 


opponents. 


And the summary of Ghazali’s second objection is that to say, as the 
philosophers do, that the specific difference through which the necessary 
existent is distinguished is either a condition or not, that in the former case 
the one necessary existent cannot be distinguished from the other in so far as 
they are necessarily existent and that therefore the necessary existent is one, 
and that in the latter case the necessary existent has no specific difference 
through which it can be divided: that to speak like this is like saying that if 
there exist more colours than one of the genus colour, the difference through 
which one colour is distinguished from another is either a condition for the 
existence of colour or not; that in the former case the one cannot be 
distinguished from the other in so far as they are colour, and colour is 
therefore one single nature; that in the latter case, if neither of them is a 
condition for the existence of colouredness, one colour has no specific 
difference through which it can be distinguished from another, and this is not 


true. ‘ 
Ghazali says, answering this problem on behalf of the philosophers: 


It may be said perhaps: This is possible in the case of colour, 
for it has an existence related to the quiddity and additional to 
the quiddity, but it is not possible for the necessary existent, for 


314 


it possesses only necessary existence, and there is therefore no 
quiddity to which its existence might be related, and just as the 
specific differences of black and red are not conditions for 
colouredness being colouredness, but only a condition for the 
actual realization of colour through a cause, , in the same way 
the specific difference cannot be a condition for necessary 
existence, for necessary existence is in relation to the First what 
colouredness is in relation to the colour, and not like the 
existence brought in relation to colouredness. 


But we reply, we do not accept this; on the contrary, the 
necessary existent has a real essence to which existence is 
attributed, as we shall show in the next discussion, and their 
statement that the First is an existence without quiddity is 
incomprehensible. The trend of their argument is, in short, that 
they base their denial of dualism on the denial that the First is 
composed of the generic and the specific, then they base the 
denial of this on their denial that there is a quiddity behind the 
existence. Therefore as soon as we have refuted this last 
proposition, which is their fundamental principle, their whole 
structure (which is a very shaky fabrication, just like a spider’s 
web) tumbles down. 


I say: 


Ghazali builds the answer he gives here in the name of the philosophers on 
their statement that existence is an accident in the existent, i. e. the quiddity, 
and he objects against them that the existence in everything is something 
different from the essence, and he affirms that their whole argument is built 
only on this. ‘ But the distinction which the philosophers make here does not 
save them from the implication held against them about colouredness and its 
specific differences, in whatever way they may turn the question. Indeed, 
nobody doubts that the specific differences of the genus are the cause of the 
genus, whether it is assumed that the existence of the genus is different from 
its essence, or that the essence and existence of the genus are identical; for if 
the specific differences were differences in the existence, and the existence of 


315 


the colour were different from the quiddity of the colour, it would follow that 
the specific differences by which the colour is divided are not differences in 
the quiddity of the colour, but differences in one of its accidents, and this is 
an absurd assumption. Therefore the truth is to say, ‘When we divide colour 
by its specific differences, the existence of the colour in so far as it is colour is 
only actual, either because it is white, or because it is black or any other 
colour. Thus we do not divide an accident of the colour, but we divide only the 
essence of the colour. Through this solution the statement that existence is an 
accident in the existent is seen to be false, and the argument and his answer 


arc unsound. 
As to Ghazali’s words: 


They base their denial of dualism on the denial that the First 
is composed of the generic and the specific, then they base the 
denial of this on the denial that there is a quiddity behind the 
existence. Therefore as soon as we have refuted this last 
proposition, which is their fundamental principle, their whole 


structure tumbles down. 
I say: 


This argument is not sound, for their structure, the denial of individual 
duality attributed to simple things univocally, is self-evident, for if we assume 
a duality and two simple things possessing a common trait, the simple 
becomes a compounds And the summary of the philosophical proof for this is 
that the nature called ‘necessary existent’, i. e. the cause which has no cause 
and which is a cause for other things, must be either numerically one or 
many; if many, it must be many through its form, one through the genus 
predicated univocally of it, or one through a relation, or one through the term 
only. b If it is like Zaid and Amr individually differentiated and specifically 
one, then it necessarily possesses hyle, and this is impossible. If it is 
differentiated through its form, but one through the genus predicated 
univocally of it, then it is necessarily composite. If it is one in its genus, 
predicated by analogy to one thing, there is no objection, and one part of it 
will be the cause of another and the series will end in a first cause, and this is 
what happens with the forms abstracted from matter, according to the 


316 


philosophers. If it is only common through the term, then there is no 
objection to its being more than one, and this is the case with the four 
primary causes, i. e. the first agent, the ultimate form, the ultimate end, the 
ultimate matter. ‘ Therefore, no strict proof is attained through this method, 
and one does not arrive at the First Principle as Avicenna thought; nor to its 
being necessarily one. 


Ghazali says: 


The second way is the drawing of the consequence, and we 
say: If existence, substantiality and being a principle are not a 
genus, because they do not give an answer to the question 
‘What is it? ‘, then according to you the First is pure intellect 
just like the other intellects which are the principles of 
existence, called angels, according to the philosophers, and 
which are the effects of the First, are intellects separate from 
matter. And this abstract reality comprises the First and the 
first effect. This First, further, is according to the philosophers 
simple, and there is no compound in its essence except through 
its necessary attributes, and both the First Cause and the first 
effect participate in being intellect without matter. This, 
however, is a generic reality. Nor is intellectuality, separate 
from matter, a necessary attribute, for it is indeed a quiddity, 
and this quiddity is common to the First and all the other 
intellects. Therefore, if they do not differ in anything else, you 
have necessarily conceived a duality without a further 
difference; and if they do differ, what then is this distinction 
apart from their intellectuality, which they have in common? 
For what they have in common is participation in this abstract 
reality. For indeed the First is conscious of its own self and of 
others, according to those who believe that it is in its es3ence 
intellect separate from matter; and also the first effect, which is 
the first intellect which God has created without a mediator, 
participates in this characteristic. This proves that the intellects 
which are effects are different species, that they only participate 
in intellectuality and are besides this distinguished by specific 


317 


differences, and that likewise the First participates with all the 
other intellects in this intellectuality. The philosophers, 
therefore, are either in plain contradiction to their own 
fundamental thesis, or have to affirm that intellectuality does 
not constitute God’s essence. And both positions are absurd 
according to them. 


I say: 


If you have understood what we have said before this, that there are things 
which have a term in common not univocally or equivocally, but by the 
universality of terms analogically related to one thing, and that the 
characteristic of these things is that they lead upwards to a first term in this 
genus which is the first cause of everything to which this word refers, like 
warmth, which is predicated of fire and all other warm things, and like the 
term ‘existent’ which is predicated of the substance and all other accidents, 
and like the term ‘movement’ predicated of motion in space and all the other 
movements, you will not have to occupy yourself with the mistakes in this 
reasoning. For the term ‘intellect’ is predicated analogically of the separate 
intellects according to the philosophers, and there is among them a first 
intellect which is the cause of all the other intellects, and the same thing is 
true of substance. And the proof that they have not one nature in common is 
that some of them are the causes of others and the cause of a thing is prior to 
the effect, and the nature of cause and effect cannot be one in genus except in 
the individual causes, and this kind of community is contradictory to genuine 
generic community, for things which participate in genus have no first 
principle which is the cause of all the others-they are all of the same rank, and 
there is no simple principle in them-whereas the things which participate in 
something predicated of them analogically must have a simple first principle. 
And in this First no duality can be imagined, for if a second were assumed, it 
must be of the same level of existence and of the same nature as the First, and 
they would have one nature in common in which they would participate by 
generic participation and would have to be distinguished through specific 
differences, additional to the genus, and both would be composed of genus 
and specific difference, and everything which is of this description is 
temporal; and lastly that which is of the extreme perfection i of existence must 


318 


be unique, for if it were not unique, it could not be of the extreme perfection 
of existence, for that which is in the extreme degree cannot participate with 
anything else, for in the same way as one single line cannot have two extreme 
points at the same end, things extended in existence and differentiated 
through increase s and decrease have not two extremes at the same side. And 
since Avicenna was not aware of this nature, which stands midway between 
the nature of that which is univocally predicated and those natures which 
participate only through the equivocation of the term or in a distant, 
accidental way, this objection was valid against him. 








THE EIGHTH DISCUSSION 








TO REFUTE THEIR THEORY THAT THE EXISTENCE OF THE 
FIRST IS SIMPLE, NAMELY THAT IT IS PURE EXISTENCE AND 
THAT ITS EXISTENCE STANDS IN RELATION TO NO QUIDDITY 
AND TO NO ESSENCE, BUT STANDS TO NECESSARY EXISTENCE 
AS DO OTHER BEINGS TO THEIR QUIDDITY 


Ghazali says: 


There are two ways of attacking this theory. The first is to 
demand a proof and to ask how you know this, through the 
necessity of the intellect, or through speculation and not by 
immediate necessity; and in any case you must tell us your 
method of reasoning. 


If it is said that, if the First had a quiddity, its existence 
would be related to it, and would be consequent’ on this 
quiddity and would be its necessary attribute, and the 
consequent is an effect and therefore necessary existence would 
be an effect, and this is a contradiction, we answer: This is to 
revert to the source of the confusion in the application of the 
term ‘necessary existence’, for we call this entity ‘reality’ or 


‘quiddity and this reality exists, i. e. it is not non-existent and is 


319 


not denied, but its existence is brought into a relation with it, 
and if you like to call this ‘consequent’ and ‘necessary attribute’, 
we shall not quibble about words, if you have once 
acknowledged that it has no agent for its existence and that this 
existence has not ceased to be eternal and to have no efficient 
cause; if, however, you understand by ‘consequent’ and ‘effect’ 
that it has an efficient cause, this is not true. But if you mean 
something else, this is conceded, for it is not impossible, z since 
the demonstration proves only the end of a causal series and its 
ending in an existent reality; a positive quiddity, therefore, is 
possible, and there is no need to deny the quiddity. 


If it is said: Then the quiddity becomes a cause for the 
existence which is consequent on it, and the existence becomes 
an effect and an object of the act, we answer: The quiddity in 
temporal things is not a cause of their existence, and why 
should it therefore be the case in the eternal, if you mean by 
‘cause’ the agent? But if you mean something else by it, namely 
that without which it could not be, let that be accepted, for there 
is nothing impossible in it; the impossibility lies only in the 
infinite causal series, and if this series only comes to a final 
term, then the impossibility is cancelled; impossibility can be 
understood only on this point, therefore you must give a proof 
of its impossibility. 


All the proofs of the philosophers are nothing but 
presumptions that the term has a sense from which certain 
consequences follow, and nothing but the supposition that 
demonstration has in fact proved a necessary existent with the 
meaning the philosophers ascribed to it. We have, however, 
shown previously that this is not true. In short, this proof of the 
philosophers comes down to the proof of the denial of 
attributes and of the division into genus and specific difference; 
only this proof is still more ambiguous and weak, for this 
plurality is purely verbal, for the intellect does allow the 
acceptance of one single existent quiddity. The philosophers, 


320 


however, say that every existent quiddity is a plurality, for it 
contains quiddity and existence, and this is an extreme 
confusion; for the meaning of a single existent is perfectly 
understandable-nothing exists which has no essence, and the 


existence of an essence does not annul its singleness. 
I say: 


Ghazali does not relate Avicenna’s doctrine literally as he did in his book 
The Aims of the Philosophers. ‘For since Avicenna believed that the existence 
of a thing indicated an attribute additional to its essence, he could no longer 
admit that its essence was the agent of its existence out of the possibles, for 
then the thing would be the cause of its own existence and it would not have 
an agent. It follows from this, according to Avicenna, that everything which 
has an existence additional to its essence has an efficient cause, and since 
according to Avicenna the First has no agent, it follows necessarily that its 
existence is identical with its essence. z And therefore Ghazali’s objection that 
Avicenna assimilates existence to a necessary attribute of the essence is not 
true, because the essence of a thing is the cause of its necessary attribute and 
it is not possible that a thing should be the cause of its own existence, because 
the existence of a thing is prior to its quiddity. To identify the quiddity and 
the existence of a thing is not to do away with its quiddity, as Ghazali asserts, 
but is only the affirmation of the unity of quiddity and existence. If we regard 
existence as an accidental attribute of the existent, and it is the agent which 
gives possible things their existence, necessarily that which has no agent 
either cannot have an existence (and this is absurd), or its existence must be 
identical with its essence. 


But the whole of this discussion is built on the mistake that the existence of 
a thing is one of its attributes. For the existence which in our knowledge is 
prior to the quiddity of a thing is that which signifies the true. Therefore the 
question whether a thing exists, either (i) refers to that which has a cause that 
determines its existence, and in that case its potential meaning is to ask 
whether this thing has a cause or not, according to Aristotle at the beginning 
of the second chapter of the Posterior Analytics;s or (2) it refers to that which 
has no cause, and then its meaning is to ask whether a thing possesses a 


321 


necessary attribute which determines its existence. ‘ And when by ‘existent’ is 
meant what is understood by ‘thing’ and ‘entity’, it follows the rule of the 
genus which is predicated analogically, and whatever it is in this sense is 
attributed in the same way to that which has a cause and to that which has 
none, and it does not signify anything but the concept of the existent, and by 
this is meant ‘the true’, and if it means something additional to the essence, it 
is only in a subjective sense which does not exist outside the soul except 
potentially, as is also the case with the universal. And this is the way in which 
the ancient philosophers considered the First Principle, and they regarded it 
as a simple existent. As to the later philosophers in Islam, they stated that, in 
their speculation about the nature of the existent qua existent, they were led 
to accept a simple existent of this description. 


The best method to follow, in my opinion, and the nearest to strict proof, is 
to say that the actualization of existents which have in their substance a 
possible existence necessarily occurs only through an actualizer which is in 
act, i. e. acting, and moves them and draws them out of potency into act. And 
if this actualizer itself is also of the nature of the possible, i. e. possible in its 
substance, there will have to be another actualizer for it, necessary in its 
substance and not possible, so that this sublunary world may be conserved, 
and the nature of the possible causes may remain everlastingly, proceeding 
without end. And if these causes exist without end, as appears from their 
nature, and each of them is possible, necessarily their cause, i. e. that which 
determines their permanence, must be something necessary in its substance, 
and if there were a moment in which nothing was moved at all, there would be 
no possibility of an origination of movements The nexus between temporal 
existence and eternal can only take place without a change affecting the First 
through that movement which is partly eternal, partly temporal. b And the 
thing moved by this movement is what Avicenna calls ‘the existence necessary 
through another’, and this ‘necessary through another’ must be a body 
everlastingly moved, and in this way it is possible that the essentially temporal 
and corruptible should exist in dependence on the eternal, and this through 
approach to something and through recession from it, as you observe it 
happen to transitory existents in relation to the heavenly bodies. ? And since 


this moved body is necessary in its substance, possible in its local movement, 


322 


it is necessary that the process should terminate in an absolutely necessary 
existent in which there is no potency at all, either in its substance, or locally or 
in any of the other forms of movement; and that which is of this description is 
necessarily simple, because if it were a compound, it would be possible, not 
necessary, and it would require a necessary existent. And this method of 


proving it is in my opinion sufficient, and it is true. 


However, what Avicenna adds to this proof by saying that the possible 
existent must terminate either in an existent necessary through another or in 
an existent necessary through itself, and in the former case that the necessary 
through another should be a consequence of the existent necessary through 
itself, for he affirms that the existent necessary through another is in itself a 
possible existent and what is possible needs something necessary-this 
addition, is to my mind superfluous and erroneous, for in the necessary, in 
whatever way you suppose it, there is no possibility whatsoever and there 
exists nothing of a single nature of which it can be said that it is in one way 
possible and in another way necessary in its existence. ‘ For the philosophers 
have proved that there is no possible whatsoever in the necessary; for the 
possible is the opposite of the necessary, and the only thing that can happen is 
that a thing should be in one way necessary, in another way possible, as they 
believed for instance to be the case with the heavenly body or what is above 
the body of the heavens, namely that it was necessary through its substance 
and possible in its movement and in space. What led Avicenna to this division 
was that he believed that the body of the heavens was essentially necessary 
through another, possible by itself, and we have shown in another place that 
this is not true. And the proof which Avicenna uses in dealing with the 
necessary existent, when this distinction and this indication are not made, is 
of the type of common dialectical notions; when, however, the distinction is 
made, it is of i the type of demonstrative proof. 


You must know further that the becoming of which the Holy Law speaks is 
of the kind of empirical becoming in this world, and this occurs in the forms 
of the existents which the Ash’arites call mental qualitiesand the philosophers 
call forms, and this becoming occurs only through another thing and in time, 
and the Holy Words: ‘Have not those who have disbelieved considered that 
the heavens and the earth were coherent, and we have rent them... ‘and the 


323 


Divine Words ‘then he straightened himself up to the sky which was smoke... 
‘, refer to this. But as to the relation which exists between the nature of the 
possible existent and the necessary existent, about this the Holy Law is silent, 
because it is too much above the understanding of the common man and 
knowledge of it is not necessary for his blessedness. When the Ash/arites 
affirm that the nature of the possible’ is created and has come into existence 
in time out of nothing (a notion which all the philosophers oppose, whether 
they believe in the temporal beginning of the world or not), they do not say 
this, if you consider the question rightly, on the authority of the law of Islam, 
and there is no proof for it. What appears from the Holy Law is the 
commandment to abstain from investigating that about which the Holy Law is 
silent, and therefore it is said in the Traditions: ‘The people did not cease 
thinking till they said: God has created this, but who has created God? And the 
Prophet said: When one of you finds this, this is an act of pure faith’, and in 
another version: ‘When one of you finds this, let him read the verse of the 
Qur’an: Say, He, God is one. And know that for the masses to turn to such a 
question comes from the whisperings of Satan and therefore the prophet said: 
This is an act of pure faith. 


Ghazali says: 


The second way is to say that an existence without quiddity 
or essence cannot be conceived, and just as mere non-existence, 
without a relation to an existent the non-existence of which can 
be supposed, cannot be conceived, in the same way existence 
can be only conceived in relation to a definite essence, 
especially when it is defined as a single essence; for how could it 
be defined as single, conceptually differentiated from others, if 
it had not a real essence? For to deny the quiddity is to deny the 
real essence, and when you deny the real essence of the existent, 
the existent can no longer be understood. It is as if the 
philosophers affirmed at the same time existence and a non- 
existent, which is contradictory. This is shown by the fact that, 
if it were conceivable, it would be also possible in the effects 
that there should be an existence without an essence, 
participating with the First in not having a real essence and a 


324 


quiddity, differing from it in having a cause, whereas the First is 
causeless. And why should such an effect not be imagined? And 
is there any other reason for this than that it is inconceivable in 
itself? But what is inconceivable in itself does not become 
conceivable by the denial of its cause, nor does what is 
conceivable become inconceivable because it is supposed to 
have a cause. Such an extreme negation is the most obscure of 
their theories, although they believe indeed that they have 
proved what they say. Their doctrine ends in absolute negation, 
and indeed the denial of the quiddity is the denial of the real 
essence, and through the denial of this reality nothing remains 
but the word ‘existence’, which has no object at all when it is 
not related to a quiddity. ‘ 


And if it is said: ‘Its real essence is that it is the necessary, 
and the necessary is its quiddity’, we answer: ‘The only sense of 
“necessary” is “causeless”, and this is a negation which does not 
constitute a real essence; and the denial of a cause for the real 
essence presupposes the real essence, and therefore let the 
essence be conceivable, so that it can be described as being 
causeless; but the essence cannot be represented as non- 
existent, since “necessity” has no other meaning than “being 


¢ 


causeless”. Besides, if the necessity were added to the 
existence, this would form a plurality; and if it is not added, 
how then could it be the quiddity? For the existence is not the 
quiddity, and thus what is not added to the existence cannot be 


the quiddity either. ‘ 
I say: 


This whole paragraph is sophistry. For the philosophers do not assume that 
the First has an existence without a quiddity and a quiddity without an 
existence. They believe only that the existence in the compound is an 
additional attribute to its essence and it only acquires this attribute through 
the agent, and they believe that in that which is simple and causeless this 
attribute is not additional to the quiddity and that it has no quiddity 


325 


differentiated from its existence; but they do not say that it has absolutely no 
quiddity, as he assumes in his objection against them. 


Having assumed that they deny the quiddity-which is false Ghazali begins 
now to charge them with reprehensible theories and says: 


If this were conceivable it would also be possible in the 
effects that there should be an existence without an essence, 
participating with the First in not having a real essence. 


I say: 


But the philosophers do not assume an existent absolutely without a 
quiddity: they only assume that it has not a quiddity like the quiddities of the 
other existents; and this is one of the sophistical fallacies, for the term 
‘quiddity is ambiguous, and this assumption, and everything built upon it, is 
a sophistical argument, for the non-existent cannot be described either by 
denying or by affirming something of it. And Ghazali, by fallacies of the kind 
perpetrated in this book, is not exempt from wickedness or from ignorance, 
and he seems nearer to wickedness than to ignorance-or should we say that 
there is a necessity which obliged him to do this? 


And as to his remark, that the meaning of ‘necessary existent’ is , 
causeless’, this is not true, but our expression that it is a necessary existent 
has a positive meaning, consequent on a nature which has absolutely no 
cause, no exterior agent, and no agent which is part of it. 


And as to Ghazali’s words: 


If the necessity were added to the existence, this would form 
a plurality; and if it is not added, how then could it be the 
quiddity? For existence is not the quiddity, and thus what is not 
added to the existence cannot be the quiddity either. 


I say: 


According to the philosophers necessity is not an attribute added to the 
essence, and it is predicated of the essence in the same way as we say of it that 
it is inevitable and eternal. ‘ And likewise if we understand by ‘existence’ a 
mental attribute, it is not an addition to the essence, but if we understand it as 


326 


being an accident, in the way Avicenna regards it in the composite existent, 
then it becomes difficult to explain how the uncompounded can be the 
quiddity itself, although one might say perhaps: ‘In the way the knowledge in 
the uncompounded becomes the knower himself. ‘ If, however, one regards 
the existent as the true, all these doubts lose their meaning, and likewise, if 
one understands ‘existent’ as having the same sense as ‘entity’, and according 
to this it is true that the existence in the uncompounded is the quiddity itself. 








THE NINTH DISCUSSION 








TO REFUTE THEIR PROOF THAT THE FIRST IS INCORPOREAL 


Ghazali says: 


There is a proof only for him who believes that body is only 
temporal, because it cannot be exempt from what is temporal 
and everything that is temporal needs a creator. But you, when 
you admit an eternal body which has no beginning for its 
existence, although it is not exempt from temporal occurrences, 
why do you regard it as impossible that the First should be a 
body, either the sun, or the extreme heaven, or something else? 


If the answer is made ‘Because body must be composite and 
divisible into parts quantitatively, and into matter and form 
conceptually, and into qualities which characterize it 
necessarily so that it can be differentiated from other bodies 
(for otherwise all bodies in being body would be similar) and 
the necessary existent is one and cannot be divided in any of 
these ways’ we answer: ‘We have already refuted you in this, 
and have shown that you have no proof for it except that a 
collection is an effect, since some of its parts require others, and 
we have argued against it and have shown that when it is not 
impossible to suppose an existent without a creator, it is not 
impossible to suppose a compound without a composing 


327 


principle and to suppose many existents without a creator, 
since you have based your denial of plurality and duality on the 
denial of composition and your denial of composition on the 
denial of a quiddity distinct from existence, and with respect to 
the last principle we have asked for its foundation and we have 


shown that it is a mere presumption. ‘ 


And if it is said: ‘If a body has no soul, it cannot be an agent, 
and when it has a soul, well, then its soul is its cause, and then 
body cannot be the First’, we answer: “Our soul is not the cause 
of the existence of our body, nor is the soul of the sphere in 
itself a cause of its body, according to you, but they are two, 
having a distinct cause; and if they can be eternal, it is possible 
that they have no cause. ‘ 


And if the question is asked, ‘How can the conjunction of 
soul and body come about? ‘, we answer, ‘One might as well ask 
how the existence of the First comes about; the answer is that 
such a question may be asked about what is temporal, but 
about what is eternally existent one cannot ask how it has come 
about, and therefore” since body and its soul are both eternally 
existent, it is not impossible that their compound should be a 


creator. ‘ 
I say: 


When a man has no other proof that the First is not body than that he 
believes that all bodies are temporal, how weak is his proof, and how far 
distant from the nature of what has to be proved!-since it has been shown 
previously that the proofs on which the theologians build their statement that 
all bodies are temporal are conflicting; and what is more appropriate than to 
regard an eternal composite as possible, as I said in this book when speaking 
of the Ash/arites, i. e. in saying that according to them an eternal body is 
possible, since in the accidents there is some eternal element, according to 
their own theory, for instance, the characteristic of forming a compound; and 
therefore their proof that all bodies are temporal is not valid, because they 
base it exclusively on the temporal becoming of the accidents. ‘ The ancient 


328 


philosophers do not allow for the existence of a body eternal through itself, 
but only of one eternal through another, and therefore according to them 
there must be an existent eternal through itself through which the eternal 
body becomes eternal. But if we expound their theories here, they have only a 
dialectical value, and you should therefore instead ask for their proofs in their 
proper place. 


And as to Ghazali’s refutation of this, and his words: 


We answer: ‘We have already refuted you in this, and we 
have shown that you have no proof for this except that a 
collection is an effect, since some of its parts require others. 


I say: 


He means that he has discussed this already previously, and he says that 
the philosophers cannot prove that the existent necessary through itself is not 
a body, since the meaning of ‘existent necessary through itself is ‘that which 
has no efficient cause’, and why should they regard an eternal body which has 
no efficient cause as impossible-and especially when it should be supposed to 
be a simple body, indivisible quantitatively or qualitatively, and in short an 
eternal composite, without a composing principle? This is a sound argument 
from which they cannot escape except through dialectical arguments. z But all 
the arguments which Ghazali gives in this book either against or on behalf of 
the philosophers or against Avicenna are dialectical through the equivocation 
of the terms used, and therefore it is not necessary to expatiate on this. 


And as to his answer on behalf of the Ash’arites that what is eternal 
through itself does not need a cause for its eternity, and that when the 
theologians assume something eternal through itself and assume its essence 
as the cause of its attributes, this essence does not become eternal because of 
something else, 


I say: 


It is a necessary consequence to be held up against Ghazali that the Eternal 
will be composed of a cause and an effect, and that the attributes will be 


329 


eternal through their cause, i. e. the essence. And since the effect is not a 
condition for its own existence, the Eternal is the cause. And let us say that the 
essence which exists by itself is God and that the attributes are effects; then it 
can be argued against the theologians that they assume one thing eternal by 
itself and a plurality of things eternal through another, and that the 
combination of all these is God. But this is exactly their objection against 
those who say that God is eternal through Himself and the world eternal 
through another, namely God. Besides, they say that the Eternal is one, and all 
this is extremely contradictory. 


And as to Ghazali’s statement that to assume a compound without the 
factor which composes it, is not different from assuming an existent without a 
creator, and that the assumption either of a single existent of this description 
or of a plurality is not an impossible supposition for the mind, all this is 
erroneous. For composition does not demand a composing factor which again 
itself is composed, but there must be a series leading up to a composing factor 
composing by itself, just as, when the cause is an effect, there must finally be a 
cause which is not an effect. Nor is it possible, by means of an argument 
which leads to an existent without a creator, to prove the oneness of this 


existent. ‘ 


And as to his assertion that the denial of the quiddity implies the denial of 
the composition, and that this implies the assertion of composition in the 
First, this is not true. And indeed the philosophers do not deny the quiddity of 
the First, but only deny that it has the kind of quiddity which is in the effects, 
and all this is a dialectical and doubtful argument. And already previously in 
this book we have given convincing arguments, according to the principles of 
the philosophers, to prove that the First is incorporeal, namely that the 
possible leads to a necessary existent and that the possible does not proceed 
from the necessary except through the mediation of an existent which is 
partly necessary, partly possible, and that this is the body of the heavens and 
its circular motion; and the most satisfactory way of expressing this according 
to the principles of the philosophers is to say that all bodies are finite in 
power, and that they only acquire their power of infinite movement through 


an incorporeal being. ‘ 


330 


Ghazali answering the objection which infers that according to the 
philosophers the agent is nothing but the sphere, composed of soul and body, 


says: 


If it is answered: “This cannot be so, because body in so far 
as it is body does not create anything else and the soul which is 
attached to the body does not act except through the mediation 
of the body, but the body is not a means for the soul in the 
latter’s creating bodies or in causing the existence of souls and 
of things which are not related to bodies’, we answer: ‘And why 
is it not possible that there should be amongst the souls a soul 
which has the characteristic of being so disposed that both 
bodies and incorporeals are produced through it? The 
impossibility of this is not a thing known necessarily, nor is 
there a proof for it, except that we do not experience this in the 
bodies we observe; but the absence of experience does not 
demonstrate its impossibility, and indeed the philosophers 
often ascribe things to the First Existent which are not generally 
ascribed to existents, and are not experienced in any other 
existent, and the absence of its being observed in other things is 
not a proof of its impossibility in reference to the First Existent, 
and the same holds concerning the body and its soul. ‘ 


I say: 


As to his assertion that bodies do not create bodies, if by ‘creating’ is 
understood producing, the reverse is true, for a body in the empirical world 
can only come into being through a body, , and an animated body only 
through an animated body, but the absolute body does not come into being at 
all, for, if it did, it would come into being from non-existence, not after non- 
existence. ‘ Individual bodies only come into being out of individual bodies 
and through individual bodies, and this through the body’s being transferred 
from one name to another and from one definition to another, so that for 
instance the body of water changes into the body of fire, because out of the 
body of water is transformed the attribute through the transformation of 
which the name and definition of water is transferred to the name and 


331 


definition of fire, and this happens necessarily through a body which is the 
agent, participating with the becoming body specifically or generically in 
either a univocal or an analogical ways and whether the individual special 
corporeality in the water is transformed into the individual special 
corporeality of the fire is a problem to be studied. 


And as to Ghazali’s words: 


But the body is not a means for the soul in the latter’s 
creating bodies or in causing the existence of souls, 


I say: 


This is an argument which he builds on an opinion some of the 
philosophers hold, that the bestower of forms on inanimate bodies and of 
souls is a separate substance, either intellect or a separate soul, and that it is 
not possible that either an animated body or an inanimate body should 
supply this. And if this opinion is held and at the same time it is assumed that 
heaven is an animated body, it is no longer possible for heaven to supply any 
of the transitory forms, either the soul or any other of these forms. For the 
soul which is in the body only acts through the mediation of the body, and 
that which acts through the mediation of the body can produce neither form 
nor soul, since it is not of the nature of the body to produce a substantial 
form, either a soul or any other substantial form. And this theory resembles 
that of Plato about forms separate from matter, and is the in theory of 
Avicenna and others among the Muslim philosophers; their proof is that the 
body produces in the body only warmth or cold or moisture or dryness, ? and 
only these are acts of the heavenly bodies according to them. But that which 
produces the substantial forms, and especially those which are animated, is a 
separate substance which they call the giver of forms. ‘ But there are 
philosophers’ who believe the contrary and affirm that what produces the 
forms in the bodies is bodies possessing forms similar to them either 
specifically or generically, those similar specifically being the living bodies 
which produce the living bodies of the empirical world, like the animals which 
are generated from other animals, whereas those forms produced by forms 
generically similar, and which are not produced from a male or a female, 
receive their lives according to the philosophers from the heavenly bodies, 


332 


since these are alive. And these philosophers have non-empirical proofs 
which, however, need not be mentioned here. 


And therefore Ghazali argues against them in this way: 


And why is it not possible that there should be among the 
souls a soul which has the characteristic of being so disposed 
that both bodies and incorporeals are produced through it? 


I say: 


He means: ‘Why should it not be possible that there should be among the 
souls in bodies souls which have the characteristic of generating other 
animate and inanimate forms? ‘ And how strange it is that Ghazali assumes 
that the production of body out of body does not happen in the empirical 
world, whereas nothing else is ever observed. 


But you must understand that when the statements of the philosophers are 
abstracted from the demonstrative sciences they certainly become dialectical, 
whether they are generally acknowledged, or, if not, denied and regarded as 
strange. The reason is that demonstrative statements are only distinguished 
from statements which are not demonstrative, by being considered in the 
genus of science which is under investigation. Those statements which can be 
subsumed under the definition of this genus of science, or which comprise in 
their definition this genus of science, are demonstrative, and those statements 
which do not seem to fulfil these conditions are not demonstrative. 
Demonstration is only possible when the nature of this genus of science under 
investigation is defined, and the sense in which its essential predicates exist is 
distinguished from the sense in which they do not, and when this is retained 
in mind by keeping to that sense in every statement adopted in this science, 
and by having the identical meaning always present in the mind. And when 
the soul is convinced that the statement is essential to this genus or a 
necessary consequence of its essence, the statement is true; but when this 
relation does not enter into the mind, or when it is only weakly established, 
the statement is only an opinion, and is not evident. And therefore the 
difference between proof and convincing opinion is more delicate than the 
appearance of a hair and more completely hidden than the exact limit 
between darkness and light, especially in theological questions which are laid 


333 


before the common people, because of the confusion between what is essential 
and what is accidental. Therefore we see that Ghazali, by relating the theories 
of the philosophers in this and others of his books and by showing them to 
people who have not studied their works with the necessary preparation the 
philosophers demand, changes the nature of the truth which exists in their 
theories or drives most people away from all their views. And by so doing he 
does more harm than good to the cause of truth. And God knows that I should 
not have related a single one of their views, or regarded this as permissible, 
but for the harm which results from Ghazali’s doings to the cause of wisdom; 
and I understand by ‘wisdom’ speculation about things according to the rules 
of the nature of proof. 


Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers: 


If it is said that the highest sphere, or the sun, or whatever 
body you may imagine, possesses a special size which may be 
increased or decreased, and this possible size needs for its 
differentiation a differentiating principle and can therefore not 
be the First, ‘ we answer: By what argument will you refute the 
man who says that this body must have the size it possesses for 
the sake of the order of the universe, and this order could not 
exist if this body were smaller or larger-since you philosophers 
yourselves affirm that the first effect’ determines the size of the 
highest sphere because all sizes are equivalent in relation to the 
essence of the first effect, but certain sizes are determined for 
the sake of the order which depends on them and therefore the 
actual size is necessary and no other is possible; and all this 
holds just as well when no effect is assumed. Indeed, if the 
philosophers had established in the first effect, which is 
according to the philosophers the cause of the highest sphere, a 
specifying principle, as for instance the will, a further question 
might be put, since it might be asked why this principle willed 
this actual size rather than another, in the way the philosophers 
argued against the Muslims about their theory of the relation 
between the temporal world and the Eternal Will, an argument 
which we turned against them with respect to the problems of 


334 


the determination of the direction of the heavenly movement 
and of the determination of the points of the poles. And if it is 
clear that they are forced to admit that a thing is differentiated 
from a similar one and that this happens through a cause, it is 
unessential whether this differentiation be regarded as possible 
without a cause or through a cause, for it is indifferent whether 
one puts the question about the thing itself and asks why it has 
such-and such a size, or whether one puts the question about 
the cause, and asks why it gave this thing this special size; and if 
the question about the cause may be answered by saying that 
this special measure is not like any other, because the order 
depends on it exclusively, the same answer may be made about 
the thing itself, and it will not need a cause. And there is no 
escape from this. For if the actual size which has been 
determined and has been realized were equivalent to the size 
which has not been realized, one might ask how one thing 
comes to be differentiated from a similar one, especially 
according to the principle of the philosophers who do not admit 
a differentiating will. If, however, there is no similar size, no 
possibility exists, and one must answer: “This has been so from 
all eternity, and in the same way therefore as, according to the 
philosophers, the eternal cause exists. “ And let the man who 
studies this question seek help from what we said about their 
asking about the eternal will, a question which we turned 
against them with respect to the points of the poles and the 
direction of the movement of the sphere. It is therefore clear 
that the man who does not believe in the temporal creation of 
the bodies cannot establish a proof that the First is incorporeal. 


I say: 


This indeed is a very strange argument of Ghazali’s. For he argues that they 
cannot prove another creator than the heavenly body, since they would have 
to give an answer by a principle in which they do not believe. For only the 
theologians accept this principle, since they say that heaven receives the 
determinate size it has, to the exclusion of other sizes it might have, from a 


335 


differentiating cause, and that the differentiating principle must be eternal. 
He either attempted to deceive in this matter or was himself deceived. For the 
differentiation which the philosophers infer is different from that which the 
Ash’arites intend, for the Ash’arites understand by ‘differentiation’ the 
distinguishing of one thing either from a similar one or from an opposite one 
without this being determined by any wisdom in the thing itself which makes 
it necessary to differentiate one of the two opposite things. The philosophers, 
on the other hand, understand here by the differentiating principle only that 
which is determined by the wisdom in the product itself, namely the final 
cause, for according to them there is no quantity or quality in any being that 
has not an end based on wisdom, an end which must either be a necessity in 
the nature of the act of this being or exist in it, based on the principle of 
superiority. ‘ For if, so the philosophers believe, there were in created things a 
quantity or quality not determined by wisdom, they would have attributed to 
the First Maker and Creator an attitude in relation to His work which may be 
only attributed to the artisans among His creatures, with the intention of 
blaming them. For when one has observed a work with respect to its quantity 
and quality, and asked why the maker of this work chose this quantity or this 
quality to the exclusion of all other possible quantities and qualities, there is 
no worse mistake than to answer ‘Not because of the intrinsic wisdom and 
thoughtfulness in the product itself, but because he willed it, ‘ since according 
to this view all quantities and qualities are similar with respect to the end of 
this product, which in fact the maker produced for its own sake, namely for 
the sake of the act for whose purpose it exists. For indeed every product is 
produced in view of something in it which would not proceed from it, if this 
product had no definite quantity, quality and nature, although in some 
products an equivalent is possible. If any product whatever could determine 
any act whatever, there would exist no wisdom at all in any product, and there 
would be no art at all, and the quantities and qualities of the products would 
depend on the whim of the artisan and every man would be an artisan. Or 
should we rather say that wisdom exists only in the product of the creature, 
not in the act of the Creator? But God forbid that we should believe such a 
thing of the First Creator; on the contrary, we believe that everything in the 
world is wisdom, although in many things our understanding of it is very 
imperfect and although we understand the wisdom of the Creator only 


336 


through the wisdom of nature. And if the world is one single product of 
extreme wisdom, there is one wise principle whose existence the heavens and 
the earth and everything in them need. Indeed, nobody can regard the 
product of such wonderful wisdom as caused by itself, and the theologians in 
their wish to elevate the Creator have denied Him wisdom and withheld from 
Him the noblest of His qualities. 








THE TENTH DISCUSSION 








TO PROVE THEIR INCAPACITY TO DEMONSTRATE THAT THE 
WORLD HAS A CREATOR AND A CAUSE, AND THAT IN FACT 
THEY ARE FORCED TO ADMIT ATHEISM 


Ghazali says: 


Their statement that body needs a creator and a cause can 
be understood from the theory of those’ who argue that all 
bodies are temporal, because they cannot exist without what is 
temporal. But what keeps you philosophers from the doctrine of 
the materialists, namely that the world is eternal in the 
condition in which it actually is, and that it has no cause and no 
creator, that there is only a cause for temporal events and that 
no body comes into existence and no body is annihilated, and 
that only forms and accidents come into existence, for the 
bodies are the heavens (which are eternal) and the four 
elements, which are the stuff of the sublunary world, and their 
bodies and matters are eternal too, and there is only a change of 
forms in them through mixtures and alterations ;and that the 
souls of men and animals and plants come into existence, that 
all the causes of these temporal events terminate in the circular 
movement, and that the circular movement is eternal and its 
source the eternal soul of the sphere. Therefore there is no 
cause for the world and no creator for its bodies, but since the 


world, as it is, is eternal, there is no cause for it, i. e. no cause 


337 


for its bodies. For indeed, what sense is there in the doctrine of 
the philosophers that these bodies exist through a cause, 
although they are eternal? 


I say: 


The philosophers assert that the man who says that all bodies have been 
produced (and by ‘produced’ must be understood creation ex nihilo) gives a 
meaning to the term ‘produced’ which is never found in the empirical world, 
and his statement surely stands in need of a proof. As to his attacks on the 
philosophers in this passage, so that he even forces on them the implication of 
atheism, we have already answered them previously and there is no sense in 
repeating ourselves, but, in short, the philosophers hold that body, be it 
temporal or eternal, cannot be independent in existence through itself; and 
this principle is, according to the philosophers, binding for the eternal body in 
the same way as for the temporal, although imagination does not help to 
explain how this is the case with the eternal body in the way it is with the 
temporal body. Aristotle therefore, in the second book of De caelo et mundo, 
when he wanted to explain the fact that the earth was circular by nature, first 
assumed it to have come into being in time so that the intellect might imagine 
its cause, and then transferred its existence to eternity. 


Having forced on the philosophers these reprehensible deductions, Ghazali 


now gives an answer in defence of them and objects then to their answer. 
Ghazali says: 


And if the philosophers say: ‘Everything that has no cause is 
of a necessary existence, and we philosophers have already 
mentioned the qualities of the necessary existent through which 
it is proved that body cannot be the necessary existent, ‘ we 
answer: We have shown the mistake in your claim about the 
attributes of the necessary existent, and that your proof does 
not demonstrate anything but the termination of a causal 
series, and this termination also exists for the materialists at the 
beginning of things, , for they say that there is no cause for the 
bodies, and the forms and accidents are causes for each other 


and terminate in the circular movement part of which is the 


338 


cause of another part in the same way as it takes place 
according to the doctrine of the philosophers, and this causal 


series’ ends in this circular movement. 


And the man who observes what we have related will 
understand the inability of those who believe in the eternity of 
bodies to claim at the same time that they have a cause, and the 
consequence of their theory is atheism and apostasy, which one 
party has clearly admitted, those namely who rely solely on the 


determinations of the intellect. 
I say: 


All this has been already answered, and its degree of truth has been stated, 
and there is no reason to repeat ourselves. And as to the materialists, they rely 
only on the senses, and when according to them the movements had 
terminated in the heavenly body and through this the causal series was ended, 
they thought that where sensation had come to a limit, the intellect also had 
come to a limit; but this is not true. But the philosophers considered the 
causes till they ended in the heavenly body, then they considered the 
intelligible causes and arrived at an existent which cannot be perceived and 
which is the principle of perceptible being, and this is the meaning of the 
words: ‘Thus did we show Abraham the Kingdom of Heaven and of the earth . 
... ‘The Ash’arites, however, rejected sensible causes; that is, they denied that 
certain sensible things are the causes of other sensible things, and they made 
the cause of sensible being a nonsensible being by a way of becoming which is 
neither experienced nor perceived, and they denied causes and effects; and 
this is a kind of view which is inconsistent with the nature of man in so far as 


he is man. 
Ghazali says, objecting to the argument of the philosophers: 


If it is said that the proof that body is not a necessary 
existent is that, if it were a necessary existent, it would have 
neither an external nor an internal cause, but if it has a cause 
for its being composed, it will be possible in respect of its 
essence, and every possible needs a necessary existent, we 
answer: The terms ‘necessary existent’ and ‘possible existent’ 


339 


are devoid of sense, and your whole confusion lies in these 
terms; but let us revert to their plain sense, which is the denial 
and the affirmation of a cause, for then your words amount to 
nothing else but saying that bodies either have a cause or not, 
and the materialists affirm the latter, ‘and why should you deny 
it? And when this is understood by ‘possibility and ‘necessity’, 
we say body is necessary and not possible, and your statement 
that body cannot be necessary is pure presumption without any 
foundation. 


I say: 


We have already said that if by ‘necessary existent’ is understood the 
causeless and by ‘possible existent’ is understood that which has a cause, the 
division of being into these two sections is not acknowledged, and opponents 
might say that this division is not true, but that, indeed, all existents are 
causeless. But when by ‘necessary existent’ is understood absolute necessary 
being and by ‘possible’ the genuinely possible, then we must arrive at a being 
which has no cause, for we can say that every being is either possible or 
necessary; if possible, it has a cause, and if this cause is of the nature of the 
possible, we have a series which ends in a necessary cause. Then, concerning 
this necessary cause it may be asked again whether some necessary beings 
might have a cause and other necessary beings none, and if a cause is ascribed 
to the nature of the necessary being which can have a cause, there will follow a 
series which ends in a necessary being which has no cause. Avicenna wanted 
by this division only to conform to the opinion of the philosophers 
concerning existents, for all philosophers agree that the body of the heavens is 
necessary through something else; whether, however, this thing necessary 
through another is possible by itself is a problem which has to be studied. 
And this argument is therefore faulty when this method is followed, and this 
method is of necessity faulty, because being is not primarily divided into the 
genuinely possible and the necessary, for this is a division which is only 
known through the nature of existing things. 


Then Ghazali answers the philosophers’ statement that body cannot be a 
necessary existent by itself, because it has parts which are its cause. 


340 


If it is said: ‘It cannot be denied that body has parts, and 
that the whole is only constituted through the parts, and that 
the parts in a thing are prior to the whole, ‘ we answer: ‘Let it be 
so; certainly, the whole is constituted by the parts and their 
aggregation, but there is no cause for the parts nor for their 
aggregation, which on the contrary are eternally in the 
condition in which they are without an efficient cause. ‘ And the 
philosophers cannot refute this, except by the argument of 
theirs which we have mentioned, which is based on the denial of 
plurality in the First; we have shown its futility, and apart from 
it there is no other method. It is therefore clear that for the man 
who does not believe in the temporal creation of bodies there is 
no foundation for believing in a creator at all. 


I say: 


This argument is, without doubt, binding for the man who follows the 
method of a necessary existent to prove the existence of an incorporeal being, 
but this is not the method followed by the ancient philosophers, and the first, 
so far as we know, who used it was Avicenna. He said that it was superior to 
the proof of the ancients, because the ancients arrived only at an immaterial 
being, the principle of the universe, through derivative things, namely motion 
and time; whereas this proof, according to Avicenna, arrives at the assertion 
of such a principle as the ancients established, through the investigation of 
the nature of the existent in so far as it is an existent. If indeed it did arrive at 
such an affirmation, what Avicenna says would be true; however, it does not. ‘ 
For the most that could be affirmed of the existent necessarily existing by 
itself would be that it is not composed of matter and form, and generally 
speaking that it has no definition. But if it is supposed to exist as composed of 
eternal parts which are continuous by nature, as is the case with the world and 
its parts, it may indeed be said of the world with its parts that it is a necessary 
existent, z it being of course understood that there is a necessary existent. And 
we have already said that the method Avicenna followed to establish an 
existent of this description is not demonstrative and does not by nature lead 
to it, except in the way we have stated. The utmost consequence of this 
argument-and this constitutes its weakness-is the theory of those, namely the 


341 


Peripatetics, who assume that there exists a simple body not composed of 
matter and form. For the man who assumes an eternal compound of actual 
parts must necessarily acknowledge that it is essentially one, and every 
oneness in a compound is one through an essential unity, namely a simple, 
and through this unity the world becomes one, and therefore Alexander of 
Aphrodisias says that there must exist a spiritual force which is diffused in all 
the parts of the universe in the same way as there is a force in all the parts of a 
single animal which binds them together, and the difference between the two 
forces is that the binding force in the world is eternal, because the conjoining 
principle is eternal, whereas the conjunction between the parts of the 
sublunary animal is individually transitory-although, through the eternal 
conjunction, not specifically transitory-since it cannot be individually 
imperishable like the world . z And through this theory the Creator will be 
deprived of that very kind of perfection which nothing else can equal, as 
Aristotle says in his book De animalibus. And we see nowadays that many of 
Avicenna’s followers because of this aporia ascribe this opinion to him, and 
they say that he does not believe that there exists a separate existence, and 
they assert that this can be seen from what he says about the necessary 
existent in many passages, and that this is the view which he has laid down in 
his Oriental Philosophy, and they say that he only called this book Oriental 
Philosophy’ because it is the doctrine of the Orientals; for they believed that 
according to the Orientals divinity is located in the heavenly bodies, as 
Avicenna himself had come to believe. However, notwithstanding this they 
accept Aristotle’s argument to prove the First Principle through movement. 


And as for ourselves, we have discussed this argument at other times and 
have shown in what sense it can be regarded as evident, and we have solved all 
the doubts concerning it; we have also discussed Alexander’s argument on 
this question, namely the one he uses in his book called On the printiples. s 
For Alexander imagined that he was turning from Aristotle’s argument to 
another; his argument, however, is taken from the principles which Aristotle 
proved, and both arguments are sound, though the more usual is Aristotle’s. 


And when the argument for a necessary existent is verified, it is true 
according to me in the way I shall describe it, although it is used too generally 
and its different senses must be distinguished. It must, namely, be preceded 


342 


by knowledge of the different kinds of possible existents in substance and the 
different kinds of necessary existents in substance. And then this argument 
takes this form: The possible existent in bodily substance must be preceded by 
the necessary existent in bodily substance, and the necessary existent in 
bodily substance must be preceded by the absolute necessary existent which 
does not possess any potency whatsoever, either in its substance or in any 
other of the different kinds of movements, and such an entity is not a body. 
For instance, it appears from the nature of the body of the heavens that it is a 
necessary existent in its bodily substance, ‘ for otherwise there would have to 
be a body prior to it, and it appears also from its nature that it is a possible 
existent in its local movement; it is therefore necessary that its mover should 
be a necessary existent in its substance, and that there should be in it no 
potency whatsoever, either as regards movement or in any other respect, and 
that neither movement nor rest could be ascribed to it nor any other kind of 
change, and such an entity is absolutely without body and without any 
potency in a body. But the eternal parts of the world are only necessary 
existents in their substance, either universally like the four elements, or 
individually like the heavenly bodies. , 








THE ELEVENTH DISCUSSION 








TO SHOW THE INCAPACITY OF THOSE PHILOSOPHERS WHO 
BELIEVE THAT THE FIRST KNOWS OTHER THINGS BESIDE ITS 
OWN SELF AND THAT IT KNOWS THE GENERA AND THE 
SPECIES IN A UNIVERSAL WAY, TO PROVE THAT THIS IS SO 


Ghazali says: 


Since for the Muslims existence is confined to the temporal 
and the eternal, and there is for them nothing eternal except 
God and His attributes, and everything besides Him is 
temporally created by Him through His will, according to them 
the existent of necessity exists previously in His knowledge, for 
the object willed must be known by the willer. They deduced 
from this that the universe is known to Him, for the universe 


was willed by Him and produced by Him, and nothing comes 


343 


into existence but what is produced through His will, and 
nothing is everlasting but His essence alone. And when once it 
was established that God wills and knows what He wills, He 
must be necessarily living, ; and every living being is conscious 
of its own self, and He is the most capable of knowing Himself. 
Therefore the whole universe is known to God, and they 
understood this through this argument, since they had found 
that He willed everything that happens in the world. 


I say: 


He says this only as an introduction and preparation for the comparison 
between his theory and that of the philosophers about eternal 


knowledge, because his theory seems at first sight more satisfactory than that 
of the philosophers. But when the theory of the theologians is tested, and 
shown up to him for whom such an exposure is necessary, it becomes clear 
that they only made God an eternal man, , for they compared the world with 
the products of art wrought by the will and knowledge and power of man. And 
when it was objected against them that He must then have a body, they 
answered that He is eternal and that all bodies are temporal. They were 
therefore forced to admit an immaterial man who produces all existents. But 
this theory is nothing but a metaphor and a poetical expression; and 
metaphorical expressions are certainly very convincing, till they are explored, 
but then their deficiency becomes evident. For indeed there is no nature more 
distant from that of the transitory than that of the eternal. And if this is true, 
it cannot be that there should exist one single species which is differentiated 
by eternity and non-eternityz as one single genus is differentiated through the 
various differences into which it is divided. For the distance between the 
eternal and the temporal is far greater than that between the different species 
which participate in temporality. And if the distance between eternity and 
non-eternity is greater than that between the various species, how then is it 
possible to apply a judgement about the empirical world to the invisible: for 
those two are opposite extremes? And when you have understood the sense of 
the attributes which exist in the visible world and those which exist in the 
invisible world, it will be clear to you that through the ambiguity of the terms 


344 


they are so equivocal that they do not permit a transference from the visible 
to the invisible. 


Life, for instance, added to the intellect of man only applies to the 
potentiality of motion in space through will and sense-perception, ; but senses 
are impossible for the Creator and still more impossible for Him is motion in 
space. But the theologians ascribe to the Creator the faculty of sense- 
perception without sense-organs, and deny His movement absolutely. 
Therefore either they do not ascribe life to the Creator in the sense it has in 
the animal and which is a condition for the existence of knowledge in man, or 
they identify it with perception in the way the philosophers say that 
perception and knowledge in the First are identical with life. Further, the 
meaning of ‘will’ in man and in animal is a desire which rouses movement 
and which happens in animal and man to perfect a deficiency in their essence, 
and it is impossible that there should be in the Creator a desire because of an 
imperfection in His essence, which could be a cause of movement and action 
either in Himself or in something different from Himself. And how could an 
eternal will be imagined which should be the cause of an act occurring 
without an increase of the desire at the time of the act, , or how could a will 
and a desire be imagined which would be before, during, and after the act in 
the same state without any change occurring to them? And again, desire (in so 
far as it is __the cause of movement) and movement are only found in body, 
and desire is only found in the animate body. Therefore according to the 
philosophers the meaning of ‘will’ in God is nothing but that every act 
proceeds from Him through knowledge, and knowledge in so far as it is 
knowledge is the knowledge of opposites, either of which can proceed from 
Him. And the Knower is called excellent by the fact that there always proceeds 
from Him the better of the opposites to the exclusion of the worse. Therefore 
the philosophers say that three attributes are most appropriate to the Creator, 
namely that He has knowledge, excellence, and power. And they say that His 


power is not inferior to His will, as is the case with man. 


All this is the theory of the philosophers on this problem and in the way we 
have stated it here with its proofs, it is a persuasive not a demonstrative 
statement. It is for you to inquire about these questions in the places where 
they are treated in the books of demonstration, if you are one of the people of 


345 


perfect eudaemonia, and if you are one of those who learn the arts the 
function of which is proof. For the demonstrative arts are very much like the 
practical; for just as a man who is not a craftsman cannot perform the 
function of craftsmanship, in the same way it is not possible for him who has 
not learned the arts of demonstration to perform the function of 
demonstration which is demonstration itself: indeed this is still more 
necessary for this art than for any other-and this is not generally 
acknowledged in the case of this practice only because it is a mere act-and 
therefore such a demonstration can proceed only from one who has learned 
the art. The kinds of statement, however, are many, some demonstrative, 
others not, and since non-demonstrative statements can be adduced without 
knowledge of the art, it was thought that this might be also the case with 
demonstrative statements; but this is a great error. And therefore in the 
spheres of the demonstrative arts, no other statement is possible but a 
technical statement which only the student of this art can bring, just as is the 
case with the art of geometry. Nothing therefore of what we have said in this 
book is a technical demonstrative proof; they are all non-technical statements, 
some of them having greater persuasion than others, and it is in this spirit 
that what we have written here must be understood. So this book of Ghazali 
might be best given the name of the ‘Incoherence of both parties together’. 


All this in my opinion is in excess of the Holy Law, and an inquiry into 
something not ordered by a religious law because human power does not 
suffice for it. For not all knowledge about which the Holy Law is silent needs 
to be explored and explained to the masses as being, according to speculative 
thought, part of the dogmas of religion; for from this the greatest confusion 
arises. One must not speak about those things concerning which the Holy Law 
is silent; the masses must learn that human understanding is not sufficient to 
treat these problems, and must not go beyond what the teaching of the Holy 
Law explains in its texts, since this is teaching in which all can participate and 
which suffices for the attainment of their happiness. And just as the physician 
investigates the measure of health which agrees most with the healthy for the 
preservation of their health, and with the sick for the curing of their illness, so 
the Lord of the Holy Law instructs the masses only in so far as is needed for 
their acquisition of happiness. And the same thing holds in respect of the facts 


346 


of human behaviour, only the investigation of these facts in so far as the Holy 
Law is silent about them is more legitimate, especially when they are of the 
same genus as those about which the Law pronounces judgement. For this 
reason the lawyers disagree about this kind of facts; some of them, the 
Zahirites, deny the use of analogy, whereas others, the analogists, admit it, , 
and this is absolutely the same thing as happens in the sphere of knowledge, 
only perhaps the Zahirites are happier in the purely intellectual sphere than in 
the practical. 


And anyone amongst the two opposing parties who inquires after these 
questions must either belong to the followers of proof, i. e. the rationalists, or 
not; in the former case he will speak about them and base his statements on 
demonstration, he will know that this way of discussion is limited to the 
followers of proof, and he will know the places in which the Holy Law gives to 
the people who possess this kind of knowledge a hint about the conclusions to 
which demonstration leads; in the latter case he will be either a believer or an 
unbeliever: if he is a believer he will know that to discuss those questions is 
forbidden by the Holy Law, and if he is an unbeliever, it is not difficult for the 
followers of proof to refute him with the stringent proofs they possess. The 
rationalist must act in this way in every religion, but especially in our Divine 
Revelation, which although it is silent on certain intellectual problems 
nevertheless hints at the conclusions about them to which demonstration 
leads, without, however, mentioning these problems in its instruction of the 


masses. 


Since this is established, we shall revert now to our subject, which is forced 
upon us by necessity-for otherwise, by God, the Knower, the Witness, the 
Revealer, we should not think it permissible to discuss such questions in this 
way. And Ghazali, having described the arguments through which the 
theologians prove the attribute of knowledge and other attributes, and shown 
that they are very evident because they are generally admitted and extremely 
easy to accept, begins to compare these arguments with those of the 
philosophers about these attributes, and this is an act of rhetoric. ‘ 


Ghazali says, addressing the philosophers: 


347 


And you, philosophers, when you affirm that the world is 
eternal and not produced by God’s will, how do you know that 
He knows something beside His essence, for you require a proof 
of this? 


Then Ghazali says: 


And the summary of what Avicenna says to prove this in the 
course of his argument can be reduced to two heads: First, that 
the First does not exist in matter, and everything which does 
not exist in matter is pure intellect and all the intelligibles are 
revealed to it, for the obstacle to perceiving all things is 
attachment to matter and being occupied with matter, and the 
human soul is occupied by directing matter, i. e. its body, and 
when this occupation is terminated and it is not any longer 
defiled by the bodily passions and the despicable conditions 
which affect it through the things of nature, all the realities of 
the intelligibles are revealed to it, and therefore is it asserted 
that all the angels know all the intelligibles without exception, 
for they too are pure immaterial intellects. 


And having related their theory; Ghazali argues against them: 


But we say: If by your assertion that the First does not exist 
in matter, you mean that it is not a body, nor impressed on a 
body, but exists by itself not comprised by space nor locally 
specified by a direction, this is admitted by us. There remains 
then your answer to the question what its attribute is, namely 
that it is pure intellect-and what do you understand by 
‘intellect’? If you mean by it that which thinks all the other 
things, this is just what we are trying to find out and the point 
under discussion, and how, therefore, can you take it as the 
premiss of a syllogism which must prove it? And if you mean by 
it something else, namely that it thinks its own self-and some of 
your fellow-philosophers may concede this to you, but this 
amounts again to your saying that what thinks its own self 
thinks other things also-the answer to be made is ‘Why do you 


348 


claim this? For this is not known by necessity, and only 
Avicenna of all the philosophers affirmed it; and how can you 
claim this as necessary knowledge, or, if you know it by 
deduction, what is your proof? ‘ 


And if the assertion is made: “Because what prevents the 
perception of things is matter, and the First is not matter’, we 
answer: We concede that matter is an impediment, but we do 
not admit that it is the only impediment; and let them arrange 
their syllogism in the figure of the hypothetical syllogism and 
say: ‘If this First is in matter it cannot think things, but it is not 
in matter, therefore it thinks things. ‘ And this is the 
assumption as a minor premiss of the opposite of the 
antecedent, but such an assumption does not lead to a 
conclusion in all cases, for it is like saying: ‘If this is a man, it is 
an animal, but it is not a man, therefore it is not an animal’. But 
this is not a necessary conclusion, for although not a man, it 
might be a horse, and therefore an animal. The assumption as a 
minor premiss of the opposite of the antecedent is valid only 
conditionally, as we have shown in our logic-namely, when the 
consequent is universally convertible with the antecedent, as 
when the logicians say: ‘If the sun has risen, it is day, but the 
sun has not risen, therefore it is not day’, for the only cause of 
its being day is the fact that the sun has risen-an example in 
which antecedent and consequent are convertible with each 
other-and the explanation of these theories and terms can be 
understood from our book ‘The Touchstone of Knowledge’, 
which we have written as an appendix to this book. If, however, 
they say ‘We claim that antecedent and consequent are here 
convertible, and that the one and only obstacle to thinking is 
being in matter’, we answer: ‘This is a pure presumption; where 


is your proof? ‘ 


I say: 


349 


The first mistake he makes here is that, in relating the theory and the proof, 
he regards the premisses he mentions as first principles, whereas for the 
philosophers they are conclusions from many premisses. For the philosophers 
had seen that every sensible existent is composed of matter and form, and 
that the form is the entity through which the existent becomes existentand 
that it is the form which is designated by the name and the definitions and 
that the specific act proceeds from the form in every existent, and it is this act 
which shows the existence of the forms in the existent. b For they had found 
that in substances there are active potencies, particular to every single 
existent, and passive potencies, either particular or common, ? and that a 
thing cannot be passive by reason of the same thing as it is active; for activity 
is the opposite of passivity, and opposites do not admit each other, and it is 
only their substratum which admits them successively, e. g. hotness does not 
accept coldness, it is simply the hot body that accepts coldness by divesting 
itself of hotness and accepting coldness, and vice versa. Now when the 
philosophers found that this was the case with activity and passivity, they 
understood that all existents of this description were composed of two 
substances, a substance which is the act and a substance which is the potency, 
and they realized that the substance in act is the perfection of the substance in 
potency and that the substance in act stands in relation to the substance in 
potency as if it were the end of its actualization, for there is no actual 
difference between them. ‘ Then, when they looked through all the different 
forms of existents, they found that all these substances must necessarily lead 
up to a substance in act which is absolutely devoid of matter, and this 
substance must necessarily be active and cannot have any passivity and 
cannot be subject to exhaustion, weariness, and decay; for such things occur 
to the substance in act only because it is the perfection of the substance in 
potency, not because it is pure act. For since the substance in potency only 
goes forth into act through a substance in act, the series of substances which 
are at the same time both active and passive must terminate in a substance 
which is pure act, and the series must terminate in that substance. And the 
proof of the existence of this substance, in so far as it is a mover and agent, 
through essential particular premisses, can be found in the eighth book of 
Aristotle’s Physics. 


350 


Having established the existence of this substance by special and general 
arguments according to what is known in their books, the philosophers now 
investigated the nature of the forms in matter which produce motion, and 
they found some of them nearer to actuality and farther from potency because 
they are less than others involved in passivity, which is the special sign of the 
matter which exists in them. And they realized that that which among these 
forms is most destitute of matter is the soul, and especially the intellect, so 
that they started to doubt whether the intellect belongs to the forms which are 
in matter or not. z But when they investigated the perceiving forms amongst 
the forms of the soul and found that they were free from matter, they 
understood that the cause of perception consists in freedom from matter, ; 
and since they discovered that the intellect is without passivity they 
understood that the reason why one form is inorganic and another perceptive 
consists in the fact that when it is the perfection of a potency it is inorganic or 


¢ 


not percipient, ‘ and when it is pure perfection with which no potency is 
mixed it is intellect. ‘ All this they proved in a demonstrative order and by 
natural deductions which cannot be reproduced here in this demonstrative 
sequence, for this would involve collecting in one place what by its nature is 
treated in many different books, and anyone who has the slightest experience 
of the science of logic will acknowledge that this is an impossibility. Through 
arguments of this kind they came to realize that what has no passivity 
whatever is intellect and not body, for what is passive is body which exists in 


matter according to them. 


An objection against the philosophers in these questions ought to be made 
only against the first principles they use in the proof of these conclusions, not 
against those conclusions themselves, as it is made by Ghazali. Through this 
they came to understand that there exists here an existent which is pure 
intellect, and when they saw further that the order which reigns in nature and 
in the act of nature follows an intellectual plan very much like the plan of the 
craftsman, they realized that there must exist an intellect which causes these 
natural potencies to act in an intellectual way, and through these two points 
they received the conviction that this existent which is pure intellect is that 
which bestows on the existents the order and arrangement in their acts. And 
they understood from all this that its thinking its own self is identical with its 


351 


thinking all existents, and that this existent is not such that its thinking its 
own self is something different from the thought by which it thinks other 
things, as is the case with the human intellect. And about this intellect the 
disjunction assumed as a premiss, that every intellect either thinks its own 
self or thinks something else or thinks both together, is not valid. For when 
this disjunction is admitted, what is said is: ‘If it thinks other things, it is self- 
evident that it must think its own self; however, if it thinks its own self, it is 
not at all necessary that it should think other things. ‘ And we have discussed 
this previously. 


And all the things which he says about the hypothetical syllogism which he 
formed in the figure he explained are not true. For the hypothetical syllogism 
is only valid when the minor and the legitimacy of the inferenceare proved 
through one or more categorical syllogisms. For correct hypothetical 
inference in this question is: ‘If what does not think is in matter, then what is 
not in matter thinks. ‘ But, of course, first the truth of this conjunction and 
disjunction must be proved. ‘ And these are the premisses of which we said 
that they are according to the philosophers conclusions, whereas Ghazali 
pretends they are first principles for them, or nearly so. And when it is 
explained as we have done, it is a syllogism of a legitimate figure and of true 
premisses. As to its legitimate form, the minor is the opposite of the 
consequent and the conclusion is the opposite of the antecedent, not as 
Ghazali believed, the minor the opposite of the antecedent and the conclusion 
the opposite of the consequent. ‘ But since they are not first principles, nor 
generally acknowledged, nor evident at first sight, they are regarded, no 
doubt, by those who have never heard anything of these things as very much 
open to objection. But indeed Ghazali confused the sciences in a most terrible 
way, and he uprooted science from its foundation and its method. 


Ghazali says: 


The second argument is that the philosophers say: 
‘Although we assert neither that the First wills temporal 
production nor that it produces the world in time by secondary 
intention, we nevertheless affirm that the First has made the 
world and that indeed the world has its existence through the 


352 


First only, the First never losing its character as an agent and 
never ceasing to act; our theory only distinguishes itself from 
others in this point, in no way however with respect to the 
principle of the act. And since the agent must have knowledge 
in conformity with its act, the universe, according to us, exists 


through its act. ‘ 


But there are two ways to answer this, of which the first is: 
‘There are two kinds of action: voluntary, like the action of 
animal and man; and involuntary, like the action of the sun in 
producing light, of fire in producing heat, of water in producing 
cold. Now knowledge of the act is only necessary in voluntary 
acts, as in the human products of art, not in the acts of nature. 
But according to you philosophers, God has made the world 
consequent on His essence by nature and by necessity, not 
through will and choice; indeed, the universe is consequent on 
His essence, as light is on the sun, and just as the sun has no 
power to check its light, nor fire to repress its producing heat, 
so the First cannot check its acts. Now this kind of occurrence, 
although it may be called an act, does not imply knowledge at 
all. ‘ And if it is answered that there is a difference between the 
two things, in that the procession of the universe from God’s 
essence occurs through His knowledge of the universe and His 
representing the universal order in the course of the emamation 
of the universe, and He has no other cause than His knowledge 
of the universe, and His knowledge of the universe is identical 
with His essence, and if He had not this knowledge of the 
universe, the universe would not exist through Him, which is 
not the case with light in relation to the sun, we answer: ‘In this 
you are in contradiction to your fellow-philosophers, for they 
say that His essence is the essence from which the existence of 
the universe in its order follows naturally and necessarily, and 
it is not because He knows this. ‘ And what is wrong with this 
conception, once you agree with them in denying His will? And 
since the sun’s knowledge of its light is no condition for its 


353 


light, but its light is necessarily consequent on the sun, so let us 
accept this also in the case of the First; and nothing prevents 
this. ‘ 


I say: 


In this section Ghazali begins by saying something reprehensible about the 
philosophers, namely that the Creator possesses a will neither with respect to 
the things produced nor with respect to the universe as a whole, because His 
act proceeds from His essence necessarily like the procession of light from the 
sun. Then he says of them that they say that through His acting He must have 
knowledge. The philosophers, however, do not deny the will of God, nor do 
they admit that He has a human will, for the human will implies a deficiency 
in the willer and a being affected by the object willed, and when the object is 
attained, the deficiency is completed and the passivity, which is called will, 
ceases. The philosophers only attribute a will to God in the sense that the acts 
which proceed from Him proceed through knowledge, and everything which 
proceeds through knowledge and wisdom proceeds through the will of the 
agent, not, however, necessarily and naturally, since the nature of knowledge 
does not imply (as he falsely affirms of the philosophers) the proceeding of 
the act. For if the nature of knowledge did imply this, then, when we say that 
God knows the opposites, it would be necessary that the opposites should 
proceed from Him together, and this is absurd. The fact that only one of the 
opposites proceeds from Him shows that there is another attribute present 
beside knowledge, namely will, and it is in this way that the affirmation of will 
in the First must be understood according to the philosophers. z For God, 
according to the philosophers, necessarily knows and wills through His 
knowledge. As to Ghazali’s assertion that the act can be subdivided into two, 
into a natural act and a voluntary act, this is false. God’s act according to the 
philosophers is in a certain way not natural, nor is it absolutely voluntary; it is 
voluntary without having the deficiency which is attached to the human will. 
Therefore the term ‘will’ is attributed to the Divine Will and the human in an 
equivocal way, just as the term ‘knowledge ‘is attributed equivocally to eternal 
knowledge and to temporal. For the will in animals and man is a passivity 
which occurs to them through the object of desire 


354 


and is caused by it. This is the meaning of ‘will’ in the case of the human will, 
but the Creator is too exalted to possess an attribute which should be an 
effect. Therefore by ‘will’ in God only the procession of the act joined to 
knowledge can be understood. And ‘knowledge’, as we said, refers to the two 
opposites, and in the knowledge of God there is knowledge of the opposites in 
a certain way, and His performing only the one shows that there exists in Him 
another attribute which is called ‘will’. 


Ghazali says: 


The second way of answering is to concede that the 
procession of a thing from the agent implies knowledge of the 
thing which proceeds. Now, according to them, the act of God is 
one, namely the effect which is pure intellect, and God can only 
know this effect. The first effect again will only know what 
proceeds from it. For the universe does not proceed from God 
immediately, but through mediators and derivation and a series 
of consequences. For that which proceeds from what proceeds 
from Him need not be known to Him, and from Him Himself 
only one thing proceeds. And how should He know everything 
that proceeds mediately from Him? For this is not even 
necessary in voluntary acts, and how could it be necessary in 
natural acts? For the movement of a stone from the top of a 
mountain can occur through a voluntary propulsion which 
implies knowledge of the principle of motion, but does not 
imply knowledge of all the consequences which may occur 
through its knocking and breaking something. ‘ And to this 
again the philosophers have no answer. 


I answer: 


The answer to this is that the Agent whose knowledge is of the highest 
perfection knows everything which proceeds from Him and which proceeds 
from that which proceeds from Him, and so from the first term to the last. 
And if the knowledge of the First is of the highest perfection, the First must 
know everything that proceeds from it either mediately or immediately, and 


355 


its knowledge need not be of the same kind as our knowledge, for our 
knowledge is imperfect and posterior to the thing known. 


Then Ghazali says, answering the objection he brought forward against the 
philosophers: 


If, however, the philosophers should say: ‘If we declared that 
the First only knows its own self, this would be a very 
reprehensible doctrine, for all other beings know themselves 
and know the First, and would therefore be superior to it; and 
how can the effect be superior to the cause? 


I say: 


This is an insufficient answer, for it opposes a rational argument with a 


moral one. 
Then Ghazali answers this and says: 


We should answer: ‘This reprehensible doctrine is a 
necessary consequence for those who follow the philosophers in 
denying the Divine Will and the production of the world, and 
one must either adhere to it as the other philosophers do, or 
abandon the philosophers and acknowledge that the world is 
produced through will. ‘ 


I say: 


Ghazali means that if they belong to those who affirm that God knows His 
work, only to avoid the reprehensible doctrine that He does not know 
anything but His own self, they are forced to acknowledge this reprehensible 
doctrine just as well, since they affirmed another reprehensible doctrine, 
namely the eternity of the world and the denial of the Will. ‘ However, the 
philosophers do not deny the Will, and only deny that part of it which implies 
a deficiency. 


Then Ghazali says: 


How will you refute those philosophers who say that this 
knowledge does not add to God’s dignity, since other beings 


356 


need knowledge only in order to acquire perfection (for in their 
essence there is a deficiency) and man receives dignity through 
the intelligibles either that he may see his advantage in the 
coming events of this world and the next, or that his obscure 
and insufficient essence may be perfected, and likewise all the 
other creatures, but that the essence of God does not stand in 
need of perfection: nay, if a knowledge could be imagined 
through which He would be perfected, His essence, in so far as 
it is His essence, would be imperfect’ 


This is just the same kind of remark as your assertions, 
Avicenna, concerning His hearing and seeing and His knowing 
the particular beings which fall under the concept of time, for 
you agree with all the other philosophers in saying that God is 
too exalted for that, and that the changes which fall under the 
concept of time and which are divided into past and future 
events are not known to the First, since this would imply a 
change in its essence and a being influenced, and the denial of 
this does not imply an imperfection, but rather a perfection, 
and there is only an imperfection in the senses and the need for 
them. ‘ If there were not this human imperfection, man would 
not be in need of the senses to guard himself against any change 
which might affect him. And in the same way you affirm that 
the knowledge of particular events is an imperfection. And if it 
is true that we can know all particular events and perceive all 
sensible things, whereas the First cannot know anything of the 
particulars nor perceive anything of sensible things without this 
implying any imperfection in the First, it may also be permitted 
to ascribe to others knowledge of the intelligible universals but 
to deny it of the First without this implying any imperfection in 
the First. There is no way out of this. 


I say: 


This is the proof of those who say that the First knows only itself, and we 
have already spoken of the theory of those who combine the doctrine that the 


357 


First knows only itself with the theory that it knows all existents; and for this 
reason some of the best known philosophers affirm that God the Creator is 
Himself all existents and that He grants them in His benevolence, and there is 
no sense in repeating ourselves. The premisses used in this section are 
common dialectical propositions, since they all belong to those which 
compare the Divine to the empirical, although no common genus unites these 
two spheres and they do not possess any common factor at all. In general his 
discussion in this section, when he argues with Avicenna, who adduces the 
argument of those philosophers who believe that God in knowing Himself 
must know other things, since He must necessarily know what proceeds from 
Himself, and all the other assertions of Avicenna to prove this, which he 
relates, and which he uses himself again to refute Avicenna, are all taken from 
human conditions which he tries to refer to the Creator; and this is false, since 
the terms of these two types of knowledge are predicated equivocally. 


Avicenna’s assertion that any intelligent being from whom an act proceeds 
knows this act is a true proposition; not, however, in the sense in which the 
word ‘knowledge’ is used of the human intellect, when it understands a thing, 
for the human intellect is perfected by what it perceives and knows, and is 
affected by it, and the cause of action in man is the representation he forms in 
his intellect. ‘ And Ghazali argues against this kind of proposition by saying 
that when a man acts and there follows from his act another act and from the 
second act a third and from the third a fourth, it is not necessary that the 
conscious agent should know all the consequences which follow from his first 
act; and Ghazali says to his opponent this is a fact which concerns voluntary 
acts, but how is it when one assumes an agent whose acts are not voluntary? 
And he only says this because he means that the affirmation of God’s 
knowledge implies the affirmation of God’s will. 


And therefore Ghazali says: 
To this again the philosophers have no answer. 
I say: 


Ghazali means that it does not follow that the First according to Avicenna 
thinks anything but the act which proceeds from it primarily, and this act is 
the second cause and the first effect. Neither is there an answer to the other 


358 


difficulty which he states that if the First thinks only itself and nothing else, 
man would be more noble than it. And the reason why Ghazali’s words carry a 
certain conviction is that if one imagines two men, one of whom thinks only 
his own self, whereas the other thinks his own self and other things besides, 
the latter intellect is regarded as superior to the former. However, as the term 
‘intellect’ is applied to the human intellect and to this Divine Intellect in a 
purely equivocal way, since the latter is an agent and not a patient and the 
former a patient and not an agent, this analogy does not hold any longer. 


Having given as Avicenna’s argument the maxim which Avicenna applies to 
every intelligent being, ‘ that the more knowledge an intellect possesses the 
nobler it is, and having affirmed that, according to him (Ghazall), it is just the 
philosophers’ denial of God’s will and of temporal creation which forces them 
to deny to God a knowledge of anything but Himself, since the conscious 
agent knows his effect only in so far as it differs from himself by being an 
object of his will, he says that this reprehensible assertion, i. e. the assertion 
that the effect which is man must be nobler than the cause which is the 
Creator, is a consequence for the philosophers only, sincc as the philosophers 
deny the coming into being of the world, they deny the Divine Will, as he 
affirms, and as they deny the Divine Will, they deny that God knows what 
proceeds from Him. But all this, namely the denial of God’s will, has been 
shown previously not to be true; for they deny only His temporal will. And 
having repeated Avicenna’s arguments, which he regarded as being applicable 
both to the knowledge of the temporal and the knowledge of the eternal, he 
begins to argue against him, showing the distinction which the philosophers 
established on this point between these two sciences, and indeed this 


consequence is incumbent on Avicenna. 
And Ghazali says: 


How will you refute those philosophers who say that this 
knowledge does not add to God’s dignity, for only other beings 
need knowledge. ..? 


I say: 


The summary of this is that, if all these perceptions exist only because of 
man’s imperfection, then God is too exalted for them; and therefore Ghazali 


359 


says to Avicenna: Just as you acknowledge with your fellow-philosophers that 
God’s not perceiving individual things is not a consequence of an 
imperfection in Him, for you have proved 


that the perception of individuals rests on an imperfection in the perceiver, in 
the same way the perception of other things than Himself need not derive 
from an imperfection in Him, since the perception of these other things 


depends on the imperfection of the perceiver. ‘ 


The answer to all this is that God’s knowledge cannot be divided into the 
opposites of true and false in which human knowledge is divided; for instance, 
it may be said of a man that either he knows or he does not know other things, 
because these two propositions are contradictory, and when the one is true 
the other is false; but in the case of God both propositions, that He knows 
what He knows and that He does not know it, are true, for He does not know it 
through a knowledge which determines an imperfection, namely human 
knowledge, but knows it through a knowledge which does not carry with it 
any imperfection, and this is a knowledge the quality of which nobody but 
God Himself can understand. And concerning both universals and individuals 
it is true of Him that He knows them and does not know them. This is the 
conclusion to which the principles of the ancient philosophers led; but those 
who make a distinction, and say that God knows universals but does not know 
particulars have not fully grasped their theory, and this is not a consequence 
of their principles. For all human sciences are passivities and impressions 
from the existents, and the existents operate on them. But the knowledge of 
the Creator operates on existents, and the existents receive the activities of His 
knowledge. 


Once this is established, the whole quarrel between Ghazali and the 
philosophers comes to an end in regard to this chapter as well as the next two. 
We shall, however, give an account of these chapters and mention in them 
both what is particular to them and those arguments which have been already 


discussed above. 


360 








THE TWELFTH DISCUSSION 








ABOUT THE IMPOTENCE OF THE PHILOSOPHERS TO PROVE 
THAT GOD KNOWS HIMSELF 


Ghazali says: 


We say that when the Muslims understood that the world 
was created through the will of God, they proved His knowledge 
from His will, then His life from His will and His knowledge 
together, ‘ then from His life, according to the principle that 
every living being knows itself, they proved that He too must 
know His own essence, since He is alive. And this is a rational 
procedure of extreme force. For you philosophers, however, 
since you deny the divine will and the world’s coming into 
existence, and since you affirm that what proceeds from Him 
proceeds in a necessary and natural sequence, why should it be 
impossible that His essence should be of such a nature that only 
the first effect proceeded from it, and that then the second 
effect followed the first till the whole order of existents was 
completed, but, notwithstanding this, the First would not know 
itself, just as neither fire from which heat proceeds, nor the sun 
from which light proceeds, know themselves or anything else? 
For only that which knows itself knows what proceeds from 
itself, and therefore knows other things besides itself. And we 
have already shown that, according to the theory of the 
philosophers the First does not know other things, and we have 
forced those who do not agree with them on this point to 
acknowledge this consequence which follows from their 
assumption. And if it does not know others, it is not absurd to 


suppose that it does not know its own self. 


If they say: ‘Everyone who does not know himself is dead, 
and how could the First be dead? ‘-we answer: ‘This is indeed a 
conclusion which follows from your theory, since there is no 
difference between you and those who say that every one who 


361 


does not act through will, power and choice, who neither hears 
nor sees, is dead, and he who does not know other things is 
dead. And if it is possible that the First is destitute of all these 
attributes, what need has it of knowing itself? ‘ And if they 
return to the doctrine that everything which is free from matter 
is intellect by itself and therefore thinks itself, we have shown 
that this is an arbitrary judgement without any proof. 


And if they say: “The proof is that what is existent is divided 
into what is alive and what is dead, and what is alive is prior 
and superior to what is dead, and the First is prior and 
superior: therefore let it be alive; and every living being knows 
itself, since it is impossible that the living should be amongst its 
effects and should not itself be alive’, we answer: ‘All this is pure 
presumption, for we affirm that it is not impossible that that 
which knows itself should follow from that which does not, 
either through many intermediaries or without mediation. And 
if the reason for its impossibility is that in that case the effect 
would be superior to the cause, well, it is not impossible that 
the effect should be superior to the cause, for the superiority of 
the cause to the effect is not a fundamental principle. Further, 
how can you refute the view that its superiority might consist 
not in its knowledge but in the fact that the existence of the 
universe is a consequence of its essence? For the proof is that, 
whereas the First neither sees nor hears, there are many other 
beings who know other things than themselves and who do see 
and hear. ‘ 


And if it were said, “Existents are divided into the seeing and 
the blind, the knowing and the ignorant’, we answer: ‘Well, let 
the seeing then be superior and let the First see and have 
knowledge of things!” But the philosophers deny this, and say 
that its excellence does not consist in seeing and knowing 
things, but in not being in need of sight and knowledge and 
being the essence from which there proceeds the universe in 
which the knowing and the seeing beings exist. And in the same 


362 


way it may be said that this essence does not possess excellence 
because it has knowledge itself, but because it is the principle of 
essences which possess knowledge, and this is an excellence 
which is peculiar to it. 


The philosophers are therefore forced to deny also that the 
First knows itself, for nothing proves such a knowledge but will, 
and nothing proves will except the temporal beginning of the 
world, and if this principle is destroyed, all these things are 
destroyed which are accepted through the speculation of the 
mind alone. For, they do not possess a proof for any thing they 
affirm or deny concerning the attributes of the First, but they 
make only such guesses and conjectures as lawyers would 
despise in their suppositions. However, no wonder that the 
intellect should be perplexed about the divine attributes; one 
should wonder only at the wonderful self-complacency of the 
philosophers, at their satisfaction with their proofs and their 
belief that they know those things through evident proofs, 
notwithstanding the mistakes and the errors in them. 


I say: 


The most wonderful thing is the claim of the theologians that the temporal 
becoming of the world implies that it has been willed by a will, for we find that 
temporal things occur through nature, through will, and by chance. x Those 
that occur through will are the products of art, and those that occur through 
nature are natural things, and if temporal things occurred only through will, 
will would have to be included in the definition of the temporal, whereas it is 
well known that the definition of temporal becoming is ‘existence succeeding 
non-existence’. If indeed the world had come into being temporally, it would 
be more appropriate that it should have come into being, in so far as it was a 
natural existent, from principles appropriate to natural things, rather than 
from principles appropriate to artificial things, i. e. the will. Since, however, it 
is established that the world exists through a First Agent which preferred its 
existence to its nonexistence, it is necessary that this agent should be a willer, 
and if this First Agent does not cease to prefer the world’s existence to its 


363 


nonexistence, and the willer-as Ghazali says-must have knowledge, the 
philosophers are in complete agreement with the theologians about this 
fundamental point. The whole theological argument, however, which he gives 
has only persuasive power, because it compares natural things to artificial. 


As to what he says of the philosophers, that they believe that what proceeds 
from the Creator proceeds in a natural way, this is a wrong imputation. What 
they really believe is that existents proceed from Him in a way superior to 
nature and to the human will, for both these ways are subject to an 
imperfection, but they are not the only possible ways, since it has been proved 
that the act of God can proceed from Him neither in a natural way nor in a 
voluntary, in the sense in which this is understood in the sublunary world. For 
will in an animal is the principle of movement, and if the Creator is devoid of 
movement, He is devoid of the principle of movement in the way a voluntary 
agent in the empirical world moves. ‘ What proceeds from God proceeds in a 
nobler way than the voluntary, a way which nobody can understand but God 
Himself. And the proof that He wills is that He knows the opposites, and if He 
were an agent in absolutely the same way as He is a knower, He would carry 
out the two contrary acts together, and this is impossible; and therefore it is 
necessary that He should perform one of the two contraries through choice. 


The error of the theologians with regard to this question is that they say that 
every act is either natural or voluntary, but do not understand the meaning of 
either of these words. For nature, according to the philosophers, has different 
meanings, the primary being the ascending of fire and the descending of 
earth, ‘ and an existent only has this movement when something has 
prevented it from being in its natural place, and there was therefore 
something that constrained it; but the Creator is too high for this kind of 
nature. The philosophers also apply the term ‘nature’ to every potency from 
which an intellectual act proceeds, in the same way as the acts which proceed 
from the arts, and some of the philosophers ascribe intellect to this nature, 
and some say that this nature does not possess intellect but acts only by 
natures And they say that this nature proceeds from an intellect, because they 
compare it to artificial things which move themselves and from which orderly 
well-arranged acts proceed . And therefore their master Aristotle asserts that 


364 


it is manifest that the nature of intellect rules the universe. ? And how far is 
this belief from what Ghazali ascribes to them! 


Who, however, assumes as a universal maxim that he who knows himself 
must know other things which proceed from him, must conclude that he who 
does not know other things cannot know himself. 


And having refuted Avicenna’s theory that God knows other things, by the 
arguments of the philosophers on this point which he adduces against him, ‘ 
he concludes against him that the First does not know itself; and this 


conclusion is valid. , 


And as to what he relates of the argument of the philosophers on this point, 
namely that they say that he who does not know himself is dead and the First 
cannot be dead, this is a persuasive argument composed of common 
propositions, for he who is not alive is not dead unless it is in his nature to 
receive life’-or one must mean by ‘dead’ what is meant by ‘inanimate’ and 
‘inorganic’, and then this is a true dichotomy, for every existent is either alive 
or inorganic, provided we understand by ‘life’ a term which is equivocally 
used of the eternal and the corruptible. 


And as to Ghazali’s words: 


And if they return to the doctrine that everything which is 
free from matter is intellect by itself and therefore thinks itself, 
we have shown that this is an arbitrary judgement without any 
proof. 


I say: 


We have already shown the manner in which this proof of the philosophers 
must be taken, in so far as this proof preserves its power by being given in this 
book-I mean its power is diminished, as is necessary when a thing is removed 
from its natural context. And as to what he says of their arguing on this point 
against the philosophers that the existent is either alive or dead, and that 
which is alive is more noble than that which is dead, and that the principle is 
nobler than that which is alive and that it is therefore necessarily alive, if by 
‘dead’ is understood the inanimate, these propositions are common and true. 


365 


His assertion, however, that life can proceed from the lifeless and knowledge 
from what does not possess knowledge, and that the dignity of the First 
consists only in its being the principle of the universe, is false. For if life could 
proceed from the lifeless, then the existent might proceed from the non- 
existent, and then anything whatever might proceed from anything whatever, 
and there would be no congruity between causes and effects, either in the 
genus predicated analogically or in the species. 4 


As to his assertion that, when the philosophers say that what is nobler than 
life must be alive, it is like saying that that which is nobler than what has 
hearing and seeing must have hearing and seeing: the philosophers do not say 
so, for they deny that the First Principle can hear and see. And Ghazali’s 
argument that, since, according to the philosophers, that which is superior to 
what hears and sees . need not hear and see, then also what is superior to the 
living and the knowing need not itself be alive and possessed of knowledge 
and that, just as according to the philosophers that which possesses sight can 
proceed from what has no sight, so it is possible that knowledge should 
proceed from what has no knowledge: this is a very sophistical and false 


argument. 


For according to the philosophers that which has no hearing or seeing is not 
absolutely superior to that which has hearing and seeing, but only because it 
has a perception superior to seeing and hearing, namely knowledge. ‘ But, 
since there is nothing superior to knowledge, it is not possible that that which 
does not possess knowledge should be superior to that which does, be it a 
principle or not. For since some of the principles possess knowledge, others 
not, it is not permissible that those which do not know should be superior to 
those that do, just as little as this is possible in regard to effects which do and 
do not possess knowledge. And the nobility of being a principle cannot 
surpass the nobility of knowledge, unless the nobility of a principle that does 
not possess knowledge could surpass the nobility of a principle that does. And 
the excellence of being a principle cannot surpass the excellence of 
knowledge. And therefore it is necessary that the principle which has the 
utmost nobility should possess the utmost excellence, which is knowledge. 
The philosophers only avoid ascribing to the First hearing and seeing, because 
this would imply its possessing a soul. The Holy Law ascribes hearing and 


366 


seeing to God to remind us that God is not deprived of any kind of knowledge 
and understanding, and the masses cannot be made to grasp this meaning 
except by the use of the terms ‘hearing’ and ‘seeing’, and for this reason this 
exegesis is limited to the learned, and therefore cannot be taken as one of the 
dogmas of the Holy Law common to the masses. And the same is the case with 
many questions the solutions of which the Holy Law leaves to science. 


Everything this chapter contains is the confusion and the incoherence of 
Ghazali himself. But, we appeal to God on account of the mistakes the learned 
have made, and that He may pardon them because of their wish to glorify His 
name in all such questions, and we pray God that He may not place us among 
those who are excluded from the next world through their faults in this, or 
from the highest through their desire for the lowest, and that He may bestow 
on us final blessedness! 








THE THIRTEENTH DISCUSSION 








TO REFUTE THOSE WHO AFFIRM THAT GOD IS IGNORANT OF 
THE INDIVIDUAL THINGS WHICH ARE DIVIDED IN TIME INTO 
PRESENT, PAST, AND FUTURE 


Ghazali says: 


About this theory they all agree; for as to those who believe 
that God only knows Himself, this is implied in their belief; and 
as to those who believe that He knows things besides Himself 
(and this is the theory which Avicenna has chosen) they believe 
that God knows other things in a universal knowledge which 
does not fall under the concept of time and which is not 
differentiated through past, future, and present although, 
nevertheless, Avicenna affirms that not the weight of a grain 
escapes God’s knowledge either on earth or in the heavens, 


since He knows individual things in a universal way. ‘ 


Now we must first understand this theory, and then occupy 
ourselves with refuting it. We shall explain this through an 
example, namely that the sun, for example, suffers an eclipse, 


367 


after not having been eclipsed, and afterwards recovers its light. 
There are therefore in an eclipse three moments: the moment 
when there was not yet an eclipse but the eclipse was expected 
in the future, the time when the eclipse was actually there, its 
being, and thirdly, the moment the eclipse had ceased but had 
been. Now we have in regard to these three conditions a 
threefold knowledge: we know first that there is not yet an 
eclipse, but that there will be one, secondly that it is now there, 
and thirdly, that it has been present but is no longer present. 
This threefold knowledge is numerically distinguishable and 
differentiated and its sequence implies a change in the knowing 
essence, for if this knowing essence thought after the cessation 
of the eclipse that the eclipse was present as before, this would 
be ignorance, not knowledge, and if it thought during its 
presence that it was absent, this again would be ignorance, and 
the one knowledge cannot take the place of the other. 


The philosophers affirm now that the condition of God is 
not differentiated by means of these three moments, for this 
would imply a change, and that He whose condition does not 
change cannot be imagined to know these things, for knowledge 
follows the object of knowledge, and when the object of 
knowledge changes, the knowledge changes, and when the 
knowledge changes, without doubt the knower changes too; but 
change in God is impossible. However, notwithstandng this, the 
philosophers affirm that God knows the eclipse and all its 
attributes and accidents, but through a knowledge which is 
attributed to Him in an eternal attribution and is unchangeable: 
God knows for instance that the sun exists and that the moon 
exists, and that they have emanated from God Himself through 
the medium of angels whom the philosophers in their technical 
terminology call ‘separate intellects’, and God knows that the 
sun and moon move in circles and that between their orbits 
there is an intersection at two points, the ascending and the 
descending node, ‘ and that at certain times the sun and moon 


368 


are together in these nodes and that then the sun is eclipsedi. e. 
the body of the moon comes between the sun and the eyes of 
the observer, and the sun is concealed from his eyes, and that 
when the sun has passed a certain distance beyond this node, 
say a year, it is eclipsed again, and that this eclipse is either 
total or for a third or for a half, and that it will last an hour or 
two hours, and God knows equally all other time 
determinations and all other accidents of the eclipse; and 
nothing of this escapes God’s knowledge. However, God’s 
knowledge before, during, and after the eclipse is all of one kind 
without any differentiation and without any implication of a 
change in His essence. And such is His knowledge of all 
temporal occurrences which take place through causes which 
have other causes terminating finally in the circular movement 
of the heavens, and the cause of this movement is the soul of 
the heavens, and the cause of the soul’s movement is its desire 
to assimilate itself to God and to the angels near Him . z And 
the whole universe is known to Him, that is, it is manifested to 
Him in one single congruous manifestation which is not 
influenced by time. Still, at the time of the eclipse it cannot be 
said that He knows that the eclipse is taking place now, nor 
does He know when it has passed that it has passed now, for He 
cannot be imagined to know anything which for its definition 
needs a relation to time, since this implies a change. This is 


their solution in so far as it concerns a division in time. 


And as concerns their theory about what is divided in 
matter and space, like individual men and animals, they say 
that God does not know the accidents of Zaid, Amr, and Khalid 
and that He knows only man in general, through a universal 
knowledge, and that He knows the accidents and properties of 
man in general, namely that he must have a body composed of 
limbs, some to grasp with, some to walk with, some to perceive 
with, some of which form a pair while some are single, and that 
the bodily faculties must be dispersed in all parts of the body. 


369 


And the same applies to all the qualities which are inside and 
outside man’s body and all its accidents, attributes, and 
consequences, so that there is nothing that is hidden from God 
in His knowledge of the universal. But the individual Zaid can 
only be distinguished from Amr through the senses, not 
through the intellect, and this distinction is based on pointing 
to a special direction, whereas the intellect can only understand 
direction and space absolutely as universals. And when we say 
‘this’ and ‘that’, this is a case of pointing to a special relation of 
a sensible thing to the observer as being near to him or far from 
him, or in a definite place, and this is impossible where God is 


concerned. 


This then is the principle in which they believe, and through 
it they uproot the Divine Laws absolutely, for this principle 
implies that God cannot know whether Zaid obeys or disobeys 
Him, since God cannot know any new occurrences that happen 
to Zaid, as He does not know the individual Zaid; for the 
individual and his acts come into existence after nonexistence, 
and as God does not know the individual, He cannot know his 
conditions and his acts-indeed, He cannot know that Zaid 
becomes a heretic or a true believer, for He can know only the 
unbelief and the belief of man in general, not as it is specified in 
individuals. Yes, God cannot know Muhammad’s proclaiming 
himself a prophet at the time he did, nor can God know this of 
any definite prophet; He can only know that some people 
proclaim themselves prophets and that they have such-and- 
such qualities, but any individual prophet He cannot know, for 
he can only be known by sense-perception. Nor can He know 
the acts which proceed from the prophets, since they are 
divided as acts of a definite man through the division of time, 
and their perception with their diversity implies a change in the 


observer. 


370 


This is what we wanted to do first, namely to expound their 
view, then to render it intelligible, thirdly to show the 


perversities implied in it. 


We shall now pass on to relate the artfulness of their theory 
and the point where it fails. Their artfulness lies in the fact that 
they say: ‘There are here three different moments, and a 
sequence of different things in one single subject no doubt 
implies a change in it. For if at the moment of the eclipse God 
thought that what was happening was like what had been 
before, He would be ignorant; if, on the other hand, He knew 
that it was happening and knew previously that it was not 
happening, but would happen, His knowledge and His 
condition would have become different, and this would imply a 
change, for “change” means only a difference in the knowledge 
and a difference in the knowledge implies a difference in the 
knower, for he who did not know a thing and then knows it, has 
changed; previously he had no knowledge that it was 
happening, and then his knowledge was realized: therefore he 
changed. ‘ 


And they have elaborated this by saying that there are three 
kinds of conditions;, first a condition which is a mere relation, 
as when we say right and left, for this does not refer to an 
essential attribute, but is a mere relation; for if you change a 
thing from your right to your left, your relation to it changes, 
but the condition of your essence does not change, for the 
relation changes with respect to the essence, but the essence 
does not change. The second kind of condition is of the same 
type, i. e. when you have the capacity to move bodies in front of 
you, and those bodies or part of them disappear, your innate 
power and your capacity does not change, for your capacity is 
first the capacity to move body in general and secondly to move 
a definite body in so far as it is a body; and the relation of the 
capacity to the definite body is not an essential attribute, but a 
mere relation, and the disappearance of the body determines 


371 


the cessation of the relation, but not a change in the condition 
of the one who possesses this capacity. The third kind of 
condition, however, is a change in the essence, for when one 
who had no knowledge acquires knowledge and one who had 
no power becomes powerful there is indeed a change. ‘ 


And the change in the object known causes a change in the 
knowledge, for the relation to the definite object known enters 
into the essence of the knowledge itself, since the essence of the 
definite knowledge is attached to the definite object known as it 
exists in reality, and when the knowledge attaches itself to it in 
another relation, it becomes necessarily another knowledge and 
this succession implies a differentiation in the essence of the 
knowledge. And it cannot be said that God has one single 
knowledge which, having been knowledge of the future event, 
could become knowledge of the present event, and having been 
knowledge of the present event, could become knowledge of the 
past event, for although the knowledge would be one and the 
same and have similar conditions, there would be a change of 
relation to Him and the change of relation would enter into the 
essence of the knowledge; and this change would imply a 
change in the essence of the knowledge, and from this there 
would result a change (which is impossible) in God. 


The objection to this is twofold. 


First one can say: How will you refute one who says that God 
has one single knowledge of the eclipse, for instance, at a 
definite time, and that this knowledge before the occurrence of 
the eclipse is the knowledge that the eclipse will occur, and 
during the eclipse is identical with the knowledge that it is 
occurring, and after the eclipse identical with the knowledge 
that it has ceased, and that these differences refer to relations 
which imply neither a change in the essence of the knowledge 
nor a change in the essence of the knower, and that this is 
exactly like a mere relation? For one single person can be at 


372 


your right and then turn in front of you and go to your left, and 
there is a succession of relations with respect to you; but that 
which is changing is the person who takes up different 
positions, and God’s knowledge must be understood in this 
way, for indeed we admit that God comprehends things in one 
single knowledge in everlasting eternity, and that His condition 
does not change; with their intention, the denial of His change, 
we do agree, but their assertion that it is necessary to regard the 
knowledge of an actual becoming and its cessation as a change, 
we refuse to accept. For how do you know this? Indeed, suppose 
God had created in us a knowledge that Zaid will arrive 
tomorrow at daybreak, and had made this knowledge 
permanent without creating for us another knowledge or the 
forgetfulness of this knowledge; then, by the mere previous 
knowledge, we should know at daybreak that at present Zaid is 
arriving and afterwards that he had arrived, and this one 
permanent knowledge would suffice to comprehend these three 


moments. 


There still remains their assertion that the relation to a 
definite object known enters into the essence of the knowledge 
of this object, and that whenever the relation becomes different 
the thing which has this essential relation becomes different, 
and that whenever this differentiation and this sequence arise 
there is a change. ‘ 


We say: If this is true, then rather follow the path of your 
fellow-philosophers when they say that God knows only Himself 
and that knowing Himself is identical with His essence, for if He 
knew man and animal and the inorganic in general (and these 
are undoubtedly different things), His relation to them would 
undoubtedly be different too; and one single knowledge cannot 
be a knowledge of different things, since the object related is 
differentiated, and the relation is differentiated, and the 
relation to the object known is essential to the knowledge, and 
this implies a multiplicity and a differentiation-not a mere 


373 


multiplicity with a similarity, for similar things are things 
which can be substituted for each other, but the knowledge of 
an animal cannot be substituted for the knowledge of the 
inorganic, nor the knowledge of white for the knowledge of 
black, for they are two different things. ‘ Besides, these species 
and genera and universal accidents are infinite and they are 
different, and how can different sciences fall under one science? 
Again, this knowledge is the essence of the knower without any 
addition, and I should like to know how an intelligent man can 
regard the unity of the knowledge of one and the same thing, 
when this knowledge is divided through its relations with the 
past, the future, and the present, as impossible, and uphold the 
unity of the knowledge which is attached to all genera and all 
different species! For the diversity and the distance between the 
genera and the remote species is far greater than the difference 
which occurs in the conditions of one thing which is divided 
through the division of time; and if the former does not imply a 
plurality and differentiation, why then does the latter? And as 
soon as it is proved that the diversity of times is less important 
than the diversity of genera and species, and that the latter does 
not imply a plurality and a diversity, the former also will not 
imply this. And if this does not imply a diversity, then it will be 
possible that the whole universe should be comprehended in 
one everlasting knowledge in everlasting time, and that this 
should not imply a change in the essence of the knower. 


I say: 


This sophistry is based on the assimilation of Divine Knowledge to human 
and the comparison of the one knowledge with the other, for man perceives 
the individual through his senses, and universal existents through his 
intellect, and the cause of his perception is the thing perceived itself, and 
there is no doubt that the perception changes through the change in the 
things perceived and that their plurality implies its plurality. 


374 


As to his answer that it is possible that there should exist a knowledge the 
relation of which to the objects known is that kind of relation which does not 
enter into the essence of the thing related, like the relation of right and left, to 
that which has a right and a left his is an answer which cannot be understood 
from the nature of human knowledge. ‘ And his second objection, that those 
philosophers who affirm that God knows universals must, by admitting in His 
knowledge a plurality of species, conclude that a plurality of individuals and a 
plurality of conditions of one and the same individual is permissible for His 
knowledge, is a sophistical objection. For the knowledge of individuals is 
sensation or imagination, and the knowledge of universals is intellect, z and 
the new occurrence of individuals or conditions of individuals causes two 
things, a change and a plurality in the perception; whereas knowledge of 
species and genera does not imply a change, since the knowledge of them is 
invariable and they are unified in the knowledge which comprehends them, 
and universality and individuality only agree in their forming a plurality. 


And his statement that those philosophers who assume one simple 
knowledge, which comprehends genera and species without there existing in 
it a plurality and diversity which the differentiation and diversity of the 
species and genera would imply, will have also to admit one simple knowledge 
which will comprehend different individuals and different conditions of one 
and the same individual, is like saying that if there is an intellect which 
comprehends species and genera, and this intellect is one, there must be one 
simple genus which comprehends different individuals; and this is a sophism, 
since the term ‘knowledge’ is predicated equivocally of divine and human 
knowledge of the universal and the individual. But his remark that the 
plurality of species and genera causes a plurality in the knowledge is true, and 
the most competent philosophers therefore do not call God’s knowledge of 
existents either universal or individual, for knowledge which implies the 
concepts of universal and individual is a passive intellect and an effect, 
whereas the First Intellect is pure act and a cause, and His knowledge cannot 
be compared to human knowledge; for in so far as God does not think other 
things as being other than Himself His essence is not passive knowledge, and 
in so far as He thinks them as being identical with His essence, His essence is 
active knowledge. ‘ 


375 


And the summary of their doctrine is that, since they ascertained by proofs 
that God thinks only Himself, His essence must of necessity be intellect. And 
as intellect, in so far as it is intellect, can only be attached to what exists, not 
to what does not exist, and it had been proved that there is no existent but 
those existents which we think, it was necessary that His intellect should be 
attached to them, since it was not possible that it should be attached to non- 
existence and there is no other kind of existent to which it might be attached. ‘ 
And since it was necessary that it should be attached to the existents, it had to 
be attached either in the way our knowledge is attached to it, or in a superior 
way, and since the former is impossible, this knowledge must be attached in a 
superior way and according to a more perfect existence of existents than the 
existence of the existents to which our intellect is attached. For true 
knowledge is conformity with the existent, z and if His knowledge is superior 
to ours and His knowledge is attached to the existent in a way superior to our 
attachment to the existent, then there must be two kinds of existence, a 
superior and an inferior, and the superior existence must be the cause of the 


inferior. 


And this is the meaning of the ancient philosophers, when they say that God 
is the totality of the existents which He bestows on us in His bounty and of 
which He is the agent. And therefore the chiefs of the Sufis say: there is no 
reality besides Him. But all this is the knowledge of those who are steadfast in 
their knowledge, and this must not be written down and it must not be made 
an obligation of faith, and therefore it is not taught by the Divine Law. And 
one who mentions this truth where it should not be mentioned sins, and one 
who withholds it from those to whom it should be told sins too. And that one 
single thing can have different degrees of existence can be learned from the 
different degrees of existence of the soul. 


Ghazali says: 


The second refutation is: ‘What prevents you, according to 
your doctrine, from affirming God’s knowledge of individuals, 
even if this implies His changing, for why do you not believe 
that this kind of change is not impossible in God, just as Jahm, 
one of the Mu’tazilites, says that His knowledge of temporals is 


376 


temporal’ and the later Karramites say that God is the 
substratum of the temporal’? The true believers refute these 
theories only by arguing that what changes cannot be without 
change, and what cannot be without change and without 
temporal occurrences is itself temporal and not eternal. ‘ For 
you, however, according to your doctrine the world is eternal 
but not without change, and if you acknowledge an eternal 
which changes, nothing prevents you from accepting this 
theory. ‘ 


If you replied: We only regard this as impossible, because 
the temporal knowledge in His essence must either derive from 
Himself or from something else; that it should derive from 
Himself is impossible, for we have shown that from the eternal 
no temporal can proceed and that God cannot become active 
after having been at rest, for this would imply a change, and we 
have established this in treating the question of the temporal 
becoming of the world; and if it were to arise in His essence 
from something else, how could something else influence and 
change Him so that His conditions changed as if under the 
power and necessity of something different from Him? -we 
answer: Neither of these alternatives is impossible, according to 
your doctrine. As to your assertion that it is impossible that 
from the eternal a temporal being should proceed, we refuted 
this sufficiently when we treated this problem. According to you 
it is impossible that from the eternal there should proceed a 
temporal being which is the first of a series of temporal beings 
and it is only impossible that there should be a first temporal 
being. ‘ However, these temporal beings have no infinite 
number of temporal causes, but by means of the circular 
movement they terminate in something eternal which is the 
soul and life of the sphere; and the soul of the sphere is eternal 
and the circular movement arises temporally from it and each 
part of this movement begins and ends, and that which follows 
it is surely a new occurrence. Therefore, according to you the 


377 


temporal beings arise from the eternal. ‘ However, since the 
conditions of the eternal are uniform, the emanation of 
temporal occurrences from Him will be eternally uniform, just 
as the conditions of the movement are uniform, since they 
proceed from an eternal being whose conditions are uniform; 
and all the philosophical sects acknowledge that from an 
eternal being a temporal being can proceed, when this happens 
in a proportionate way and eternally. Therefore let the different 
types of His knowledge proceed from Him in this way. 


And as to the other alternative, that His knowledge should 
proceed from another, we answer: Why is that impossible 
according to you? There are here only three difficulties. The 
first is the changing, but we have already shown that this is a 
consequence of your theory. 


The second difficulty, that one thing should be the cause of 
a change in another, is not impossible according to you; for let 
the occurrence of the thing be the cause of the occurrence of its 
being known, just as you say that the appearance of a coloureds 
figure in front of the pupil of the eye is the cause of the 
impression of the image of this figure on the vitreous humour 
of the pupil through the medium of the transparent air between 
the pupil and the figure seen ;b and if therefore an inanimate 
object can be the cause of the impression of the form on the 
pupil-and this is the meaning of sight-why should it be 
impossible that the occurrence of temporal beings should cause 
the First to acquire its knowledge of them? And just as the 
potency of seeing is disposed to perceive, and the appearance of 
the coloured figure, when the obstacles are removed, is the 
cause of the actualization of the perception, so let according to 
you the essence of the First Principle be disposed to receive 
knowledge and emerge from potency into act through the 
existence of this temporal being. And if this implies a change in 
the eternal, a changing eternal is not impossible according to 
you. And if you protest that this is impossible in the necessary 


378 


existent, you have no other proof for establishing the necessary 
existent than the necessity of a termination to the series of 
causes and effects, as has been shown previously, and we have 
proved that to end this series with an eternal being which can 
change is not impossible. 


The third difficulty in the problem is that if the Eternal 
could change through another, this would be like subjection 
and the control of another over Him. 


But one may say: Why is this impossible according to you? 
For it only means that the Eternal is the cause of the occurrence 
of the temporal beings through intermediaries, and that 
afterwards the occurrence of these temporal beings becomes the 
cause of the knowledge which the Eternal has of them. It is 
therefore as if Hemere Himself the cause of this knowledge 
reaching Him, although it reaches Him through intermediaries. 
And if you say that this is like subjection, let it be so, for this 
conforms to your doctrine, since you say that what proceeds 
from God proceeds in the way of necessity and nature, and that 
He has no power not to do it, and this too resembles a kind of 
bondage, and indicates that He is as it were under necessity as 
to that which proceeds from Him. And if it is said that this is no 
constraint, since His entelechy consists in the fact that He 
makes everything proceed from Himself, and that this is no 
subjection, then we answer that His entelechy consists in 
knowing everything, and if it is true to say that the knowledge 
which we receive in conjunction with everything that happens is 
a perfection for us, , not an imperfection or subjection, let the 
same be the case with respect to God. 


I say: 


The summary of this first objection against the philosophers, which is a 
refutation of their theories, not of the fact itself, is that ‘according to your 
principles, philosophers, there exists an eternal being in which temporal 
beings inhere, namely the sphere; how can you therefore deny that the First 


379 


Eternal is a subject in which temporal beings inhere? ‘ The Ash’arites deny this 
only because of their theory that any subject in which temporal beings inhere 
is itself a temporal being. And this objection is dialectical, for there are 
temporal beings which do not inhere in the eternal, namely the temporal 
beings which change the substance in which they inhere; and there are 
temporal beings which inhere in the eternal, namely the temporal beings 
which do not change the substance of their substratum, like the local 
movement of the moving body and transparency and illumination;’ and 
further there is an eternal in which no movements and no changes inhere at 
all, namely the incorporeal eternal; and there is an eternal in which only some 
movements inhere, namely the eternal which is a body like the heavenly 
bodies, and when this distinction, which the philosophers require, is made, 
this objection becomes futile, for the discussion is only concerned with the 


incorporeal eternal. 


Having made this objection against the philosophers, he gives the answer of 
the philosophers about this question, and the summary is that they are only 
prevented from admitting temporal knowledge in the First, because temporal 
knowledge must arise through itself or through another; and in the former 
case there would proceed from the eternal a temporal being, and according to 
the principles of the philosophers no temporal being can proceed from the 
eternal. Then he argues against this assertion that from the eternal no 
temporal being can proceed, by showing that they assume that the sphere is 
eternal and that they assume that temporal beings proceed from it. 


But their justification of this is that the temporal cannot proceed from an 
absolutely eternal being, but only from an eternal being which is eternal in its 
substance, but temporal in its movements, namely the celestial body; and 
therefore the celestial body is according to them like an intermediary between 
the absolutely eternal and the absolutely temporal, for it is in one way eternal, 
in another way temporal, and this intermediary is the celestial circular 
movement according to the philosophers, and this movement is according to 
them eternal in its species, temporal in its parts. And so far as it is eternal, it 
proceeds from an eternal, and in so far as its parts are temporal, there 
proceed from them infinite temporal beings. And the only reason that 
prevented the philosophers from accepting an existence of temporal beings in 


380 


the First was that the First is incorporeal and temporal beings only exist in 
body, for only in body, according to them, there is receptivity, and that which 
is free from matter has no receptivity. 


And Ghazali’s objection to the second part of the argument of the 
philosophers, namely that the First Cause cannot be an effect, is that it is 
possible that God’s knowledge should be like the knowledge of man, that is 
that the things known should be the cause of His knowledge and their 
occurrence the cause of the fact that He knows them, just as the objects of 
sight are the cause of visual perception and the intelligible the cause of 
intellectual apprehension; so that in this way God’s producing and creating 
existents would be the cause of His apprehending them, and it would not be 
His knowledge that would be the cause of His creating them. 


But it is impossible, according to the philosophers, that God’s knowledge 
should be analogous to ours, for our knowledge is the effect of the existents, 
whereas God’s knowledge is their cause, and it is not true that eternal 
knowledge is of the same form as temporal. He who believes this makes God 
an eternal man’ and man a mortal God, and in short, it has previously been 
shown that God’s knowledge stands in opposition to man’s, for it is His 
knowledge which produces the existents, and it is not the existents which 
produce His knowledge. 








THE FOURTEENTH DISCUSSION 








T?O REFUTE THEIR PROOF THAT HEAVEN IS AN ANIMAL 
MOVING IN A CIRCLE IN OBEDIENCE TO GOD 


Ghazali says: 


The philosophers say also that heaven is an animal and 
possesses a soul which has the same relation to the body of 
heaven as our souls to our bodies, and just as our bodies move 
by will to their ends through the moving power of the soul, 
heaven acts. And the aim of the heavens in their essential 
movement is to serve the Lord of the world in a way we shall 
relate. 


381 


Their doctrine in this question is something that cannot be 
refuted, and we shall not declare that it is impossible; for God 
has the power of creating life in any body, and neither the size 
of a body nor its circular shape is a hindrance to its being 
animated, for the condition of the existence of life is not limited 
to a particular shape, since animals, notwithstanding their 
different shapes, all participate in the reception of life. But we 
claim their incapacity to reach this knowledge by rational proof, 
even if it is true, and only the prophets through divine 
revelation or inspiration could apprehend such a knowledge, 
but rational argument does not prove it; indeed, we do not even 
assert that it is impossible that such a thing should be known by 
proof, if there is a proof and this proof is valid, but we must say 
that what they have given as a proof has only the value of a 
conjecture, but lacks all strictness. 


Their device is that they say that heaven is moved, and this 
is a premiss given by perception. And every body moved has a 
mover, which is a premiss established by reason, since if body 
were moved merely by being body, every body would be in 
motion. ‘ Every mover receives its impulse either from the 
moved itself, like the nature in the stone which falls and the will 
in the movement of the animal conjoined with its power to 
move, or from an external mover which moves through 
constraint, as when a stone is flung upwards. Everything that is 
moved by something existing in itself is either unconscious of 
its movement (and we call this nature), like the falling of the 
stone, or conscious (and we call this voluntary or animated). 
This disjunction, that a movement is either constrained or 
natural or voluntary, comprises all the cases completely, so that 
if a movement does not fall under two of these divisions it must 
be of the third type. Now the movement of heaven cannot be 
constrained, because the mover of a movement by constraint is 
either (i) another body which is moved by constraint or by will, 
and in this case we must finally no doubt arrive at a will as 


382 


mover, and when in the heavenly bodies a body moved through 
will is established, then our aim is reached, for what use is it to 
assume movements through constraint when finally we must 
admit a will? or (2) God is the mover of its movement by 
constraint without intermediary, and this is impossible; for if it 
moves through Him in so far as it is a body and in so far as He 
is its creator, then necessarily every body ought to be moved. ; 


This movement, therefore, must be distinguished by a 
quality which marks this body off from all other bodies; and 
this quality will be its proximate mover, either by will or by 
nature. And it cannot be said that God moves it through His 
will, because His will has the same relation to all bodies, and 
why should this body be specially disposed so that God should 
move it rather than another? One cannot suppose this; for it is 
impossible, as has been shown in the question about the 
temporal beginning of the world. When it is therefore 
established that this body needs as a principle of movement a 
special qualification, the first division, that of the movement 
through constraint, is ruled out. 


So there remains the possibility that this movement occurs 
by nature. But this is not possible, for nature by itself is not the 
cause of motion, because the meaning of ‘motion’ is the 
withdrawal from one place to another place; and a body does 
not move from the place in which it is when that place is its 
proper place. For this reason a bladder full of air on the surface 
of the water does not move, but when it is immersed it moves 
towards the surface of the water, and then it has found its 
proper place and has come to rest and its nature is stabilized; 
when, however, it is transferred to a place which is not its 
proper one, it withdraws to its proper place, just as it withdraws 
from mid-water to the border of the air. Now it cannot be 
imagined that the circular movement is natural, since it returns 
to every position and place which it would be supposed to 
abandon, and it is not by nature that a body seeks the place 


383 


which it abandons, and therefore the bladder of air does not 
seek the interior of the water, nor the stone when it has come to 
rest on the earth the air. Thus only the third division remains, 
that of movement by will. ‘ 


I say: 


What he lays down in this section, that every thing moved either is moved 
by itself or through a body from outside and that it is this which is called 
constraint, is self-evident. But that for every thing which is moved by itself 
there is no mover but the movedz is not a self-evident proposition; it is only a 
common notion, and the philosophers indeed try to prove that every thing 
moved by itself has an interior mover different from it, through the use of 
other premisses which are self-evident, and of premisses which are the 
conclusions of other proofs, and this is something which may be ascertained 
in their books. And likewise it is not self-evident that every thing moved by an 
exterior mover must finally terminate in a thing moved by itself: what is 
posed here as a set of self-evident premisses is, as a matter of fact, a mixture 
of the two kinds of assertions; that is to say they are partly conclusions and 
partly self-evident. Indeed, that what is moved by itself and not by an external 
body is moved either by its substance and nature or by an interior principle, 
and that it cannot be moved by something which cannot be seen or touched 
and which is connected with it from the outside (or in other words by an 
incorporeal entity) is self-evident. You can claim to have a proof for this, 
namely by saying that if this were not so, upward movement would not be 
proper to fire rather than to earth; but it is, indeed, evident in itselfAnd as to 
that which does not move by its own substance and nature, this is evident in 
the things which are sometimes in motion and sometimes at rest, since that 
which is by nature cannot perform both of two opposites; for those things, 
however, which are perceived to move continually, a proof is necessary. 


Again, as to his assertion that what is moved by itself is moved through a 
principle in itself, either a principle called ‘nature’ or a principle called ‘soul’ 
and ‘choice’, this is true, when previously it has been proved that nothing 
exists which is moved by itself. As concerns his affirmation that the principle 
called nature does not move by itself in space, except when it is not its proper 


384 


place (for then it moves to its proper place and stays there), this is true. And 
his further remark that what moves in a circle has neither an improper nor a 
proper place, so that it could move from the one to the other either totally or 
partially, this is nearly self-evident and easy to uphold, and he has in this 
section mentioned something of its explanation and proof; and therefore, 
when we understand ‘nature’ in the sense he has established here, circular 


movement cannot move by nature. 


And as to his further remark that, when it does not move by nature, it moves 
through soul or through a potency which resembles the soul, it appears that 
the term ‘soul’ is predicated only equivocally of the soul in the celestial 
bodies, ‘ and the learned for the most part apply the term ‘nature’ to every 
potency which performs a rational act, namely an act which conforms to the 
order and arrangement which exist in rational things; but they exclude heaven 
from this kind of potency, because according to them it is heaven which 
provides this directing power for all existents? 


However, the argument of the ancients he relates here has only dialectical 
value, partly because much in it which is in reality a conclusion of a proof is 
assumed to be self-evident and partly because things are opposed in it which 
are not really in opposition. It is also dialectical because its premisses are 
probable and common notions. This was Avicenna’s method of proving that 
the heavenly body was an animated body, but for this the ancients have a 
more efficient and clearer proof. 


Ghazali says: 


The objection is that we can assume besides your theory 
three hypotheses which cannot be proved to be untrue. The first 
is that we assume the movement of heaven to take place 
through constraint by another body which desires its 
movement and makes it turn eternally, and that this body 
which sets it in motion is neither a sphere nor a circumference 
nor a heaven; their assertion is therefore false that the 
movement of heaven is voluntary and that heaven is animated, 
and what we have said is possible, and it cannot be denied 
except by a presumption of impossibility. 


385 


I say: 


This is false, for the philosophers have proved that outside heaven there is 
no other body, and it cannot be inside heaven; besides, were this body to set it 
in motion, it would necessarily have to be moved itself, and we should have an 


infinite regress. 
Ghazali says: 


The second hypothesis is to say: ‘The movement occurs by 
constraint and its principle is the will of God, and indeed we say 
that the downward movement of a body also occurs by 
constraint, through God’s creating this movement in this body; 
and the same can be said of all the other movements of those 
bodies which are not living. ‘ 


There still remains the fact that the philosophers regard this 
as impossible, because they ask why the will should have 
distinguished just this body, whereas all other bodies 
participate in bodiliness. But we have already explained that it 
is of the nature of the eternal Will to differentiate one thing 
from a similar one, and that the philosophers are forced to 
admit such a quality for the determination of the direction of 
the circular movement and for the determination of the place of 
the poles and their points, and we shall not repeat this; but our 
argument is, in short, that when they deny that a body can be 
differentiated for the attachment of the will to it without a 
distinctive attribute, this can be turned against them in regard 
to this distinctive attribute, for we ask them: ‘Why is the body of 
heaven distinguished by this attribute, which sets it apart from 
all other bodies, although all other bodies are also bodies; and 
how can anything occur to it which does not occur to other 
bodies? ‘ If this is caused by another attribute, we must repeat 
the same question about this other attribute, and in this way we 
should get an infinite series, and they would be forced in the 
end to acknowledge an arbitrary judgement of the will and the 


386 


fact that in the principles there is something that distinguishes 


one thing from a similar one. 
I say: 


That a stone moves downwards through a quality which has been created in 
it, and fire upwards, and that these qualities are opposed -this is a self-evident 
fact, and to contradict it is pure folly. But it is still more foolish to say that the 
eternal Will causes the movement in these things everlastingly-without any 
act He deliberately choseland that this movement is not implanted in the 
nature of the thing, and that this is called constraint; for if this were true, 
things would have no nature, no real essence, no definition at all. For it is 
selfevident that the natures and definitions of things only differ through the 
difference of their acts, just as it is self-evident that every movement forced on 
a body comes from a body outside it. And this argument has no sense 


whatever. 


And as to his affirmation ‘that to assume that the act which proceeds from 
an existent requires a special attribute makes it necessary to ask about this 
attribute also why it characterizes this existent rather than any other of its 
kind’, this is like saying that one ought to ask a man who asserted that earth 
and fire, which participate in bodiliness, were distinguished only by an 
attribute added to their bodiliness, why the attribute of fire characterizes fire 
and the attribute of earth, earth, and not rather the reverse. These, indeed, are 
the words of a man who does not assume for the attributes themselves a 
particular subject, but on the contrary believes that any attribute can be in 
any subject. ‘ He who speaks like this denies also the definition and the 
differentiation of subjects, and their characterization through special 
attributes, which is the first cause of the specification of existents through 
particular attributes, and this assumption belongs to the principles of the 
Ashvarites who tried thereby to annul both religious and rational wisdom and, 
in short, reason itself. 


Ghazali says: 


The third hypothesis is to admit that heaven is 
differentiated by an attribute and that this attribute is the 
principle of the movement, in the way they believe this of the 


387 


downward movement, although in this case it is not known, as 


it is known in the case of the stone. 


And their assertion that a thing cannot by its nature 
abandon the place sought by its nature rests on a confusion. For 
according to them there is here no numerical difference; on the 
contrary, the body is one and the circular movement is one, and 
neither the body nor the movement has an actual part; they are 
only divided by imagination, and this movement is not there to 
seek its place or to abandon it-indeed, it may well be that God 
creates a body in the essence of which there is something which 
determines a circular movement. The movement itself will then 
be determined by this attribute, not, however, the aiming at the 
place, for that would imply that arrival at the place would be the 
aim of the movement. And if your assertion that every 
movement takes place in seeking a place or abandoning it is a 
necessary principle, it is as if. you made the seeking of the place 
the goal of nature, not the movement itself which will in this 
case only be a means. ‘ But we say it is not absurd that the 
movement, not the seeking of a place, should be the goal itself; 
and why should that be impossible? And it is clear that, simply 
because they regard their hypothesis as the most plausible, we 
are not obliged to deny any other hypothesis absolutely; for to 
assert absolutely that heaven is a living being is pure 
presumption, for which there is no support. 


I say: 


The assertion of the philosophers that this movement is not a natural 
potency resembling the natural movement in earth and fire is true. And this is 
clear from their saying that this potency desires the place suitable to the body 
which possesses existence through this potency, and that the heavenly body, 
since all space is suitable to it, is not moved through such a potency, and the 
learned do not call this potency heavy or light. b Whether this potency 
depends on perception or not, and if so which kind of perception, is shown by 
other arguments. 


388 


And the summary of this is to say: The inanity of the first hypothesis, 
namely that the mover of heaven might be another body which is not heaven, 
is self-evident or nearly so. For this body cannot set the heavenly body in a 
circular movement without being moved by itself, as if one were to say that a 
man or an angel turned the heavens from east to west. , And if this were true, 
this animated body would have to be either outside the world or inside it; and 
it is impossible that it should be outside the world, since outside the world 
there is neither place nor emptiness, as has been shown in many passages, 
and it would also be necessary that when this body set it in motion it should 
rest upon a body supporting it, and this latter body again upon another, and 
so ad infinitum. But that it should be inside the world is also impossible, for 
then it ought to be perceived by the senses, since any body inside the world 
can be perceived, and this body, besides needing a body which would make it 
turn, would also need a body to carry it or perhaps the body conveying it and 
the body setting it in motion might be identical, and the conveying body 
would need a body to convey it, and the number of animated bodies which set 
things in motion would have to be equal to the number of heavenly bodies. 
And one would also have to ask about these bodies whether they were 
composed of the four elements, in which case they would be transitory, or 
whether they might be simple; and, if they were simple, what their nature was. 
All this is impossible, especially for one who has ascertained the natures of the 
simple bodies and learned their number and the species of bodies composed 
of them, and there is no sense in occupying ourselves with this matter here, 
for it has been proved in another place that this movement does not take 
place by constraint, since it is the principle of all movements, and through its 
intermediary, not only movements, but lifer is distributed to all beings. 


As to the second hypothesis, that God moves the heavens without having 
created a potency in them through which they move, this also is a very 
reprehensible doctrine, far from man’s understanding. It would mean that 
God touches and moves everything which is in this sublunary world, and that 
the causes and effects which are perceived are all without meaning, and that 
man might be man through another quality than the quality God has created 
in him and that the same would be true for all other things. But such a denial 
would amount to a denial of the intelligibles, for the intellect perceives things 


389 


only through their causes. This theory resembles the theory of those ancient 
philosophers, the Stoics, ? who say that God exists in everything; and we shall 
engage in a discussion with them’ when we treat the question of the denial of 
causes and effects. 


The third objection which assumes a natural movement is to suppose that 
the movement of heaven is caused by a natural potency in it and through an 
essential attribute, not through a soul. It says that the argument of the 
philosophers in denying this is false, in so far as they build their proof on the 
following argument. The philosophers, that is, say that if the movement of 
heaven occurred by nature, the place sought by its natural movement would 
be identical with the place which it abandoned, because every part of heaven 
moves to places from which it has moved, since its movement is circular. The 
place, however, from which natural local movement retires is different from 
the place it aims at, for the place from which it moves is an accidental place, 
while the place to which it moves is its natural place, in which it will come to 
rest. But, says Ghazali, this is a false assumption of the philosophers, for 
although they assume that the parts of heaven have many movements through 
many movers, this cannot be correct according to their own principles, for 
they affirm that the circular movement is unique, and that the body moved by 
it is unique, and therefore heaven is not in search of a place through its 
circular movement, and it is thus possible that in heaven there should be 
something through which it aims at the movement itself. 


But the justification of the philosophers is that they only say this to such 
people as believe that the stars change their place through a natural 
movement, similar to the change of place found in things moved by nature. 
And the true assumption of the philosophers is that through the circular 
movement the thing moved is not in search of a place, but only seeks the 
circular movement itself, and that things which behave in this way have of 
necessity as their mover a soul and not nature. Movement, that is to say, has 
existence only in the intellect, since outside the soul there exists only the thing 
moved and in it there is only a particular movement without any lasting 
existence. ; But what is moved towards movement in so far as it is movement 
must of necessity desire this movement, and what desires movement must of 


necessity represent it. 


390 


And this is one of the arguments through which it is evident that the 
heavenly bodies are provided with intellect and desire; and this is clear also 
from various other arguments, one of which is that we find that circular 
bodies move with two contrary movements at the same time, towards the east 
and towards the west; and this cannot happen through nature, for that which 


moves through nature moves in one movement alone. ‘ 


And we have already spoken of what caused the philosophers to believe that 
heaven possesses intellect, and their plainest proof is that, having understood 
that the mover of heaven is free from matter, they concluded that it can only 
move through being an object of thought and representation, and therefore 
the thing moved must be capable of thought and representation. And this is 
clear also from the fact that the movement of the heavens is a condition of the 
existence and preservation of the existents in the sublunary world, which 
cannot take place by accident. But these things can only be explained here in 


an informative and persuasive fashion. 








THE FIFTEENTH DISCUSSION 








TO REFUTE THE THEORY OF THE PHILOSOPHERS ABOUT THE 
AIM WHICH MOVES HEAVEN 


Ghazali says: 


The philosophers have also affirmed that heaven is an 
animal which obeys God by movement and by drawing near 
Him; for every voluntary movement arises for the sake of an 
end, since one cannot imagine that an act and a movement can 
proceed from an animal which does not prefer the act to its 
omission-indeed, if the act and its omission were to be 


equipollent, no act could be imagined. 


Further, approach to God does not mean seeking His grace 
and guarding oneself from His wrath, since God is too exalted 


391 


for wrath and grace; similar words can only be applied to Him 
metaphorically, and they are used in a metaphorical way when 
one speaks of His will to punish or to reward. ‘ Approach 
cannot mean the seeking of an approach to Him in space, for 
this is impossible; the only meaning it can have is of an 
approach in qualities, for God’s existence is the most perfect 
and every other existence is imperfect in relation to His, and in 
this imperfection there are degrees and distinctions. The angels 
are nearest to Him in quality, not in place; and this is the 
meaning of the term ‘the angels in His proximity -namely, the 
intellectual substances which neither change nor alter nor pass 
away, and which know things as they really are. And the nearer 
man comes to the angels in qualities the nearer he comes to 
God, and the end of man’s nature lies in assimilation to the 
angels. 


And when it is established that this is the meaning of 
‘approach to God’, and that it refers to seeking approach to Him 
in qualities, then this consists for man in knowledge of the 
realities of the existents and in his remaining eternally in the 
most perfect condition possible to him; for indeed permanence 
in the utmost perfection is God. 


As to the angels in His proximity, any perfection that is 
possible for them is actual with them in their existence, since 
there is no potency in them which could emerge into act, ‘ and 
therefore they are in the utmost perfection in regard to 
everything but God. And by ‘heavenly angels’ is meant the souls 
which move the heavens, and in them there is potency, and 
their perfections are divided into what is actual, like their 
circular shape and their appearance, which exists always, and 
what is potential, namely their appearance in a definite position 
and place; for any definite position is possible to them, but they 
are not actually in all positions, for to be in all of them at once 
is impossible. And since they cannot be at all times in all 
particular positions at once, they try to exhaust all these 


392 


particular positions by being in them specifically, so that they 
do not cease to aim at one position and one place after another; 
and this potentiality is never ending, nor do these movements 


ever end. 


But their one aim is to assimilate themselves to the First 
Principle, in the acquisition of the utmost perfection within the 
bounds of possibility with respect to Him, and this is the 
meaning of the obedience of the heavenly angels to God. And 
their assimilation is acquired in two ways. First, in completing 
every position specifically possible, and this is aimed at by first 
intention; secondly, by the order proceeding from their 
movement through the diversity of their configuration in trine 
and quartile, in conjunction and opposition, and through the 
diversity in the ascendant in relation to the earth, so that the 
good which is in the sublunary world can emanate from it, and 
all that happens arise from it. And every soul is intellective and 
longs for the perfection of its essence. 


I say: 


Everything he says here about the philosophers is a philosophical doctrine, 
or its consequence, or can be regarded as a philosophical doctrine, with one 
exception, when he says that heaven seeks by its movement the particular 
positions which are infinite; however, what is infinite cannot be sought, since 
it cannot be attained. Nobody has held this doctrine but Avicenna, and 
Ghazali’s objection to it, which we will mention later, is sufficient, and 
according to the philosophers it is the movement itself in so far as it is 
movement which is aimed at by heavens For the perfection of an animal, in so 
far as it is an animal, is movement; in this sublunary world rest occurs to the 
transitory animal only by accident, that is through the necessity of matter, for 
lassitude and fatigue touch the animal only because it is in matter. b The 
whole life and perfection of those animals which are not affected by tiredness 
and languor must of necessity lie in their movement; and their assimilation to 
their Creator consists in this, that by their movement they impart life to what 
exists in this sublunary world. 


393 


This movement, however, does not occur according to the philosophers in 
first intention for the sake of this sublunary world; that is, the heavenly body 
is not in first intention created for the sake of this sublunary world. For 
indeed this movement is the special act for the sake of which heaven is 
created, and if this movement occurred in first intention for the sake of the 
sublunary world, the body of the heavens would be created only for the sake 
of this sublunary world, and it is impossible, according to the philosophers, 
that the superior should be created for the sake of the inferior; on the 
contrary, out of the superior there follows the existence of the inferior, just as 
the perfection of the ruler in relation to his subject does not lie in his being a 
ruler, but his being a ruler is only the consequence of his perfection. In the 
same way the providence which prevails in this world is like the care of the 
ruler for his subjects, who have no salvation and no existence except in him, 
and especially in the ruler who for his most perfect and noble existence does 
not need to be a ruler, let alone that he should need his subjects’ existence. ‘ 


Ghazali says: 


The objection to this is that in the premisses of this 
argument there are controversial points. We shall not, however, 
pay any attention to them, but shall revert at once to the final 
intention the philosophers had in view and refute it from two 
standpoints. 


The first is to say: “To seek perfection through being in all 
possible places may be foolishness rather than obedience; is it 
not in some degree like a man, who has no occupation and who 
has adequate means to satisfy his wishes and needs, and who 
gets up and walks round in a country or in a house, and 
declares that by doing so he approaches God and that he 
perfects himself by arriving at all possible places, and says that 
it is possible for him to be in these places, but not possible for 
him to unite all the places numerically, and that therefore he 
fulfils this task specifically and that in this there is perfection 
and an approach to God? Indeed, it is his foolishness which 
makes him do such a stupid thing, and it may be said that to 


394 


change positions and pass from place to place is not a 
perfection which has any value or which may be an object of 


desire. 
And there is no difference between what they say and this. 
I say: 


It might be thought that the silliness of such an argument either comes from 
a very ignorant or from a very wicked man. Ghazali, however, has neither of 
these dispositions. But sometimes unwise words come by way of exception 
from a man who is not ignorant, and wicked talk from a man who is not 
wicked, and it shows the imperfection of people that such conceits can be 
addressed to them. 


But if we concede to Avicenna that the sphere aims through its movement at 
a change of positions, that this change of positions is what conserves the 
beings of this sublunary world after giving them their existence, and that this 
action is everlasting, can there then exist an obedience more complete than 
this? For instance, if a man exerted himself in guarding a city against the 
enemy, going round the city day and night, should we not regard this as a 
most important act of approach to God? But if we assumed that he moved 
round the town for the end which Ghazali attributes to Avicenna, namely that 
he only sought to perfect himself through trying to be in an infinite number of 
places, he would be declared mad. ‘ And this is the meaning of the Divine 
Words: ‘Verily thou canst not cleave the earth, and thou shalt not reach the 


mountains in height. ‘2 


And his assertion that, since heaven cannot complete the individual 
numerical positions or join them, it has to complete them specifically, is a 
faulty, incomprehensible expression, unless he means that its movement has 
to last in its totality since it cannot be lasting in its parts. For there are 
movements which are lasting neither in their parts nor in their totality, 
namely the movements of the transitory; and there are movements which are 
lasting in their totality, transitory in their parts, but notwithstanding this such 
a movement is said to be one in ways which are distinguished in many 
passages of the books of the philosophers. And his assertion that, since 
heaven cannot complete them numerically, it completes them specifically, is 


395 


erroneous, since the movement of heaven is numerically one, and one can 
only apply such an expression to the transitory movements in the sublunary 
world; for these movements, since they cannot be numerically one, are 


specifically one and lasting through the movement which is numerically one. 
Ghazali says: 


The second is to say: What you assert of the aim can be 
realized through the movement from west to east. Why, then, is 
the first movement from east to west, and why are not all the 
movements of the universe in the same direction? And if there 
is an intention in their diversity, why are they not different in 
an opposite way, so that the movement from the east should 
become the movement from the west, and the reverse? 
Everything you have mentioned of the occurrence of events like 
trine and sextile and others through the diversity of movements 
would happen just the same through the reverse. Also, what you 
have mentioned of the completion of the positions and places 
would happen just the same if the movement were in the 
opposite direction. Why then, since the reverse movement is 
possible for them, do they not move sometimes in one 
direction, sometimes in another, to complete all their 
possibilities, if it is in the completion of all their possibilities 
that their perfection lies? It is therefore shown that all these 
things are phantasms without any substance; for the secrets of 
the heavenly kingdom cannot be attained through such 
phantasms. God alone can manifest them to His prophets and 
saints through revelation, not through proof, and therefore the 
later philosophers are unable to give the reason for the 
direction of the movement of the heavenly bodies and why they 
have chosen it. 


I say: 


This objection is sophistical, for the transference from one question to 
another is an act of sophistry. Why does there follow, from their inability to 
assign the reason of the diversity in the directions of the movements of 


396 


heaven, their inability to give the reason for the movement of heaven or to say 
that there is no reason at all for this movement? But this whole argument is 
extremely weak and feeble. However, how happy the theologians are about 
this problem! They believe that they have refuted the philosophers over it, 
since they are ignorant of the different arguments by which the philosophers 
have arrived at their reasons and of the many reasons that are required and 
must be assigned to every existent, since the causes differ through the variety 
in the natures of the existents. For simple existents have no other cause for 
what proceeds from them than their own natures and their forms, , but in 
composite things there are found, beside their forms, efficient causes which 
produce their composition and the conjunction of their parts. The earth, for 
instance, has no other cause for its downward movement than its attribute of 
earthiness, and fire has no other cause for its upward movement than its own 
nature and its form, and through this nature it is said to be the opposite of 
earth. Likewise, for up and down there are no reasons why the one direction 
should be higher and the other lower, but this is determined by their nature. 
And since the differentiation of directions is determined through the 
directions themselves, and the differentiation of the movements through the 
differentiation of the directions, no other reason can be assigned for the 
variation in the movements than the variation in the directions of the things 
moved, and the variation in their natures depends on the variation of their 


natures; i. e. some are nobler than others. 


For instance, when a man sees that animals in walking place one leg in front 
of their body before the other and not the reverse, and asks why the animal 
does this, there is no sufficient answer except to say that an animal in its 
movement must have one leg to put forward and one to support itself on, and 
therefore an animal must have two sides, right and left, and the right is the 
one which is always put forward first because of its special potency and the 
left the one which always, or mostly, follows, because of its special potency; 
and it cannot be the reverse, so that the left side became the right, since the 
natures of the animal determine this, either through a determination in a 
majority of cases, or through a constant determination. 


The same is the case with the heavenly bodies since, if a person asks why 


heaven moves in a particular direction, the answer is that it is because it has a 


397 


right and a left, and especially because it is evident from its nature that it is a 
living being, only it has the peculiarity that the right side in a part of it is the 
left side in another part, z and that although it has only this one organ of 
locomotion it moves in opposite directions like a left foot which can also do 
the work of a right . And just as the answer to the question whether the animal 
would not be more perfect if its right were its left, and why the right has been 
differentiated to be the right, and the left to be the left, is that the only reason 
for this is that the nature of the side called right has been determined by its 
essence to be the right and not the left, and that the left side has been 
determined by its essence to be the left and not the right, and the noblest has 
been attributed to the noblest; in the same way, when it is asked why the right 
side has been differentiated for the movement of the highest sphere to be the 
right and the left side to be the left (for the reverse was also possible as the 
case of the planets shows), the only answer is that the noblest direction has 
been attributed to the noblest body, as upward movement has been attributed 
to fire, downward movement to earth. As to the fact that the other heavens 
move in two contrary movements’ besides the diurnal, this happens because 
of the necessity of this opposition of movements for the sublunary world, 
namely the movement of generation and corruption, b and it is not of the 
nature of the human intellect that it should apprehend more in such 
discussions and in this place than what we have mentioned. 


Having made this objection against the philosophers and asserted that they 
have no answer to it, he mentions an answer which some of the philosophers 


give. 
Ghazali says: 


Some philosophers say that since the perfection occurs 
through movement, from whatever side it may be, and the order 
of events on earth requires a diversity of movements and a 
determination of directions, the motive concerning them of the 
principle of movement lies in the approach to God’ and the 
motive of the direction of movement in the diffusion of good 
over the sublunary world. But we answer: ‘This is false for two 
reasons. The first is: if one may imagine such a thing, let us 


398 


declare that the nature of heaven demands rest, and must avoid 
movement and change, for this is in truth assimilation to God; 
for God is too exalted to change, and movement is a change, 
although God chose movement for the diffusion of His grace. 
For through it He is useful to others and it does not weigh on 
Him nor tire Him-so what is the objection to such a 
supposition? 


‘The second is that events are based on the diversity of the 
relations which result from the diversity in the directions of the 
movements. Now let the first movement be a movement from 
the west, and let the others move from the east, then the same 
diversity will arise as is needed for the diversity of the relations. 
Why then has one direction been specially chosen, since these 
varieties require only the principle of variety and in this sense 
one direction by itself is not superior to its contrary? ‘ 


I say: 


This theologian wants to indicate the cause of this from the point of view of 
the final cause, not of the efficient, and none of the philosophers doubts that 
there is here a final cause in second intention, which is necessary for the 
existence of everything in the sublunary world. And although this cause has 
not yet been ascertained in detail, nobody doubts that every movement, every 
progression or regression of the stars, has an influence on sublunary 
existence, so that, if these movements differed, the sublunary world would 
become disorganized. But many of these causes are either still completely 
unknown or become known after a long time and a long experience, z as it is 


said that Aristotle asserted in his book On Astrological Theorems. 3 


As to the general questions, it is easier to discover them, and the astrologers 
have indeed come to know many of them and in our own time many of these 
things have been apprehended which ancient nations, like the Chaldaeans and 
others, had already discovered. 


And for this reason one cannot doubt that there is a wisdom in the existents, 
since it has become clear through induction that everything which appears in 
heaven is there through provident wisdom and through a final cause. And if 


399 


there are final causes in animals, it is still more appropriate that there should 
be final causes in the heavenly bodies. ‘ For in the case of man and animal 
about ten thousand signs of providence, have become known in a period of a 
thousand years, and it seems not impossible that in the infinite course of 
years much of the purpose of the heavenly bodies will come to light. “ And we 
find that about these things the ancients give some mysterious indications 
which the initiated, that is the most highly reputed of the philosophers, know 
how to interpret. 


As to the two reasons in Ghazali’s argument, the first, that assimilation to 
God would determine heaven to be at rest, since God is too exalted for 
movement, but that God has chosen movement because through it His grace 
can be diffused over transitory things-this is a faulty argument, since God is 
neither at rest nor moving, ‘ and the motion of body is nobler for it than rest, 
and when an existent assimilates itself to God it assimilates itself to Him by 
being in the noblest of its states, which is movement. As to Ghazali’s second 
point, it has been answered previously. 








THE SIXTEENTH DISCUSSION 








TO REFUTE THEIR THEORY THAT THE SOULS OF THE 
HEAVENS OBSERVE ALL THE PARTICULAR EVENTS OF THIS 
WORLD, AND THAT THE MEANING OF ‘THE INDELIBLE TABLET 
‘IS THE SOULS OF THE HEAVENS, AND THAT THE INSCRIPTION 
OF THE PARTICULAR EVENTS OF THE WORLD ON THE TABLET 
RESEMBLES THE DELINEATION OF THE FACTS REMEMBERED 
ON THE FACULTY OF MEMORY CONTAINED IN THE BRAIN OF 
MAN, AND THAT THIS IS NOT A BROAD HARD BODY’ ON 
WHICH THINGS ARE WRITTEN AS THINGS ARE WRITTEN ON A 
SLATE BY CHILDREN; SINCE THE QUANTITY OF THIS WRITING 
DEMANDS A LARGE SURFACE OF MATERIAL ON WHICH IT IS 
WRITTEN, AND IF THIS WRITING IS INFINITE, THE MATERIAL 
ON WHICH IT IS WRITTEN MUST BE INFINITE TOO, AND ONE 


400 


CANNOT IMAGINE AN INFINITE BODY, NOR INFINITE LINES 
ON A BODY, NOR CAN AN UNLIMITED NUMBER OF THINGS BE 
DETERMINED BY A FINITE NUMBER OF LINES 


Ghazali says: 


And they assert that the heavenly angels are the souls of the 
heavens, and that the cherubim which are in the proximity of 
God are the separate intellects, which are substances subsisting 
by themselves which do not fill space and do not employ 
bodies, and that from them the individual forms emanate in the 
heavenly souls, and that those separate intellects are superior to 
the heavenly angels, because the former bestow and the latter 
acquire, and bestowing is superior to acquiring, and therefore 
the highest is symbolized by the pen’ and it is said that God 
knows through the pen, because He is like the engraver who 
bestows as does the pen and the recipient is compared to the 
tablet. And this is their doctrine. And the discussion of this 
question differs from the preceding one in so far as that what 
we mentioned previously is not impossible, because its 
conclusion was that heaven is an animal moving for a purpose, 
and this is possible; but this doctrine amounts to the assertion 
that the created can know the infinite particulars, which is often 
regarded as impossible, and in any case, has to be proved, since 
by itself it is a mere presumption. 


I say: 


What he mentions here is, to my knowledge, not said by any philosophers 
except Avicenna, namely that the heavenly bodies have representations, not to 
speak of the fact that these representations should be infinite, and Alexander 
of Aphrodisias explains in his book called The Principles of the Universe that 
these bodies have no representations, because representations exist only in 
animals because of their conservation, and these bodies do not fear 
corruption, and with respect to them representations would be valueless (and 
likewise sensations). ‘ If they had representations they would also have 


401 


sensations, since sensations are the condition for representations and every 
being which has representations necessarily has sensations, although the 
reverse is not true . Therefore to interpret the indelible tablet in the way 
Ghazali says that they do is not correct, and the only possible interpretation of 
the separate intellects which move the different spheres by means of 
subordination is that they are the angels in the proximity of God, s if one 
wants to harmonize the conclusions of reason with the statements of the Holy 


Law. 
Ghazali says: 


And they prove this by saying that the circular movement is 
voluntary and that the will follows the thing willed, b and that a 
universal thing willed can only be intended by a universal will, 
and that from the universal will nothing proceeds. For-so they 
say-every actual existent is determined and individual, and the 
relation of the universal will to the individual units is one and 
the same, and no individual thing proceeds from it. Therefore 
an individual will is needed for a definite movement. For every 
particular movement from every definite point to another 
definite point the sphere has a will, and this sphere no doubt 
has a representation of this particular movement through a 
bodily potency, since individuals only perceive through bodily 
potencies and every will must of necessity represent the thing 
willed, i. e. must know it, be it an individual or a universal. And 
if the sphere has a representation and a comprehension of the 
particular movements, it must of necessity also comprehend 
what follows from them through the diversity of their relations 
to the earth, because some of the individuals of the sphere are 
rising, some setting, some in the middle of the sky for some 
people and under the earth for others. 


And likewise it must know the consequences of the diversity 
of those relations which always arise anew through the 
movement, like trine and sextile, opposition and conjunction, 


to other such heavenly occurrences; and all earthly occurrences 


402 


depend on heavenly occurrences either directly, or through one 
intermediary, or through many; and in short every event has a 
cause, occurring in a concatenation which terminates in the 
eternal heavenly movement, some parts of which are the causes 
of others. 


Thus the causes and effects ascend in their concatenation to 
the particular heavenly movements, and the _ sphere 
representing the movements represents their consequences and 
the consequences of their consequences, so as to reach the end 
of the series. And therefore the sphere observes everything that 
occurs and everything that will occur, and its occurrence is 
necessary through its cause, and whenever the cause is realized, 
the effect is realized. We only do not know the future events 
because all their causes are not known to us; for if we knew all 
the causes, we should know all the effects, for when we know, 
for instance, that fire will come into contact with cotton at a 
certain moment, we know that the cotton will burn, and when 
we know that a man will eat, we know that his appetite will be 
satisfied, and when we know that a man will walk over a certain 
spot lightly covered where a treasure is buried, and his feet will 
accidentally touch the treasure and he will perceive it, ‘ we 
know that he will be rich because of this treasure. Only as a 
matter of fact we do not know these causes. Sometimes we 
know part of the causes, and then we guess what may happen, 
and when we know the more important or the greater f part of 
them, we have a sound opinion about the occurrence of these 
events; but if we knew all the causes, then we should know all 
the effects. However, the heavenly occurrences are many and, 
besides, they are mixed up with earthly events and it is not in 
human power to observe the causality of all these. But the souls 
of the heavens perceive it through their perception of the First 
Cause and through the observation of their consequences and 
the consequences of their consequences, to the end of their 


concatenation. ‘ 


403 


And therefore they say that the man who dreams sees in his 
dream what will happen in the future through being in contact 
with the indelible tablet and observing it. And when he observes 
a thing it remains often in his memory as it really was, but 
sometimes his imagination hastens to symbolize it, for it is of 
the nature of this faculty to represent things through things 
which, in some way or another, are related to them, or to 
transfer things to their opposites; and the thing that was 
perceived is then effaced in his memory, but the image 
belonging to his imagination remains there. Then it is necessary 
to interpret what his imagination symbolizes, e. g. a man by 
means of a tree, a woman by means of a shoe, a servant by 
means of some household vessels, and a man who observes the 
paying of the legal alms and the poor-tax by means of linseed 
oil, for the linseed in the lamp is the cause of the illumination; it 
is on this principle that the interpretation of dreams is based. ; 


And they assert that contact with these souls takes place in a 
state of languor, since then there is no obstacle; for when we are 
awake we are occupied with what the senses and our passions 
convey to us, and occupation with those sensual things keeps us 
away from this contact, but when in sleep some of these 
occupations are obliterated, the disposition for this contact 
appears. And they assert that the prophet Muhammad 
perceived the hidden universe in this way; however, the 
spiritual faculty of a prophet has such power that it cannot be 
overwhelmed by the external senses, and therefore he sees in a 
waking condition what other people perceive in their sleep. “ 
But his imagination also pictures to him what he sees, and 
although sometimes the thing he sees remains in his memory 
exactly as it was, sometimes only its representation remains, 
and such an inspiration is just as much in need of 
interpretation as such dreams are. And if all events were not 
eternally inscribed on the indelible tablet, the prophets would 
not know the hidden world either awake or asleep; but the pen 


404 


has indelibly fixed what shall be till the day of resurrection, and 
the meaning of this we have explained. And this we wanted to 
impart to make their doctrine understood. 


I say: 


We have already said that we do not know of anyone who holds this theory 
but Avicenna. And the proof which Ghazali relates rests on very weak 
premisses, although it is persuasive and dialectical. For it is assumed that 
every particular effect proceeds from an animate being through the particular 
representation of this effect and of the particular movements through which 
this effect is realized. To this major premiss a minor premiss is joined, that 
heaven is an animate being from which particular acts proceed. From these 
premisses it is concluded that the particular effects, and the particular acts 
which proceed from heaven, occur through a particular representation which 
is called imagination; and that this is not only apparent from the different 
sciences, but also from many animals which perform particular acts, like the 
bees and the spider. ‘ 


But the objection to these premisses is that no particular act proceeds from 
beings endowed with intellect, except when this act is represented through a 
universal representation, and then endless individual things proceed from it- 
for instance the form of a cupboard proceeds from a carpenter only through a 
universal representation which does not distinguish one particular cupboard 
from another. And the same thing happens when the works of animals 
proceed by nature’ from them. And these representations are an intermediary 
between the universal and the particular perceptions; that is, they are an 
intermediary between the definition of a things and its particular 
representation . But if the heavenly bodies have representations, then they 
must have representations that are of the nature of the universal, not of the 
nature of the particular representation which is acquired through the senses. 
And it is not possible that our acts should proceed from particular 
representations, and therefore the philosophers believe that the represented 
forms from which the definite acts of animals proceed are like an 
intermediary between the intelligibles and the individual forms represented, 
e. g. the form by reason of which non-carnivorous birds flee from birds of 


405 


prey, and the form by reason of which bees build their cells. ? The only artisan 
who needs an individual sensible image is the one who does not possess this 
universal representation, which is necessary for the origination of the 
individual things. e 


It is this universal image which is the motive power for the universal will 
which does not aim at a particular individual; and it is the individual will 
which aims at a particular individual of one and the same species-this, 
however, does not happen in the heavenly bodies. 


And that a universal will should exist for a universal thing in so far as it is 
universal is impossible, since the universal does not exist outside the soul and 
has no transitory existence. And his primary division of will into a universal 
and an individual will is, indeed, not correct; otherwise one must say that the 
heavenly bodies move towards the definite limits of things without the 
definite limit being accompanied by the representation of an individual 
existent, in contrast to what happens with us. And his assertion that no 
individual is realized through the universal will is false, if by ‘universal will’ is 
understood that which does not distinguish one individual from another, but 
represents it universally, as is the case with a king who arranges his armies for 
battle. ‘ If, however, there is understood by ‘will’ its being attached to a 
universal entity itself, then it must be said that such an attachment is not a 
will at all, and there does not exist such a will except in the way we have 
explained . 


And if it followed from the nature of the heavenly bodies that they think 
sublunary things by way of imagination, they must do this through universal 
imaginations which are the results of definition, not through particular 
imaginations which are the results of senseimpressions. And it seems quite 
clear that they cannot think sublunary things through individual 
representations especially when it is said that what proceeds from them 
proceeds from them by second intention. However, the doctrine of the 
philosophers is that the heavenly bodies think themselves and think the 
sublunary world, and whether they think the sublunary world as something 
different from themselves is a problem that must be examined in places 
specially reserved for this problem; and in general, if the heavens know, the 


406 


term ‘knowledge’ is attributed to our knowledge and theirs in an equivocal 
Way. 


As to the theory he gives here about the cause of revelation and dreams, this 
is the theory of Avicenna alone, and the opinions of the ancient philosophers 
differ from his. For the existence of a knowledge of individuals actually 
infinite, in so far as it is an individual knowledge, is impossible, and I 
understand by individual knowledge that kind of apprehension which is 
called representation. But there is no reason to introduce here the question of 
dreams and revelation, for this leads to much controversy, and such an act is 
an act of sophistry, not of dialectics. My statement, however, that the 
imaginations of the heavenly bodies are imaginations intermediary between 
individual and universal representations is a dialectical argument; for what 
results from the principle of the philosophers is that the heavenly bodies have 
no imagination whatever, for these imaginations, as we have said already, 
whether they are universal or particular, aim only at conservation and 
protection; and they are also a condition for our intellectual representation, 
which therefore is transitory, but the intellectual representation of the 
heavenly bodies, since it is not transitory, cannot be accompanied by 
imagination, for otherwise it would depend in one way or another on 
imagination. Therefore their apprehension is neither universal nor individual, 
but these two kinds of knowledge, universal and individual, are here unified, 
and because of this they can only be distinguished by their matters. And in 
this way knowledge of the occult and of dreams and the like can be acquired, 
and this will be explained perfectly in its proper place. 


Ghazali says: 


And the answer is for us to ask: How will you refute those 
who say that the prophet knows the occult through God, who 
shows it to him by way of revelation, arid the same is the case 
with the man who has visions in his sleep, which he only sees 
because God or an angel inspires them in him? We do riot need 
any of the things you have related, and you have not the 
slightest proof for introducing the Holy Law by mentioning the 
Tablet and the Pen; for true believers do not in the least 


407 


understand by ‘the Tablet’ and ‘the Pen’ what you have 
mentioned, and the way to embrace the religious dogmas is not 
to refuse to admit them in the way they must be understood. ‘ 
And, although the possibility of what you have said is granted, 
so long as you cannot indicate why you deny the correctness of 
the sense in which these religious terms are understood, the 
reality of what you say- cannot be known or verified. Indeed, 
the only way to arrive at knowledge of such things is through 
the Holy Law, not by reason. The rational proofofwhat you have 
said is primarily based on many premisses, the refutation of 
which need not detain us, but we shall limit ourselves to the 


discussion of three propositions. 


The first proposition is that you say that the movement of 
heaven is voluntary, and we have already settled this problem 
and shown the futility of your claim. 


If; however, to oblige you the grant you this voluntary 
movement, the second proposition is your saying that heaven 
needs a particular representation for each particular movement, 
and this we do not concede. For according to you there are no 
parts in the sphere, which is one single thing and is only 
divided in imagination; nor are there particular movements, for 
there is only one continuous movement, and in order to 
complete all the places possible for it, it is sufficient for the 
sphere to desire this one movement, as you have indicated 
yourselves, and it will only need universal representation and a 


universal will. 


Let us give ail example of the universal and the particular 
will to make the intention of the philosophers clear. When, for 
instance, a man has a universal aim to make the pilgrimage to 
Mecca, from this universal will no movement follows, ‘ for the 
movement occurs as a particular movement, in a particular 
direction, and of a particular extent, and the man does not 
cease, in directing himself to Mecca, to form new 


408 


representations of the place one after another, where he will go 
and the direction lie will take, and every particular 
representation will be followed by a particular will to move 
from the place which lie has reached by his movement. And this 
is what they understood by a particular movement which 
follows a particular will; and this is granted, for the directions, 
when lie takes the road to Mecca, are many, and the distance is 
undetermined, and lie must determine place after place and 
direction after direction, passing from one particular will to 


another. 


But the heavenly movement has only one direction, for it is 
a sphere and moves oil its axis in its own space, going neither 
beyond its own space nor beyond the movement willed. There is 
therefore only one direction and one impulse and one aim, like 
the downward movement of the stone, which tends towards the 
earth in the shortest way, and the shortest way is the straight 
line, and the straight line is determined, ‘ and therefore this 
movement needs no new cause besides the universal nature 
which tends to the centre of the earth while it changes its 
distance from the earth, and arrives at and departs from one 
definite place after another. In the same way the universal will 
suffices for this movement, and nothing else is required, and 
the assumption of this proposition is a mere presumption. 


I say: 
As to Ghazali’s words: 


And the answer is for us to ask: How will you refute those who say.... We 
do not need any of the things you have related. this answer is based on 
tradition, not on reason, and there is no sense in introducing it in this book. 
The philosophers examine everything there is in the Holy Law, and, if it is 
found to agree with reason, we arrive at a more perfect knowledge; if, 
however, reason does riot perceive its truth, it becomes known that human 
reason cannot attain it, and that only the Holy Law perceives it. , Ghazali’s 
argument against the philosophers about the interpretation of the Tablet and 


409 


the Pen does not belong to the problem under discussion, and there is 
therefore no sense in introducing it here. And this interpretation of 
knowledge of the occult, according to Avicenna, leas no sense. 


The rational objection he adduces against Avicenna over this problem is well 
founded. For there are for heaven no particular motions of particular 
distances that would require imagination. The animate being which moves 
through particular motions in particular spaces imagines, no doubt, these 
spaces towards which it moves, and these movements, when it cannot visually 
perceive these distances; the circular, however, as Ghazali says, moves qua 
circular in one single movement, although from this one movement there 
follow many different particular motions in the existents below it. These 
spheres, however, are not concerned with those particular movements, but 
their only intention is to conserve the species of which these particulars are 
the particulars, not to conserve the existence of any of these particulars in so 
far as they are particulars, for, if so, heaven would surely possess imagination. 


The question that still needs to be examined is whether the temporal 
particulars which proceed from the heavenly movement are intended for their 
own sake or only for the preservation of the species. ‘ This question cannot be 
treated here, but it certainly seems that there exists a providence as concerns 
individuals, as appears from true dreams and the like, e. g. the 
prognostication of the future; however, in reality this is a providence 
concerning the species. 


Ghazali says: 


The third proposition-and this indeed is a very bold 
presumptionis that they say that, when heaven represents 
particular movements, it also represents their results and 
consequences. This is pure nonsense, like saying that, when a 
man moves himself and knows his movement, he must also 
know the consequences of his movement vertically and 
horizontally (that is, the bodies which are above and under him 
and at his side), and when he moves in the sun he must know 
the places upon. which his shadow falls and does not fall, and 
what happens through the coolness of his shadow because of 


410 


the interruption of the rays of the sun there, and what happens 
through the compression of the particles of earth under his 
foot, and what happens through the separation of these 
particles, and what happens to the humours inside him by their 
changing through his movement into warmth, and which parts 
of him are changed into sweat, and so on, till he knows all the 
occurrences inside and outside his body of which the movement 
is the cause or the condition or the disposition or the aptitude. 
And this is nonsense which no intelligent man can believe, and 
by which none but the ignorant can be beguiled. And this is 
what this presumption amounts to. 


Besides, we may ask: ‘Are these different particulars which 
are known to the soul of the sphere the events which are 
occurring at the present moment or are future events also 
brought in relation to it? ‘If you limit its knowledge to present 
events you deny its perception of the occult and the 
apprehension of future events through it, by the prophets in the 
state of wakefulness, by others in their sleep; and then the point 
of this proof disappears. For it is indeed presumption to say 
that he who knows a thing knows its consequences and results, 
so that if we knew all causes we should also know all future 
events. For, indeed, the causes of all events are to be found at 
present in the heavenly movement, but it determines the effect 
either through one intermediary or through many. And if this 
knowledge covers the future also, it will not have an end, and 
how can the distinction between particulars in the infinite 
future be known, and how can many different particular objects 
of knowledge, of an infinite number and without an end to their 
units, be collected in a created soul, at one and the same 
moment without any sequence? ‘ He whose intellect does not 
perceive the impossibility of this may well despair of his 
intellect. 


And if they reverse this against us with respect to God’s 
knowledge, God’s knowledge is not attached to its object in its 


411 


correspondence with the things known, in the way this 
attachment exists in the case of things known by created beings, 
but as soon as the soul of the sphere moves round like the soul 
of man, ‘ it belongs to the same kind as the soul of man, and 
also it participates with the soul of man in the perception of 
individuals through an intermediary. , And although no 
absolute knowledge can be had about this, it is most probable 
that the soul of the sphere is of the same kind as the human 
soul; and if this is not most probable, it is possible, and the 
possibility destroys the claim to absolute knowledge they put 


forward. 


And if it is said, ‘It is also proper to the human soul in its 
essence to perceive all things, but its preoccupation with the 
consequences of passion, anger, greed, resentment, envy, 
hunger, pain, and in short the accidents of the body and what 
the sensations convey to the body, is so great that, when the 
human soul is occupied with one of these things, it neglects 
everything else; but the souls of the spheres are free from these 
attributes, and nothing occupies them, and neither care nor 
pain nor perception overwhelms them, and therefore they know 
everything’-we answer: ‘How do you know that nothing 
occupies them? Does not their service of the First and their 
longing for Him submerge them and keep them from the 
representation of particular things? And what makes it 
impossible to suppose other impediments than anger and 
passion? For these are sensual hindrances, and how do you 
know that these hindrances are limited in the way we 
experience them? For there are occupations for the learned 
through the excellence of their interests and the desire for 
leadership which children are unable to imagine, and which 
they cannot believe to be occupations and hindrances. ‘ And 
how do you know that analogous things are impossible for the 
souls of the spheres? ‘ 


412 


This is what we wanted to mention about those sciences to 
which they give the name of metaphysical. 


I say: 


As to his regarding it as impossible that there should exist an immaterial 
intellect which thinks things with their consequences, comprising them all, 
neither the impossibility nor the necessity of its existence is a self-evident fact, 
but the philosophers affirm that they have a proof of its existence. As to the 
existence of infinite representations, this cannot be imagined in any 
individual, but the philosophers affirm that they have a proof of the existence 
of the infinite in the eternal knowledge and an answer to the question how 
man can attain knowledge of particular events in the future through the 
eternal knowledge, namely that of these things the soul thinks only the 
universal which is in the intellect, not the particular which is particularized in 
the soul. For individuals are known to the soul because it is potentially all 
existents, and what is in potency emerges into act either through the sensible 
things or through the nature of the intellect, which is prior to sensible things 
in reality (I mean the intellect through which sensible things become stable 
intelligibles, not, however, in such a way that in this knowledge there are 
representations of an infinite number of individuals). ‘ In short, the 
philosophers assert that these two kinds of knowledge, the universal and the 
particular, are unified in the knowledge which is separated from matter; and 
when this knowledge emanates in the sublunary world it divides itself into 
universal and particular, although this knowledge itself is neither the one nor 
the other. But the proof of this or its contrary cannot be given here. And the 
discussion here about these questions is like the assumption of geometrical 
propositions which are not well enough known to meet with immediate assent 
and which are not convincing at first sight. And Ghazali mixes one part with 
another, i. e. lie starts objecting to one part of the theory through another, and 
this is the worst method of discussion, because in this way assent neither by 
proof nor by persuasion can be obtained. 


Likewise the problems about the differences between the souls of the 
heavenly bodies and the soul of man are all very obscure, and when such 
things are discussed in a place not proper to them the discussion becomes 


413 


either irrelevant or dialectical and superficial; that is to say, the conclusions 
are drawn from possible premisses, like their assertion that the irascible and 
the concupiscible soul hinder the human soul in the perception of what is 
proper to it. It appears from the nature of these and similar sayings that they 
are possible and are in need of proofs, and that they open the way to many 
conflicting possibilities. 


And this closes what we decided to mention of the different assertions which 
this book contains about theological problems; this is the most important part 
of our book. We shall now speak on physical problems. 








ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 








Ghazali says: 


The so-called natural sciences are many, and we shall 
enumerate their parts, in order to make it known that the Holy 
Law does not ask one to contest and refute them, except in 
certain points we shall mention. ‘ They are divided into 
principal classes and subdivisions The principal classes are 
eight. In the first class are treated the divisibility, movement, 
and change which affect body in so far as it is body, and the 
relations and consequences of movement like time, space, and 
void, ‘ and all this is contained in Aristotle’s Physics. The 
second treats of the disposition of the parts of the elements of 
the world, namely heaven and the four elements which are 
within the sphere of the moon, and their natures and the cause 
of the disposition of each of them in a definite place; and this is 
contained in Aristotle’s De coelo. The third treats of the 
conditions of generation and corruption, of equivocal 
generation and of sexual generation, of growth and decay, of 
transmutations, and how the species are conserved, whereas the 
individuals perish through the two heavenly movements 
(westwards and eastwards), and this is contained in De 
generatione et corruptione. The fourth treats of the conditions 


414 


which are found in the four elements through their mixture, by 
which there occur meteorological phenomena like clouds and 
rain and thunder, lightning, the halo round the moon, the 
rainbow, thunderbolts, winds, and earthquakes. The fifth treats 
of mineralogy, the sixth of botany. The seventh treats of 
zoology, which is contained in the book Historia animalium. 
The eighth treats of the soul of animals and the perceptive 
faculties, and says that the soul of man does not die through the 
death of his body but that it is a spiritual substance for which 


annihilation is impossible. 


The subdivisions are seven: The first is medicine, whose end 
is the knowledge of the principles of the human body and its 
conditions of health and illness, their causes and symptoms, so 
that illness may be expelled and health preserved. The second, 
judicial astrology, which conjectures from the aspects and 
configuration of the stars the conditions which will be found in 
the world and in the State and the consequences of dates of 
births and of years. The third is physiognomy, which infers 
character from the external appearance.‘ The fourth is dream- 
interpretation, which infers what the soul has witnessed of the 
world of the occult from dream images, for the imaginative 
faculty imagines this symbolically. The fifth is the telesmatical 
art, that is the combination of celestial virtues with some 
earthly so as to constitute a power which can perform 
marvellous acts in the earthly world . The sixth is the art of 
incantation, which is the mixing of the virtues of earthly 
substances to produce marvellous things from them. ‘ The 
seventh is alchemy, whose aim is to change the properties of 
minerals so that finally gold and silver are produced by a kind 
of magic. , And there is no need to be opposed to any of these 
sciences by reason of the Divine Law; we dissent from the 
philosophers in all these sciences in regard to four points only. 


I say: 


415 


As to his enumeration of the eight kinds of physical science, this is exact 
according to the doctrine of Aristotle. But his enumeration of the subdivisions 
is not correct. Medicine is not one of the natural sciences, but is a practical 
science which takes its principles from physical science; for physical science is 
theoretical and medicine is practical, and when we study a problem common 
to theoretical science and practical we can regard it from two points of view; 
for instance, in our study of health and illness the student of physics observes 
health and nature as kinds of natural existents, whereas the physician studies 
them with the intention of preserving the one, health, and keeping down the 
other, illness. Neither does judicial astrology belong to physical science; it is 
only a prognostication of future events, and is of the same type as augury and 
vaticination. Physiognomy is also of the same kind, except that its object is 
occult things in the present, not in the future. , The interpretation of dreams 
too is a prognosticating science, and this type belongs neither to the 
theoretical nor to the practical sciences, although it is reputed to have a 
practical value. The telesmatical art is vain, for if we assume the positions of 
the spheres to exert a power on artificial products, this power will remain 
inside the product and not pass on to things outside it. As to conjuring, this is 
the type of thing that produces wonder, but it is certainly not a theoretical 
science. Whether alchemy really exists is very dubious; if it exists, its artificial 
product cannot be identical with the product of nature; art can at most 
become similar to nature but cannot attain nature itself in reality. ‘ As to the 
question whether it can produce anything which resembles the natural 
product generically, we do not possess sufficient data to assert categorically 
its impossibility or possibility, but only prolonged experiments over a lengthy 
period can procure the necessary evidence. We shall treat the four points 
Ghazali mentions one after the other. 


Ghazali says: 


The first point is their assertion that this connexion 
observed between causes and effects is of logical necessity, and 
that the existence of the cause without the effect or the effect 
without the cause is not within the realm of the contingent and 
possible. The second point is their assertion that human souls 


¢ 


are substances existing by themselves, ‘ not imprinted on the 


416 


body, and that the meaning of death is the end of their 
attachment to the body and the end of their direction of the 
body; and that otherwise the soul would exist at any time by 
itself. They affirm that this is known by demonstrative proof. 
The third point is their assertion that these souls cannot cease 
to exist, but that when they exist they are eternal and their 
annihilation cannot be conceived. ‘ The fourth point is their 
assertion that these souls cannot return to their bodies. ‘ 


As to the first point, it is necessary to contest it, for on its 
negation depends the possibility of affirming the existence of 
miracles which interrupt the usual course of nature, 4like the 
changing of the rod into a serpents or the resurrection of the 
dead or the cleavage of the moon, b and those who consider the 
ordinary course of nature a logical necessity regard all this as 
impossible. They interpret the resurrection of the dead in the 
Qur’an by saying that the cessation of the death of ignorance is 
to be understood by it, and the rod which conceived the arch- 
deceiver, the serpent, by saying that it means the clear divine 
proof in the hands of Moses to refute the false doctrines of the 
heretics; and as to the cleavage of the moon they often deny that 
it took place and assert. that it does not rest on a sound 
tradition; and the philosophers accept miracles that interrupt 
the usual course of nature only in three cases. 


First: in respect to the imaginative faculty they say that 
when this faculty becomes predominant and strong, and the 
senses and perceptions do not submerge it, it observes the 
Indelible Tablet, and the forms of particular events which will 
happen in the future become imprinted on it; and that this 
happens to the prophets in a waking condition and to other 
people in sleep, and that this is a peculiar quality of the 
imaginative faculty in prophecy. 


Secondly: in respect of a property of the rational speculative 
faculty i. e. intellectual acuteness, that is rapidity in passing 


417 


from one known thing to another; for often when a problem 
which has been proved is mentioned to a keen-sighted man he 
is at once aware of its proof, and when the proof is mentioned 
to him he understands what is proved by himself, and in 
general when the middle term occurs to him he is at once aware 
of the conclusion, and when the two terms of the conclusion are 
present in his mind the middle term which connects the two 
terms of the conclusion occurs to him. And in this matter 
people are different; there are those who understand by 
themselves, those who understand when the slightest hint is 
given to them, and those who, being instructed, understand 
only after much trouble; and while on the one hand it may be 
assumed that incapacity to understand can reach such a degree 
that a man does not understand anything at all and has, 
although instructed, no disposition whatever to grasp the 
intelligibles, it may on the other hand be assumed that his 
capacity and proficiency may be so great as to arrive at a 
comprehension of all the intelligibles or the majority of them in 
the shortest and quickest time. And this difference exists 
quantitatively over all or certain problems, and qualitatively so 
that there is an excellence in quickness and easiness, and the 
understanding of a holy and pure soul may reach through its 
acuteness all intelligibles in the shortest time possible; and this 
is the soul of a prophet, who possesses a miraculous speculative 
faculty and so far as the intelligibles are concerned is not in 
need of a teacher; but it is as if he learned by himself, and he it 
is who is described by the words ‘the oil ofwhich would well- 
nigh give light though no fire were in contact with it, light upon 
light’. ‘ 


Thirdly: in respect to a practical psychological faculty which 
can reach such a pitch as to influence and subject the things of 
nature: for instance, when our soul imagines something the 
limbs and the potencies in these limbs obey it and move in the 


required direction which we imagine, so that when a man 


418 


imagines something sweet of taste the corners of his mouth 
begin to water, and the potency which brings forth the saliva 
from the places where it is springs- into action, and when coitus 
is imagined the copulative potency springs into action, and the 
penis extends;z indeed, when a man walks on a plank between 
two walls over an empty space, his imagination is stirred by the 
possibility of falling and his body is impressed by this 
imagination and in fact he falls, but when this plank is on the 
earth, he walks over it without falling. ‘ This happens because 
the body and the bodily faculties are created to be subservient 
and subordinate to the soul, and there is a difference here 
according to the purity and the power o: the souls. And it is not 
impossible that the power of the soul should reach such a 
degree that also the natural power of things outside a man’s 
body obeys it, since the soul of man is not impressed on his 
body although there is created in man’s nature a certain 
impulse and desire to govern his body. And if it is possible that 
the limbs of his body should obey him, it is not impossible that 
other things besides his body should obey him and that his soul 
should control the blasts of the wind or the downpour of rain, 
or the striking of a thunderbolt or the trembling of the earth, 
which causes a land to be swallowed up with its inhabitants. s 
The same is the case with his influence in producing cold or 
warmth or a movement in the air; this warmth or cold comes 
about through his soul, b all these things occur without any 
apparent physical cause, and such a thing will be a miracle 
brought about by a prophet. But this only happens in matters 
disposed to receive it, and cannot attain such a scale that wood 
could be changed into an animal or that the moon, which 
cannot undergo cleavage, could be cloven. This is their theory 
of miracles, and we do not deny anything they have mentioned, 
and that such things happen to prophets; we are only opposed 
to their limiting themselves to this, and to their denial of the 
possibility that a stick might change into a serpent, and of the 
resurrection of the dead and other things. We must occupy 


419 


ourselves with this question in order to be able to assert the 
existence of miracles and for still another reason, namely to 
give effective support to the doctrine on which the Muslims 
base their belief that God can do anything. And let us now fulfil 


our intention. 
I say: 


The ancient philosophers did not discuss the problem of miracles, since 
according to them such things must not be examined and questioned; for they 
are the principles of the religions, and the man who inquires into them and 
doubts them merits punishment, like the man who examines the other general 
religious principles, such as whether God exists or blessedness or the virtues. 
For the existence of all these cannot be doubted, and the mode of their 
existence is something divine which human apprehension cannot attain. The 
reason for this is that these are the principles of the acts through which man 
becomes virtuous, and that one can only attain knowledge after the 
attainment of virtue. ‘ One must not investigate the principles which cause 
virtue before the attainment of virtue, and since the theoretical sciences can 
only be perfected through assumptions and axioms which the learner accepts 
in the first place, this must be still more the case with the practical sciences. 


As to what Ghazali relates of the causes of this as they are according to the 
philosophers, I do not know anyone who asserts this but Avicenna. And if 
such facts are verified and it is possible that a body could be changed 
qualitatively through something which is neither a body nor a bodily potency, 
“then the reasons he mentions for this are possible; but not everything which 
in its nature is possible’ can be done by man, for what is possible to man is 
well known. Most things which are possible in themselves are impossible for 
man, and what is true of the prophet, that he can interrupt the ordinary 
course of nature, is impossible for man, but possible in itself; and because of 
this one need not assume that things logically impossible are possible for the 
prophets, and if you observe those miracles whose existence is confirmed, you 
will find that they are of this kind. The clearest of miracles is the Venerable 
Book of Allah, s the existence of which is not an interruption of the course of 
nature assumed by tradition, like the changing of a rod into a serpent, but its 


420 


miraculous nature is established by way of perception and consideration for 
every man who has been or who will be till the day of resurrection. And so this 
miracle is far superior to all others. 


Let this suffice for the man who is not satisfied with passing this problem 
over in silence, and may he understand that the argument on which the 
learned base their belief in the prophets is another, to which Ghazali himself 
has drawn attention in another place , b namely the act which proceeds from 
that quality through which the prophet is called prophet, that is the act of 
making known the mysterious and establishing religious laws which are in 
accordance with the truth and which bring about acts that will determine the 
happiness of the totality of mankind. I do not know anyone but Avicenna who 
has held the theory about dreams Ghazali mentions. The ancient philosophers 
assert about revelation and dreams only that they proceed from God through 
the intermediation of a spiritual incorporeal being which is according to them 
the bestower of the human intellect, and which is called by the best authors 
the active intellect and in the Holy Law angel. We shall now return to Ghazali’s 
four points. 








THE FIRST DISCUSSION 








Ghazali says: 


According to us the connexion between what is usually 
believed to be a cause and what is believed to be an effect is not 
a necessary connexion; each of two things has its own 
individuality and is not the other, ‘ and neither the affirmation 
nor the negation, neither the existence nor the non-existence of 
the one is implied in the affirmation, negation, existence, and 
non-existence of the other-e. g. the satisfaction of thirst does 
not imply drinking, nor satiety eating, nor burning contact with 
fire, nor light sunrise, nor decapitation death, nor recovery the 
drinking of medicine, nor evacuation the taking of a purgative, 
and so on for all the empirical connexions existing in medicine, 
astronomy, the sciences, and the crafts. For the connexion in 
these things is based on a prior power of God to create them in 


421 


a successive order, though not because this connexion is 
necessary in itself and cannot be disjoined-on the contrary, it is 
in God’s power to create satiety without eating, and death 
without decapitation, and to let life persist notwithstanding the 
decapitation, and so on with respect to all connexions. The 
philosophers, however, deny this possibility and claim that that 
is impossible. To investigate all these innumerable connexions 
would take us too long, and so we shall choose one single 
example, namely the burning of cotton through contact with 
fire; for we regard it as possible that the contact might occur 
without the burning taking place, and also that the cotton might 
be changed into ashes without any contact with fire, although 
the philosophers deny this possibility. The discussion of this 
matter has three points. 


The first is that our opponent claims that the agent of the 
burning is the fire exclusively;’ this is a natural, not a voluntary 
agent, and cannot abstain from what is in its nature when it is 
brought into contact with a receptive substratum. This we deny, 
saying: The agent of the burning is God, through His creating 
the black in the cotton and the disconnexion of its parts, and it 
is God who made the cotton burn and made it ashes either 
through the intermediation of angels or without 
intermediation. For fire is a dead body which has no action, and 
what is the proof that it is the agent? Indeed, the philosophers 
have no other proof than the observation of the occurrence of 
the burning, when there is contact with fire, but observation 


¢ 


proves only a simultaneity, ‘ not a causation, and, in reality, 
there is no other cause but God . For there is unanimity of 
opinion about the fact that the union of the spirit with the 
perceptive and moving faculties in the sperm of animals does 
not originate in the natures contained in warmth, cold, 
moistness, and dryness, and that the father is neither the agent 
of the embryo through introducing the sperm into the uterus, 


nor the agent of its life, its sight and hearing, and all its other 


422 


faculties. And although it is well known that the same faculties 
exist in the father, still nobody thinks that these faculties exist 
through him; no, their existence is produced by the First either 
directly or through the intermediation of the angels who are in 
charge of these events. ‘ Of this fact the philosophers who 
believe in a creator are quite convinced, but it is precisely with 
them that we are in dispute. 


It has been shown that coexistence does not indicate 
causation. We shall make this still more clear through an 
example. Suppose that a man blind from birth, whose eyes are 
veiled by a membrane and who has never heard people talk of 
the difference between night and day, has the membrane 
removed from his eyes by day and sees visible things, he will 
surely think then that the actual perception in his eyes of the 
forms of visible things is caused by the opening of his eyelids, 
and that as long as his sight is sound and in function, the 
hindrance removed and the object in front of him visible, he 
will, without doubt, be able to see, and he will never think that 
he will not see, till, at the moment when the sun sets and the air 
darkens, he will understand that it was the light of the sun 
which impressed the visible forms on his sight. And for what 
other reason do our opponents believe that in the principles of 
existences there are causes and influences from which the 
events which coincide with them proceed, than that they are 
constant, do not disappear, and are not moving bodies which 
vanish from sight? For if they disappeared or vanished we 
should observe the disjunction and understand then that 
behind our perceptions there exists a cause. And out of this 
there is no issue, according to the very conclusions of the 
philosophers themselves. 


The true philosophers’ were therefore unanimously of the 
opinion that these accidents and events which occur when there 
is a contact of bodies, or in general a change in their positions, 
proceed from the bestower of forms who is an angel or a 


423 


plurality of angels, so that they even said that the impression of 
the visible forms on the eye occurs through the bestower of 
forms, and that the rising of the sun, the soundness of the pupil, 
and the existence of the visible object are only the preparations 
and dispositions which enable the substratum to receive the 
forms; and this theory they applied to all events. And this 
refutes the claim of those who profess that fire is the agent of 
burning, bread the agent of satiety, medicine the agent of 
health, and so on. 


I say: 


To deny the existence of efficient causes which are observed in sensible 
things is sophistry, and he who defends this doctrine either denies with his 
tongue what is present in his mind or is carried away by a sophistical doubt 
which occurs to him concerning this question. For he who denies this can no 
longer acknowledge that every act must have an agent. The question whether 
these causes by themselves are sufficient to perform the acts which proceed 
from them, or need an external cause for the perfection of their act, whether 
separate or not, is not self-evident and requires much investigation and 
research. And if the theologians had doubts about the efficient causes which 
are perceived to cause each other, because there are also effects whose cause is 
not perceived, this is illogical. Those things whose causes are not perceived 
are still unknown and must be investigated, precisely because their causes are 
not perceived; and since everything whose causes are not perceived is still 
unknown by nature and must be investigated, it follows necessarily that what 
is not unknown has causes which are perceived. ‘ The man who reasons like 
the theologians does not distinguish between what is self-evident and what is 
unknown, z and everything Ghazali says in this passage is sophistical. 


And further, what do the theologians say about the essential causes, the 
understanding of which alone can make a thing understood? For it is self- 
evident that things have essences and attributes which determine the special 
functions of each thing and through which the essences and names of things 
are differentiated. If a thing had not its specific nature, it would not have a 
special name nor a definition, and all things would be one-indeed, not even 


424 


one; for it might be asked whether this one has one special act or one special 
passivity or not, and if it had a special act, then there would indeed exist 
special acts proceeding from special natures, but if it had no single special act, 
then the one would not be one. But if the nature of oneness is denied, the 
nature of being is denied, and the consequence of the denial of being is 
nothingness. 


Further, are the acts which proceed from all things absolutely necessary for 
those in whose nature it lies to perform them, or are they only performed in 
most cases or in half the cases? I This is a question which must be 
investigated, since one single action-and passivity between two existent things 
occurs only through one relation out of an infinite number, and it happens 
often that one relation hinders another. Therefore it is not absolutely certain 
that fire acts when it is brought near a sensitive body, for surely it is not 
improbable that there should be something which stands in such a relation to 
the sensitive thing as to hinder the action of the fire, as is asserted of talc and 
other things. But one need not therefore deny fire its burning power so long as 
fire keeps its name and definition. 


Further, it is self-evident that all events have four causes, agent, form, 
matter, and end, and that they are necessary for the existence of the effects- 
especially those causes which form a part of the effect, namely that which is 
called by the philosophers matter, by the theologians condition and 
substratum, and that which is called by the philosophers form, by the 
theologians psychological quality . The theologians acknowledge that there 
exist conditions which are necessary to the conditioned, as when they say that 
life is a condition of knowledge; and they equally recognize that things have 
realities and definitions, and that these are necessary for the existence of the 
existent, and therefore they here judge the visible and the invisible according 
to one and the same scheme. “ And they adopt the same attitude towards the 
consequences of a thing’s essence, namely what they call ‘sign’, as for instance 
when they say that the harmony in the world indicates that its agent possesses 
mind and that the existence of a world having a design indicates that its agent 
knows this world? Now intelligence is nothing but the perception of things 
with their causes, and in this it distinguishes itself from all the other faculties 
of apprehension, and he who denies causes must deny the intellect. Logic 


425 


implies the existence of causes and effects, and knowledge of these effects can 
only be rendered perfect through knowledge of their causes. Denial of cause 
implies the denial of knowledge, and denial of knowledge implies that nothing 
in this world can be really known, and that what is supposed to be known is 
nothing but opinion, that neither proof nor definition exist, and that the 
essential attributes which compose definitions are void. The man who denies 
the necessity of any item of knowledge must admit that even this, his own 
affirmation, is not necessary knowledge. 


As to those who admit that there exists, besides necessary knowledge, 
knowledge which is not necessary, about which the soul forms a judgement on 
slight evidence and imagines it to be necessary, whereas it is not necessary, 
the philosophers do not deny this. And if they call such a fact ‘habit’ this may 
be granted, but otherwise I do not know what they understand by the term 
‘habit’-whether they mean that it is the habit of the agent, the habit of the 
existing things, or our habit to form a judgement about such things? ‘ It is, 
however, impossible that God should have a habit, for a habit is a custom 
which the agent acquires and from which a frequent repetition of his act 
follows, whereas God says in the Holy Book: ‘Thou shalt not find any 
alteration in the course of God, and they shall not find any change in the 
course of God. ‘If they mean a habit in existing things, habit can only exist in 
the animated;; if it exists in something else, it is really a nature, and it is not 
possible that a thing should have a nature which determined it either 
necessarily or in most cases. If they mean our habit of forming judgements 
about things, such a habit is nothing but an act of the soul which is 
determined by its nature and through which the intellect becomes intellect. 
The philosophers do not deny such a habit; but ‘habit’ is an ambiguous term, 
and if it is analysed it means only a hypothetical act; as when we say ‘So-and- 
so has the habit of acting in such-and-such a way’, meaning that he will act in 
that way most of the time. If this were true, everything would be the case only 
by supposition, and there would be no wisdom in the world from which it 
might be inferred that its agent was wise. 


And, as we said, we need not doubt that some of these existents cause each 
other and act through each other, and that in themselves they do not suffice 
for their act, but that they are in need of an external agent whose act is a 


426 


condition of their act, and not only of their act but even of their existence. 
However, about the essence of this agent or of these agents the philosophers 
differ in one way, although in another they agree. They all agree in this, that 
the First Agent is immaterial and that its act is the condition of the existence 
and acts of existents, and that the act of their agent reaches these existents 
through the intermediation of an effect of this agent, which is different from 
these existents and which, according to some of them, is exclusively the 
heavenly sphere, whereas others assume besides this sphere another 
immaterial existent which they call the bestower of forms. 


But this is not the place to investigate these theories, and the highest part of 
their inquiry is this; and if you are one of those who desire these truths, then 
follow the right road which leads to them. The reason why the philosophers 
differed about the origin of the essential forms and especially of the forms of 
the soul is that they could not relate them to the warm, cold, moist, and dry, 
which are the causes of all natural things which come into being and pass 
away, © whereas the materialists related everything which does not seem to 
have an apparent cause to the warm, cold, moist, and dry, affirming that these 
things originated through certain mixtures of those elements, just as colours 
and other accidents come into existence. And the philosophers tried to refute 


them. 
Ghazali says: 


Our second point is concerned with those who acknowledge 
that these events proceed from their principles, but say that the 
disposition to receive the forms arises from their observed and 
apparent causes. However, according to them also the events 
proceed from these principles not by deliberation and will, but 
by necessity and nature, as light does from the sun, and the 
substrata differ for their reception only through the 
differentiations in their disposition. For instance, a polished 
body receives the rays of the sun, reflects them and illuminates 
another spot with them, whereas an opaque body does not 
receive them; the air does not hinder the penetration of the 
sun’s light, but a stone does; certain things become soft through 


427 


the sun, others hard; certain things, like the garments which 
the fuller bleaches, become white through the sun, others like 
the fuller’s face become black: the principle is, however, one 
and the same, although the effects differ through the differences 
of disposition in the substratum. Thus there is no hindrance or 
incapacity in the emanation of what emanates from the 
principles of existence; the insufficiency lies only in the 
receiving substrata. If this is true, and we assume a fire that has 
the quality it has, and two similar pieces of cotton in the same 
contact with it, how can it be imagined that only one and not 
the other will be burned, as there is here no voluntary act? And 
from this point of view they deny that Abraham could fall into 
the fire and not be burned notwithstanding the fact that the fire 
remained fire, and they affirm that this could only be possible 
through abstracting the warmth from the fire (through which it 
would, however, cease to be fire) or through changing the 
essence of Abraham and making him a stone or something on 
which fire has no influence, and neither the one nor the other is 


possible. 
I say: 


Those philosophers who say that these perceptible existents do not act on 
each other, and that their agent is exclusively an external principle, cannot 
affirm that their apparent action on each other is totally illusory, but would 
say that this action is limited to preparing the disposition to accept the forms 
from the external principle. However, I do not know any philosopher who 
affirms this absolutely; they assert this only of the essential forms, not of the 
forms of accidents. They all agree that warmth causes warmth, and that all the 
four qualities act likewise, but in such a way that through it the elemental fire’ 
and the warmth which proceeds from the heavenly bodies are conserved. The 
theory which Ghazali ascribes to the philosophers, that the separate principles 
act by nature, not by choice, is not held by any important philosophers; on the 
contrary, the philosophers affirm that that which possesses knowledge must 
act by choice. However, according to the philosophers, in view of the 
excellence which exists in the world, there can proceed out of two contraries 


428 


only the better, and their choice is not made to perfect their essences-since 
there is no imperfection in their essence-but in order that through it those 
existents which have an imperfection in their nature may be perfected. 


As to the objection which Ghazali ascribes to the philosophers over the 
miracle of Abraham, such things are only asserted by heretical Muslims. The 
learned among the philosophers do not permit discussion or disputation 
about the principles of religion, and he who does such a thing needs, 
according to them, a severe lesson. For whereas every science has its 
principles, and every student of this science must concede its principles and 
may not interfere with them by denying them, this is still more obligatory in 
the practical science of religion, for to walk on the path of the religious virtues 
is necessary for man’s existence, according to them, not in so far as he is a 
man, but in so far as he has knowledge; and therefore it is necessary for every 
man to concede the principles of religion and invest with authority the man 
who lays them down. The denial and discussion of these principles denies 
human existence, and therefore heretics must be killed. Of religious principles 
it must be said that they are divine things which surpass human 
understanding, but must be acknowledged although their causes are 


unknown. 


Therefore we do not find that any of the ancient philosophers discusses 
miracles, although they were known and had appeared all over the world, for 
they are the principles on which religion is based and religion is the principle 
of the virtues; nor did they discuss any of the things which are said to happen 
after death. For if a man grows up according to the religious virtues he 
becomes absolutely virtuous, and if time and felicity are granted to him, so 
that he becomes one of the deeply learned thinkers and it happens that he can 
explain one of the principles of religion, it is enjoined upon him that he 
should not divulge this explanation and should say ‘all these are the terms of 
religion and the wise’, conforming himself to the Divine Words, ‘but those 
who are deeply versed in knowledge say: we believe in it, it is all from our 
Lord’. ‘ 


Ghazali says: 


429 


There are two answers to this theory. The first is to say: “We 
do not accept the assertion that the principles do not act ina 
voluntary way and that God does not act through His will, and 
we have already refuted their claim in treating of the question 
of the temporal creation of the world. If it is established that the 
Agent creates the burning through His will when the piece of 
cotton is brought in contact with the fire, He can equally well 
omit to create it when the contact takes place. 


I say: 


Ghazali, to confuse his opponent, here regards as established what his 
opponent refuses to admit, and says that his opponent has no proof for his 
refusal. He says that the First Agent causes the burning without an 
intermediary He might have created in order that the burning might take 
place through the fire. But such a claim abolishes any perception of the 
existence of causes and effects. No philosopher doubts that, for instance, the 
fire is the cause of the burning which occurs in the cotton through the fire- 
not, however, absolutely, but by an external principle which is the condition 
of the existence of fire, not to speak of its burning. The philosophers differ 
only about the quiddity of this principle-whether it is a separate principle, or 
an intermediary between the event and the separate principle besides the fire. 


Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers: 


But it may be said that such a conception involves 
reprehensible impossibilities. For if you deny the necessary 
dependence of effects or their causes and relate them to the will 
of their Creator, and do not allow even in the will a particular 
definite pattern, but regard it as possible that it may vary and 
change in type, then it may happen to any of us that there 
should be in his presence beasts of prey and flaming fires and 
immovable mountains and enemies equipped with arms, 
without his seeing them, because God had not created in him 
the faculty of seeing them. And a man who had left a book at 
home might find it on his return changed into a youth, 
handsome, intelligent, and efficient, or into an animal; or if he 


430 


left a youth at home, he might find him turned into a dog; or he 
might leave ashes and find them changed into musk; or a stone 
changed into gold, and gold changed into stone. And if he were 
asked about any of these things, he would answer: ‘I do not 
know what there is at present in my house; I only know that I 
left a book in my house, but perhaps by now it is a horse which 
has soiled the library with its urine and excrement, and I left in 
my house a piece of bread which has perhaps changed into an 
apple-tree. ‘ For God is able to do’ all these things, and it does 
not belong to the necessity of a horse that it should be created 
from a sperm, nor is it of the necessity of a tree that it should be 
created from a seed; no, there is no necessity that it should be 
created out of anything at all. And perhaps God creates things 
which never existed before; indeed, when one sees a man one 
never saw before and is asked whether this man has been 
generated, one should answer hesitantly: ‘It may be that he was 
one of the fruits in the market which has been changed into a 
man, and that this is that man. ‘ For God can do any possible 
thing, and this is possible, and one cannot avoid being 
perplexed by it; and to this kind of fancy one may yield ad 
infinitum, but these examples will do. ‘ 


But the answer is to say: If it were true that the existence of 
the possible implied that there could not be created in man any 
knowledge of the non-occurrence of a possible, all these 
consequences would follow necessarily. But we are not at a loss 
over any of the examples which you have brought forward. For 
God has created in us the knowledge that He will not do all 
these possible things, and we only profess that these things are 
not necessary, but that they are possible and may or may not 
happen, and protracted habit time after time fixes their 
occurrence in our minds according to the past habit in a fixed 
impression. Yes, it is possible that a prophet should know in 
such ways as the philosophers have explained that a certain 


man will not come tomorrow from a journey, and although his 


431 


coming is possible the prophet knows that this possibility will 
not be realized. And often you may observe even ordinary men 
of whom you know that they are not aware of anything occult, 
and can know the intelligible only through instruction, and still 
it cannot be denied that nevertheless their soul and 
conjecturing power can acquire sufficient strength to 
apprehend what the prophets apprehend in so far as they know 
the possibility of an event, but know that it will not happen. 
And if God interrupts the habitual course by causing this 
unusual event to happen this knowledge of the habitual is at the 
time of the interruption removed from their hearts and He no 
longer creates it. There is, therefore, no objection to admitting 
that a thing may be possible for God, but that He had the 
previous knowledge that although He might have done so He 
would not carry it out during a certain time, and that He has 
created in us the knowledge that He would not do it during that 


time. 
I say: 


When the theologians admit that the opposite of everything existing is 
equally possible, and that it is such in regard to the Agent, and that only one 
of these opposites can be differentiated through the will of the Agent, there is 
no fixed standard for His will either constantly or for most cases, according to 
which things must happen. For this reason the theologians are open to all the 
scandalous implications with which they are charged. For true knowledge is 
the knowledge of a thing as it is in reality. ‘ And if in reality there only existed, 
in regard both to the substratum and to the Agent, the possibility of the two 
opposites, ; there would no longer, even for the twinkling of an eye, be any 
permanent knowledge of anything, since we suppose such an agent to rule 
existents like a tyrannical prince who has the highest power, for whom 
nobody in his dominion can deputize, of whom no standard or custom is 
known to which reference might be made. Indeed, the acts of such a prince 
will undoubtedly be unknown by nature, and if an act of his comes into 
existence the continuance of its existence at any moment will be unknown by 


nature. 


432 


Ghazali’s defence against these difficulties that God created in us the 
knowledge that these possibilities would be realized only at special times, 
such as at the time of the miracle, is not a true one. For the knowledge created 
in us is always in conformity with the nature of the real thing, since the 
definition of truth is that a thing is believed to be such as it is in reality. b If 
therefore there is knowledge of these possibles, there must be in the real 
possibles a condition to which our knowledge refers, either through these 
possibles themselves or through the agent, or for both reasons-a condition 
which the theologians call habit. ? And since the existence of this condition 
which is called habit is impossible in the First Agent, this condition can only 
be found in the existents, and this, as we said, is what the philosophers call 


nature. 


The same congruity exists between God’s knowledge and the existents, 
although God’s knowledge of existents is their cause, and these existents are 
the consequence of God’s knowledge, and therefore reality conforms to God’s 
knowledge . If, for instance, knowledge of Zaid’s coming reaches the prophet 
through a communication of God, the reason why the actual happening is 
congruous with the knowledge is nothing but the fact that the nature of the 
actually existent’, ‘ is a consequence of the eternal knowledge, for knowledge 
qua knowledge can only refer to something which has an actualized nature. ‘I 
The knowledge of the Creator is the reason why this nature becomes actual in 
the existent which is attached to it. ‘ Our ignorance of these possibles is 
brought about through our ignorance of the nature which determines the 
being or non-being of a thing. If the opposites in existents were in a condition 
of equilibrium, both in themselves and through their efficient causes, it would 
follow that they neither existed nor did not exist, or that they existed and did 
not exist at the same time, and one of the opposites must therefore have a 
preponderance in existence. And it is the knowledge of the existence of this 
nature which causes the actualization of one of the opposites. And the 
knowledge attached to this nature is either a knowledge prior to it, and this is 
the knowledge of which this nature is the effect, namely eternal knowledge, or 
the knowledge which is consequent on this nature, namely non-eternal 
knowledge. The attainment of the occult is nothing but the vision of this 
nature, and our acquisition of this knowledge not preceded by any proof is 


433 


what is called in ordinary human beings a dream, and in prophets inspiration. 
The eternal will and eternal knowledge are the causes of this nature in 
existents. And this is the meaning of the Divine Words: ‘Say that none in the 
heavens or on the earth know the occult but God alone. ‘This nature is 
sometimes necessary and sometimes what happens in most cases. ‘ Dreams 
and inspiration are only, as we said, the announcement of this nature in 
possible things, and the sciences which claim the prognostication of future 
events possess only rare traces of the influences of this nature or constitution 
or whatever you wish to call it, namely that which is actualized in itself and to 
which the knowledge attaches itself. 


Ghazali says: 


The second answer-and in it is to be found deliverance from 
these reprehensible consequencesb-is to agree that in fire there 
is created a nature which burns two similar pieces of cotton 
which are brought into contact with it and does not 
differentiate between them, when they are alike in every 
respect. ? But still we regard it as possible that a prophet should 
be thrown into the fire and not burn, either through a change in 
the quality of the fire or through a change in the quality of the 
prophet, and that either through God or through the angels 
there should arise a quality in the fire which limited its heat to 
its own body, so that it did not go beyond it, but remained 
confined to it, keeping, however, to the form and reality of the 
fire, without its heat and influence extending beyond it; or that 
there should arise in the body of the person an attribute, which 
did not stop the body from being flesh and bone, but still 
defended it against the action of the fire. For we can see a man 
rub himself with talc and sit down in a lighted oven and not 
suffer from it; and if one had not seen it, one would deny it, and 
the denial of our opponents that it lies in God’s power to confer 
on the fire or to the body an attribute which prevents it from 
being burnt is like the denial of one who has not seen the talc 
and its effect. ‘ For strange and marvellous things are in the 


434 


power of God, many of which we have not seen, and “, by 
should we deny their possibility and regard them as impossible? 


And also the bringing back to life of the dead and the 
changing of a stick into a serpent are possible in the following 
way: matter can receive any form, and therefore earth and the 
other elements can be changed into a plant, and a plant, when 
an animal eats it, can be changed into blood, ‘ then blood can be 
changed into sperm , and then sperm can be thrown into the 
womb and take the character of an animal. , This, in the 
habitual course of nature, takes place over a long space of time, 
but why does our opponent declare it impossible that matter 
should pass through these different phases in a shorter period 
than is usual, and when once a shorter period is allowed there is 
no limit to its being shorter and shorter, so that these potencies 
can always become quicker in their action and eventually arrive 


at the stage of being a miracle of a prophet. 


And if it is asked: “Does this arise through the soul of the 
prophet or through another principle at the instigation of the 
prophet? ‘-we answer: ‘Does what you acknowledge may happen 
through the power of the prophet’s soul, like the downpour of 
rain or the falling of a thunderbolt or earthquakes-does that 
occur through him or through another principle? What we say 
about the facts which we have mentioned is like what you say 
about those facts which you regard as possible. And the best 
method according to both you and us is to relate these things to 
God, either immediately or through the intermediation of the 
angels. But at the time these occurrences become real, the 
attention of the prophet turns to such facts, and the order of the 
good determines its appearance to ensure the duration of the 
order of religion, and this gives a preponderance to the side of 
existence. The fact in itself is possible, and the principle in God 
is His magnanimity; but such a fact only emanates from Him 
when necessity gives a preponderance to its existence and the 
good determines it, and the good only determines it when a 


435 


prophet needs it to establish his prophetic office for the 
promulgation of the good. “ 


And all this is in accordance with the theory of the 
philosophers and follows from it for them, since they allow to 
the prophet a particular characteristic which distinguishes him 
from common people. There is no intellectual criterion for the 
extent of its possibility, but there is no need to declare it false 
when it rests on a good tradition and the religious law states it 
to be true. Now, in general, it is only the sperm which accepts 
the form of animals-and it receives its animal potencies only- 
from the angels, who according to the philosophers, are the 
principles of existents -and only a man can be created from the 
sperm of a man, and only a horse from the sperm of a horse, in 
so far as the actualization of the sperm through the horse 
determines the preponderance of the analogous form of a horse 
over all other forms, and it accepts only the form to which in 
this way the preponderance is given, and therefore barley never 
grows from wheat or an apple from a pear. ‘ Further, we see that 
certain kinds of animal are only produced by spontaneous 
generation from earth and never are generated by procreation- 
e. g. worms, and some which are produced both spontaneously 
and by procreation like the mouse, the serpent, and the 
scorpion, for their generation can come also from earth. Their 
disposition to accept forms varies through causes unknown to 
us, and it is not in human power to ascertain them, since those 
forms do not, according to the philosophers, emanate from the 
angels by their good pleasure or haphazard, ‘ but in every 
substratum only in such a way that a form arises for whose 
acceptance it is specially determined through its own 
disposition. These dispositions differ, and their principles are, 
according to the philosophers, the aspects of the stars and the 
different relative positions of the heavenly bodies in their 
movements. And through this the possibility is open that there 
may be in the principles of these dispositions wonderful and 


436 


marvellous things, so that those who understand talismans 
through their knowledge of the particular qualities of minerals 
and of the stars succeed in combining the heavenly potencies 
with those mineral peculiarities, and make shapes of these 
earthly substances, and seek a special virtue for them and 
produce marvellous things in the world through them. And 
often they drive serpents and scorpions from a country, and 
sometimes bugs, and they do other things which are known to 
belong to the science of talismans. 


And since there is no fixed criterion for the principles of 
these dispositions, and we cannot ascertain their essence or 
limit them, how can we know that it is impossible that in 
certain bodies dispositions occur to change their phases at a 
quicker rhythm, so that such a body would be disposed to 
accept a form for the acceptance of which it was not prepared 
before, which is claimed to be a miracle? There is no denying 
this, except through a lack of understanding and an 
unfamiliarity with higher things and oblivion of the secrets of 
God in the created world and in nature. And he who has 
examined the many wonders of the sciences does not consider 
in any way impossible for God’s power what is told of the 
wonders of the prophets. 


Our opponents may say: ‘We agree with you that everything 
possible is in the power of God, and you theologians agree with 
us that the impossible cannot be done and that there are things 
whose impossibility is known and things which are known to be 
possible, and that there are also things about which the 
understanding is undecided and which it does not hold to be 
either impossible or possible. Now what according to you is the 
limit of the impossible? If the impossible includes nothing but 
the simultaneous affirmation and negation of the same thing, 
then say that of two things the one is not the other, and that the 
existence of the one does not demand the existence of the other. 
And say then that God can create will without knowledge of the 


437 


thing willed, and knowledge without life, ‘ and that He can 
move the hand of a dead man and make him sit and write 
volumes with his hand and engage himself in sciences while he 
has his eye open and his looks are fixed on his work, although 
he does not see and there is no life in him and he has no power, 
and it is God alone who creates all these ordered actions with 
the moving of the dead man’s hand, and the movement comes 
from God. But by regarding this as possible the difference 
between voluntary action and a reflex action like shivering is 
destroyed, and a judicious act will no longer indicate that the 
agent possesses knowledge or power It will then be necessary 
that God should be able to change genera and transform the 
substance into an accident and knowledge into power and black 
into white and a voice into an odour, just as He is able to 
change the inorganic into an animal and a stone into gold, and 
it will then follow that God can also bring about other unlimited 
impossibilities. ‘ 


The answer to this is to say that the impossible cannot be 
done by God, and the impossible consists in the simultaneous 
affirmation and negation of a thing, or the affirmation of the 
more particular with the negation of the more general, or the 
affirmation of two things with the negation of one of them, and 
what does not refer to this is not impossible and what is not 
impossible can be done. The identification of black and white is 
impossible, because by the affirmation of the form of black in 
the substratum the negation of the form of white and of the 
existence of white is implied; and since the negation of white is 
implied by the affirmation of black, the simultaneous 
affirmation and negation of white is impossible. ‘ And the 
existence of a person in two places at once is only impossible 
because we imply by his being in the house that he cannot be in 
another place, and it cannot be understood from the denial that 
he is in another place that he can be simultaneously both in 
another place and in the house. And in the same way by will is 


438 


implied the seeking of something that can be known, and if we 
assume a seeking without knowledge there cannot be a will and 
we would then deny what we had implied. And it is impossible 
that in the inorganic knowledge should be created, because we 
understand by inorganic that which does not perceive, and if in 
the organic perception was created it would become impossible 
to call it inorganic in the sense in which this word is 


understood. 


As to the transformation of one genus into another, some 
theologians affirm that it is in the power of Gods but we say that 
for one thing to become another is irrational; for, if for 
instance, the black could be transformed into power, the black 
would either remain or not, and if it does not exist any more, it 
is not changed but simply does not exist any more and 
something else exists; and if it remains existent together with 
power, it is not changed, but something else is brought in 
relation to it, and if the black remains and power does not exist, 
then it does not change, but remains as it was before. And when 
we say that blood changes into sperm, we mean by it that this 
identical matter is divested of one form and invested with 
another; and it amounts to this, that one form becomes 
nonexistent and another form comes into existence while the 
matter remains, and that two forms succeed one another in it. 
And when we say that water becomes air through being heated, 
we mean by it that the matter which had received the form of 
the water is deprived of this form and takes another, and the 
matter is common to them but the attribute changes. And it is 
the same when we say that the stick is changed into a serpent or 
earth into an animal. But there is no matter common to the 
accident and the substance, nor to black and to power, nor to 
the other categories, and it is impossible for this reason that 
they should be changed into each other. 


As to God’s moving the hand of a dead man, and raising this 


man up in the form of a living one who sits and writes, so that 


439 


through the movement of his hand a well-ordered script is 
written, this in itself is not impossible as long as we refer events 
to the will of a voluntary being, and it is only to be denied 
because the habitual course of nature is in opposition to it. And 
your affirmation, philosophers, that, if this is so, the 
judiciousness of an act no longer indicates that the agent 
possesses knowledge is false, for the agent in this case is God; 
He determines the act and He performs it. And as to your 
assertion that if this is so there is no longer any difference 
between shivering and voluntary motion, we answer that we 
know this difference only because we experience in ourselves 
the difference between these two conditions, and we find 
thereby that the differentiating factor is power, ‘ and know that 
of the two classes of the possible the one happens at one time, 
the other at another; that is to say, we produce movement with 
the power to produce it at one time, and a movement without 
this power at another. Now, when we observe other movements 
than ours and see many well-ordered movements, we attain 
knowledge of the power behind them, and God creates in us all 
these different kinds of knowledge through the habitual course 
of events, through which one of the two classes of possibility 
becomes known, though the impossibility of the second class is 
not proved thereby. 


I say: 


When Ghazali saw that the theory that things have no particular qualities 
and forms from which particular acts follow, for every thing is very 
objectionable, and contrary to common sense, he conceded this in this last 
section and replaced it by the denial of two points: first that a thing can have 
these qualities but that they need not act on a thing in the way they usually act 
on it, e. g. fire can have its warmth but need not burn something that is 
brought near to it, even if it is usually burnt when fire is brought near to it; 
secondly that the particular forms have not a particular matter in every 
object. 


440 


The first point can be accepted by the philosophers, for because of external 
causes the procession of acts from agents may not be necessary, “ and it is not 
impossible that for instance fire may sometimes be brought near cotton 
without burning it, when something is placed with the cotton that makes it 
non-inflammable, as Ghazali says in his instance of talc and a living being. 


As to the point that matter is one of the conditions for material things, this 
cannot be denied by the theologians, for, as Ghazali says, there is no 
difference between our simultaneous negation and affirmation of a thing and 
our simultaneous denial of part of it and affirmation of the whole. And since 
things consist of two qualities, a general and a particular-and this is what the 
philosophers mean by the term ‘definition’, a definition being composed 
according to them of a genus and a specific difference-it is indifferent for the 
denial of an existent which of its two qualities is denied. For instance, since 
man consists of two qualities, one being a general quality, viz. animality, and 
the second a particular, viz. rationality, man remains man just as little when 
we take away his animality as when we take away his rationality, for animality 
is a condition of rationality and when the condition is removed the 
conditioned is removed equally. 


On this question the theologians and the philosophers agree, except that the 
philosophers believe that for particular things the general qualities are just as 
much a condition as the particular, and this the theologians do not believe; for 
the philosophers, for instance, warmth and moisture are a condition of life in 
the transient, because they are more general than life, just as life is a 
condition of rationality. But the theologians do not believe this, and so you 
hear them say: ‘For us dryness and moisture are not a condition of life. ‘ For 
the philosophers shape, too, is one of the particular conditions of life in an 
organic being; if not, one of two following cases might arise: either the special 
shape of the animal might exist without exercising any function, or this 
special shape might not exist at all. ‘ For instance, for the philosophers the 
hand is the organ of the intellect, and by means of it man performs his 
rational acts, like writing and the carrying on of the other arts; now if 
intelligence were possible in the inorganic, it would be possible that intellect 
might exist without performing its function, and it would be as if warmth 
could exist without warming the things that are normally warmed by it. b 


441 


Also, according to the philosophers, every existent has a definite quantity and 
a definite quality, and also the time when it comes into existence and during 
which it persists are determined, although in all these determinations there is, 
according to the philosophers, a certain latitude. ‘ 


Theologians and philosophers agree that the matter of existents which 
participate in one and the same matter sometimes accepts one of two forms 
and sometimes its opposite, as happens, according to them, with the forms of 
the four elements, fire, air, water, and earth. Only in regard to the things 
which have no common matter or which have different matters do they 
disagree whether some of them can accept the forms of others-for instance, 
whether something which is not known by experience to accept a certain form 
except through many intermediaries can also accept this ultimate form 
without intermediaries. For instance, the plant comes into existence through 
composition out of the elements; it becomes blood and sperm through being 
eaten by an animal and from sperm and blood comes the animal, as is said in 
the Divine Words: ‘We created man from an extract of clay, then We made 
him a clot in a sure depository” and so on till His words ‘and blessed be God, 
the best of creators’. The theologians affirm that the soul of man can inhere in 
earth without the intermediaries known by experience, whereas the 
philosophers deny this and say that, if this were possible, wisdom would 
consist in the creation of man without such intermediaries, and a creator who 
created in such a way would be the best and most powerful of creators; both 
parties claim that what they say is selfevident, and neither has any proof for 
its theory. And you, reader, consult your heart; it is your duty to believe what 
it announces, and this is what God-who may make us and you into men of 
truth and evidence-has ordained for you. 


But some of the Muslims have even affirmed that there can be attributed to 
God the power to combine the two opposites, and their dubious proof is that 
the judgement of our intellect that this is impossible is something which has 
been impressed on the intellect, whereas if there had been impressed on it the 
judgement that this is possible, it would not deny this possibility, but admit it. 
For such people it follows as a consequence that neither intellect nor existents 
have a well-defined nature, and that the truth which exists in the intellect does 
not correspond to the existence of existing things. The theologians themselves 


442 


are ashamed of such a theory, but if they held it, it would be more consistent 
with their point of view than the contradictions in which their opponents 
involve them on this point. For their opponents try to find out where the 
difference lies between what as a matter of fact the theologians affirm on this 
point and what they deny, and it is very difficult for them to make this out- 
indeed they do not find anything but vague words. We find, therefore, that 
those most expert in the art of theological discussion take refuge in denying 
the necessary connexion between condition and conditioned, between a thing 
and its definition, between a thing and its cause and between a thing and its 
sign. All this is full of sophistry and is without sense, and the theologian who 
did this was Abu-l-Ma’ali. ‘ The general argument which solves these 
difficulties is that existents are divided into opposites and correlates, and if 
the latter could be separated, the former might be united, but opposites are 
not united and correlates therefore cannot be separated. And this is the 
wisdom of God and God’s course in created things, and you will never find in 
God’s course any alteration. ‘ And it is through the perception of this wisdom 
that the intellect of man becomes intellect, and the existence of such wisdom 
in the eternal intellect is the cause of its existence in reality. The intellect 
therefore is not a possible entity which might have been created with other 
qualities, as Ibn Hazm imagined. 








THE SECOND DISCUSSION 








THEIR IMPOTENCE TO SHOW BY DEMONSTRATIVE PROOF 
THAT THE HUMAN SOULIS A SPIRITUAL SUBSTANCE WHICH 
EXISTS BY ITSELF AND DOES NOT FILL SPACE, IS NEITHER 
BODY NOR IMPRESSED ON A BODY, IS NEITHER CONTINUOUS 
WITH THE BODY NOR SEPARATED FROM THE BODY, JUST AS 
NEITHER GOD NOR THE ANGELS ACCORDING TO THEM IS 
OUTSIDE OR INSIDE THE WORLD 


Ghazali says: 


The discussion of this question demands the exposition of 
their theory about the animal and human faculties. s The 


443 


animal faculties are divided according to them into motive and 
apprehensive, and the apprehensive are of two classes, the 
external and the internal. The external are the five senses, and 
these faculties are entities impressed on the bodies. b The 
internal are three in number. ? The first is the representative 
faculty in the foremost part of the brain behind the faculty of 
sight; in it the forms of the things seen remain after the closing 
of the eye, and in this faculty there is impressed and collected 
what the five senses bring to it, and it is therefore called the 
common sense. If it did not exist, a man who saw white honey 
and perceives its sweetness by taste could not, when he saw it a 
second time, apprehend its sweetness as long as he had not 
tasted it as he did the first time, but in the common sense there 
is something which judges that this white is the sweetness, and 
there is in it, no doubt, a judging element for which both these 
things, colour and sweetness, are brought together and which 
determines then that when the one is present the other must be 
there too. ‘ 


The second is the estimative faculty which is that which 
apprehends the intentions’ whereas the first apprehends the 
forms; and the meaning of ‘forms’ is ‘that which cannot be 
without matter, i. e. body’, whereas the meaning of ‘intentions’ 
is ‘that which does not require a body for its existence, although 
it can happen that it occurs in a body’-like enmity and concord. 
The sheep perceives the colour, shape, and appearance of the 
wolf, which are only found in body, but it perceives also that the 
wolf is its enemy, and the lamb perceives the shape and colour 
of its mother and then perceives its love and tenderness, and for 
this reason it flees from the wolf while it walks behind the 
mother. Discord and concord need not be in bodies like colour 
and shape, but it sometimes happens that they occur in bodies. 
This faculty differs from the first, and is located in the posterior 
ventricle of the brains 


444 


The third faculty is called in animals the imaginative and in 
man the cogitative, b and its nature is to combine the sensible 
forms and to compose the intentions with the farms:’ it is 
located in the middle ventricle between the place where the 
forms are kept and that where the intentions are retained. s 
Because of this man can imagine a horse that flies and a being 
with the head of a man and the body of a horse, and other 
combinations, although he has never seen such things. It is 
more appropriate, as will be shown, to join this faculty with the 
motive faculties than with the apprehensive. ‘ The places where 
these faculties are located are known only through medicine, 
for if a lesion occurs to one of these ventricles the faculties 
become defective. 


Further, the philosophers affirm that the faculty on which 
the forms of sensible things are impressed through the five 
senses retains these forms so that they do not disappear after 
their reception, for one thing does not retain another through 
the faculty by which it receives it, for water receives without 
retaining, while wax receives through its wetness and retains 
through its dryness, by contrast with water. “ Through this 
consideration that which retains is different from that which 
receives, and this is called the retentive faculty. And in the same 
way intentions are impressed on the estimative faculty, and a 
faculty retains them, which is called the memorative. ‘ Through 
this consideration, these internal perceptions, when the 
imaginative faculty is joined to them, become five in number, 


like the external faculties. 


The motive faculties’ form two classes, in so far as they are 
only stimulating motion or executing motion and acting; the 
stimulating motive faculty is the impulsive and appetitive 
faculty; this is the faculty which stimulates the acting motive 
power to move when, in the representative faculty which we 
have mentioned, ‘ there is inscribed the form of something to be 
sought or avoided. The stimulating faculty has two branches, 


445 


one called concupiscent which excites to a movement, through 
which there is an approach to the things represented as 
necessary or useful in a search for pleasure, and the irascible 
which excites to a movement through which the thing 
represented as injurious or mischievous is removed as one 
seeks to master it. Through this faculty the complete 
determination to act is effected, which is called will. 


The motive faculty which itself executes movement is a 
faculty which is diffused in the nerves and muscles and has the 
function of contracting the muscles and drawing the tendons 
and ligaments which are in contact with the limbs in the 
direction where this faculty resides, or of relaxing and 
extending them so that the ligaments and tendons move in the 
opposite direction . These are the animal faculties of the soul as 
described in a summary way, without the details. 


And as regards the soul which thinks things and is called the 
rational or discursive soul by the philosophers (and by 
‘discursive’ is meant ‘rational’, because discourse is the most 
typical external operation of reason and therefore the 
intellective soul takes its name from it), it has two faculties, a 
knowing and an acting, and both are called intellect, though 
equivocally. b And the acting faculty is one which is a principle 
moving man’s body towards the well-ordered human arts, 
whose order derives from the deliberation proper to man. The 
knowing faculty, which is called the speculative, is one which 
has the function of perceiving the real natures of the 
intelligibles in abstraction from matter, place, and position; and 
these are the universal concepts which the theologians call 
sometimes conditions and sometimes modes, ‘ and which the 


philosophers call abstract universals. 


The soul has therefore two faculties on two sides: the 
speculative faculty on the side of the angels, since through it it 
receives from the angels knowledge of realities (and this faculty 


446 


must always be receptive for the things coming from above); 
and the practical faculty on the inferior side, which is the side of 
the body which it directs and whose morals it improves. This 
faculty must rule over all the other bodily faculties, and all the 
others must be trained by it and subjected to it. It must not 
itself be affected or influenced by them, but they must be 
influenced by it, in such a way that there will not through the 
bodily attributes occur in the soul subservient dispositions, 
called vices, but that this faculty may remain predominant and 
arouse in the soul dispositions called virtues. 


This is a summary of the human vital faculties, which they 
distinguished and about which they spoke at great length, and 
we have omitted the vegetative faculties, since there is no need 
to mention them as they are not connected with our subject. 
Nothing of what we have mentioned need be denied on 
religious grounds, for all these things are observable facts 
whose habitual course has been provided by God. We only want 
now to refute their claim that the soul being an essence 
subsistent by itself, can be known by demonstrative rational 
proofs, and we do not seek to refute those who say that it is 
impossible that this knowledge should derive from God’s power 
or who believe that the religious law is opposed to this; for 
perhaps it will be clear at the dividing on the Day of Judgement 
that the Holy Law regards it as true. However, we reject their 
claim that this can be known by mere reason and that the 
religious law is not necessary for its knowledge, and we shall 
ask them to produce their proofs and indeed they have many. 


I say: 


All this is nothing but an account of the theory of the philosophers about 
these faculties and his conception of them; only he followed Avicenna, who 
distinguished himself from the rest of the philosophers by assuming in the 
animal another faculty than the imaginative; which he calls the estimative 
faculty and which replaces the cogitative faculty in man, and he says that the 


447 


ancients applied the term ‘imaginative faculty’ to the estimative, and when 
they do this then the imaginative faculty in the animal is a substitute for the 
cogitative faculty in man and will be located in the middle ventricle of the 
brain. And when the term ‘imaginative’ is applied to the faculty which 
apprehends shape, this is said to reside in the foremost part of the brain. 
There is no contradiction in the fact that the retentive and memorative 
faculties should both be in the posterior part of the brain, for retaining and 
memory are two in function, but one in their substratum. And what appears 
from the theory of the ancients is that the imaginative faculty in the animal is 
that which determines that the wolf should be an enemy of the sheep and that 
the sheep should be a friend of the lamb, for the imaginative faculty is a 
perceptive ones and it necessarily possesses judgement, and there is no need 
to introduce another faculty. What Avicenna says would only be possible if 
the imaginative faculty were not perceptive; and there is no sense in adding 
another faculty to the imaginative in the animal, especially in an animal which 
possesses many arts by nature, for its representations are not derived from 
the senses and seem to be perceptions intermediary between the intellectual 
and the sensible forms, and the question of these forms is concisely treated in 
De sensu et sensato, and we shall leave this subject here and return to 
Ghazali’s objections against the philosophers. 


Ghazali says: 


The first proof is that they say that intellectual cognitions 
inhere in human souls, and are limited and have units which 
cannot be divided, and therefore their substratum must also be 
indivisible and every body is divisible, and this proves that the 
substratum of the cognitions is something incorporeal. ‘ One 
can put this into a logical form according to the figures of logic, 
but the easiest way is to say that if the substratum of knowledge 
is a divisible body, then the knowledge which inheres in it must 
be divisible too; but the inherent knowledge is not divisible, and 
therefore the substratum is not a body: and this is a mixed 
hypothetical syllogism in which the consequent is denied, from 
which there follows the denial of the antecedent in all cases; and 
there is no doubt about the validity of this figure of the 


448 


syllogism, nor again about its premisses, for the major is that 
everything inherent in something divisible is necessarily 
divisible, the divisibility of its substratum being assumed, and 
this is a major about which one cannot have any doubt. The 
minor is that knowledge as a unity inheres in man and is not 
divided, for its infinite division is impossible, and if it is 
limited, then it comprises no doubt units which cannot be 
divided; and in short, when we know a thing, we cannot assume 


that a part can cease and a part remain, because it has no parts. 
The objection rests on two points. It may be said: 


‘How will you refute those who say that the substratum of 
knowledge is an atom in space which cannot be divided, as is 
known from the theory of the theologians? ‘ And then there 
remains nothing to be said against it but to question its 
possibility, and to ask how all that is known can exist in one 
atom, whereas all the atoms which surround this one are 
deprived of it although they are near to it. But to question its 
possibility has no value, as one can also turn it against the 
doctrine of the philosophers, by asking how the soul can be one 
single thing which is not in space or outside the body, either 
continuous with it or separated from it. However, we should not 
stress this first point, for the discussion of the problem of the 
atom is lengthy, ‘ and the philosophers have geometrical proofs 
against it whose discussion is intricate, and one of their many 
arguments is to ask: ‘Does one of the sides of an atom between 
two atoms touch the identical spot the other side touches or 
not? ‘ The former is impossible, because its consequence would 
be that the two sides coincided, whereas a thing that is in 
contact with another is in contact, and the latter implies the 
affirmation of a plurality and divisibility, and the solution of 
this difficulty is long and we need not go deeper into it and will 
now turn to the other point. 


449 


Your affirmation that everything which inheres in a body 
must be divisible is contradicted by what you say of the 
estimative faculty of the sheep where the hostility of the wolf is 
concerned, for in the judgement of one single thing no division 
can be imagined, since hostility has no part, so that one part of 
it might be perceived and another neglected. Still, according to 
you this perception takes place in a bodily faculty, and the souls 
of animals are impressed on their bodies and do not survive 
death, and all the philosophers agree about this. And if it is 
possible for you to regard as divisible that which is perceived by 
the five senses, by the common sense and by the faculty which 
retains the forms, this is not possible for you in the case of 
those intentions which are not supposed to be in matter. 


And if it be said: ‘Absolute hostility, abstracted from matter, 
is not perceived by the sheep, but only the hostility of the 
definite individual wolf connected with its bodily individuality 
and shape, and only the rational faculty perceives universal 
realities abstracted from matter’-we answer that the sheep 
perceives, indeed, the colour and shape of the wolf and then its 
hostility, and if the colour is impressed on the faculty of sight 
and the same happens to the shape, and it is divided through 
the division of the substratum of sight, I ask, ‘through what 
does the sheep perceive the hostility? If through a body, 
hostility is divided, and I should like to know what this 
perception is when it is divided, whether it is a perception of a 
part of the hostility-and how can it have a part? -or whether 
every part is a perception of the hostility and the hostility is 
known many times as its perception is fixed in every part of the 
substratum. “ And thus this problem is a difficulty for their 
proof and must be solved. 


And if it is said: “This is an argument against the 
intelligibles, but the intelligibles cannot be denied, ‘ and as long 
as you cannot call in question the premisses that knowledge 
cannot be divided and that what cannot be divided cannot be in 


450 


a divisible body, you can have no doubt about the 
consequence’--the answer is: “We have only written this book to 
show the incoherence and contradictions in the doctrine of the 
philosophers, and such a contradiction arises over this 
question, since through it either your theory about the rational 
soul is refuted or your theory about the estimative faculty. ‘ 


Further we say that this contradiction shows that they are 
not conscious of the point, which confounds their syllogism, 
and it may well be that the origin of their confusion lies in their 
statement that knowledge is impressed on a body in the way 
colour is impressed on a coloured thing, the colour being 
divided with the division of the coloured thing, so that 
knowledge must be divided by the division of its substratum. 
The mistake lies in the term ‘impression’, since it may well be 
that the relation of knowledge to its substratum is not like that 
of colour to the coloured object so that it could be regarded as 
being spread over it, diffused over its sides and divisible with it; 
knowledge might well be related to its substratum in another 
way which would not allow its divisibility although its 
substratum was divisible; yes, its relation to it might be like that 
of perception of the hostility to the body, ; and the relations of 
the attributes to their substrata do not all follow the same 
pattern and they are not all known to us with all their details so 
that we could rely on our knowledge, and to judge such a 
question without a perfect comprehension of all the details of 
the relation is an unreliable judgement. In short, we do not 
deny that what the philosophers say gives reasonable and 
predominant reasons for belief, but we deny that it is known by 
an evidence which excludes error and doubt. And it is in this 
way that a doubt about it may be raised. 


I say: 


When the premisses which the philosophers use are taken in an indefinite 
way the consequence Ghazali draws is valid. For our assertion that every 


451 


attribute inhering in a body which is divisible is divisible through the 
divisibility of the body can be understood in two ways. First it may be meant 
that the definition of every part of this attribute which inheres in the 
particular body is identical with the definition of the whole: for instance the 
white inhering in the white body, for every part of whiteness which inheres in 
the individual body has one and the same definition as the whole of whiteness 
in this body. ‘ Secondly, it may be meant that the attribute is attached to the 
body without a specific shape, ‘ and this attribute again is divided through the 
division of the body not in such a way that the intension of the definition of 
the whole is identical with the intension of the definition of every part-for 
instance, the faculty of sight which exists in one who sees-but in such a way 
that it is subject to a difference in intensity according to the greater and lesser 
receptivity of the substratum, and therefore the power of sight is stronger in 
the healthy and the young than in the sick and the old. What is common to 
those two classes is that they are composed of individuals, i. e. that they are 
divided by quantity and not by quiddity, i. e. that either the uniqueness of the 
definition and the quiddity remains or that they are annulled. < Those which 
can be divided quantitatively into any particular part are one by definition 
and quiddity and those which cannot be divided into any individual part 
whatevers only differ from the first class in a degree of intensity, for the action 
of the part which has vanished is not identical with that of the part which 
remains, since the action of the part which has vanished in weak sight does 
not act in the same way as the weak sight. b Those two classes have it in 
common that colour also cannot be divided by the division of its substratum 
into any particular part whatever and keep its definition absolutely intact, but 
the division terminates in a particular part in which the colour, when it is 
distributed to it, disappears. ? The only thing which keeps its distribution 
always intact is the nature of the continuous in so far as it is continuous, i. e. 


the form of continuity. 


When this premiss is assumed in this way, namely by holding that 
everything which is divisible in either of these two classes has a body as its 
substratum, it is self-evident, and the converse, that everything which is in a 
body is divisible according to one of these two classes, is evident too; and 
when this is verified, then the converse of its opposite is true also, namely that 


452 


what is not divisible according to one of these two classes cannot be in a body. 
If to these premisses there is added further what is evident in the case of the 
universal intelligibles, namely that they are not divisible in either of the two 
ways, since they are not individual forms, it is clear that there follows from 
this that neither is the substratum of these intelligibles a body, nor is the 
faculty which has the power to produce them a faculty in a body; and it 
follows that their substratum is a spiritual faculty which perceives itself and 
other things. 


But Ghazali took first the one of these two classes and denied that the 
universal intelligibles belong to it, and then made his objection by means of 
the second class, which exists in the faculty of sight and in the imaginative 
faculty, and in doing this he committed a sophism; but the science of the soul 
is too profound and too elevated to be apprehended by dialectics. ‘ 


Besides, Ghazali has not adduced the argument in the manner in which 
Avicenna brought it out, for Avicenna built his argument only on the 
following: If the intelligibles inhered in a body, they would have to be either in 
an indivisible part of it, or in a divisible part. Then he refuted the possibility 
of their being in an indivisible part of the body, and after this refutation he 
denied that, if the intellect inhered in a body, it could inhere in an indivisible 
part of it. Then he denied that it could inhere in a divisible part of it and so he 
denied that it could inhere in body at all. 


And when Ghazali denied one of these two divisions he said it was not 
impossible that there might be another form of relation between the intellect 
and the body than this, but it is quite clear that if the intellect is related to the 
body there can exist only two kinds of relation, either to a divisible or to an 
indivisible substratum. 


This proof can be completed; by saying that the intellect is not attached to 
any animal faculty in the way the form is attached to its substratum, for the 
denial of its being attached to the body implies necessarily the denial of its 
being attached to any animal faculty which is attached to the body. For, if the 
intellect were attached to any of the animal faculties, it would as Aristotle says 
be unable to act except through this faculty, but then this faculty would not 


453 


perceive the intellect. This is the argument on which Aristotle himself bases 
his proof that the intellect is separate. ‘ 


We shall now mention the second objection which Ghazali raises against the 
second proof of the philosophers, but we must first observe that their proofs, 
when they are taken out of their context in those sciences to which they 
belong, can have at the most the value of dialectical arguments. The only aim 
of this book of ours is therefore to ascertain the value of the arguments in it 
which are ascribed to the two parties, and to show to which of the two 
disputants the terms ‘incoherence’ and ‘contradiction’ would be applied with 
greater justification. 


Ghazali says: 
The second proof is that the philosophers say: 


‘If the knowledge of one single intellectual notion, i. e. a 
notion abstracted from matter, were impressed on matter as 
accidents are impressed on bodily substances, their division 
would necessarily follow the division of the body, as has been 
shown before. And if it is not impressed on matter nor spread 
out over it, and the term ‘impression’ is rejected, let us then use 
another term and say, ‘Is there a relation between knowledge 
and the knower? ‘ 


It is absurd to deny the relation, for if there did not exist a 
relation, why would it be better to know something than not to 
know it ? And if there is a relation, this relation can take place 
in three ways; either there will be a relation to every part of the 
substratum, or to some parts to the exclusion of others, or to no 
part whatever. It is false to say that the notion has no relation to 
any individual part of the substratum; for if there is no relation 
to the units, there can be no relation to the aggregate, since a 
collection of disconnected units is not an aggregate, but itself 
disconnected. It is false to say that there might be a relation to 
some part, for the part that was not related would have nothing 
to do with this notion and therefore would not come into the 
present discussion. And it is false to say that every part of the 


454 


substratum might be related to it, for if it were related in all its 
parts to this notion in its totality, then each single part of the 
substratum would possess not a part of the notion but the 
notion in its totality, and this notion would therefore be 
repeated infinitely in act; on the other hand, if every part were 
related to this notion in a special way, different from the 
relation of another part, then this notion would be divided in its 
content; and we have shown that the content of a notion, one 
and the same in every respect, is indivisible; if the relation, 
however, of each part were related to another part of the notion, 
then this notion would clearly be divided, and this is 
impossible. And from this it is clear that the things perceived 
which are in the five senses are only images of the particular 
divided forms, and that the meaning of perception is the arrival 
of the image of the thing perceived in the soul of the perceiver, 
so that every part of the image of the thing perceived is related 
to a part of the bodily organ. 


And the objection against this is what has been said before. 
For by replacing the term ‘impression’ by ‘relation’ the 
difficulty is not removed which arises over the question what of 
the hostility of the wolf is impressed on the estimative faculty of 
the sheep, as we have mentioned; for the perception is no doubt 
related to it, and with this relation there must occur what you 
have said, and hostility is not a measurable thing possessing a 
measurable quantity, so that its image could be impressed on a 
measurable body and its parts related to the parts of that body, 
and the fact that the shape of the wolf is measurable does not 
remove the difficulty, for the sheep perceives something else as 
well as the shape, namely the adversity, opposition, and 
hostility, and this hostility, added to the shape through the 
hostility, has no magnitude, and still the sheep perceives it 
through a body having magnitude; and that is necessarily a 
difficulty in this proof as well as in the first. 


455 


And if someone says: ‘Do you not refute these proofs by 
asserting that knowledge inheres in a spatial indivisible body, 
namely the atom? ‘ we answer: ‘No, for the discussion of the 
atom is connected with geometrical questions the solution and 
discussion of which is long and arduous. Further, such a theory 
would not remove the difficulty, for the power and the will 
ought then also to be in this atom. For man acts, and this acting 
cannot be imagined without power and will, which would also 
be in this atom; and the power to write resides in the hand and 
the fingers, but knowledge of it does not reside in the hand, for 
it does not cease when the hand is cut off; nor is the will in the 
hand, for often a man wants to write, when his hand has 
withered and he is not able to do so, not because his will has 
gone, but because his power has. “ 


I say: 


This discussion is not an independent one, but only a complement to the 
first, for in the first discussion it was merely assumed that knowledge is not 
divided by the division of its substratum, and here an attempt is made to 
prove this by making use of a division into three categories. And he repeats 
the same objection, which presented itself to him because he did not carry out 
the division of matter in the two senses in which it can be taken. For when the 
philosophers denied that the intellect could be divided through the division of 
its substratum in the way in which accidents are divided through the division 
of their substratum, and there exists another way of division in body which 
must be applied to the bodily functions of perception, they had a doubt about 
these faculties. The proof is only completed by denying that the intellect can 
be divided in either of these ways, and by showing that everything which 
exists in a body is necessarily divisible in one of them. 


For of those things in the body which are divided in this second way, i. e. 
which are not by definition divisible through the division of their substratum’ 
it was sometimes doubted whether they are separable from their substratum 
or not. For we see it happen that most parts of the substratum decay and still 
this kind of existence, i. e. the individual perception, does not decay; and it 


456 


was thought that it might happen that, just as the form does not disappear 
through the disappearance of one or more parts of its substratum, in the same 
way the form might not disappear when the whole was destroyed, and that the 
decay of the act of the form through its substratum was similar to the decay of 
the act of the artisan through the deterioration of his tools. And therefore 
Aristotle says that if an old man had the eye of a young man, he would see as 
well as the young one, meaning that it is thought that the decrepitude which 
occurs to the sight of the old man does not happen because of the decay of the 
faculty but because of the decay of the organs. And he tries to prove this by 
the inactivity of the organ or the greater part of it in sleep, fainting, 
drunkenness, and the illnesses through which the perceptions of the senses 
decay, whereas it is quite certain that the faculties are not destroyed in these 
conditions. And this is still more evident in those animals which live when 
they are cut in two; and most plants have this peculiarity, although they do 
not possess the faculty of perceptions 


But the discussion of the soul is very obscure, and therefore God has only 
given knowledge of it to those who are deeply learned; and therefore God, 
answering the question of the masses about this problem, says that this kind 
of question is not their concern, saying: “They will ask thee of the spirit. Say: 
“The spirit comes at the bidding of my Lord, and ye are given but a little 
knowledge thereof. “ ‘And the comparison of death with sleep in this question 
is an evident proof that the soul survives, since the activity of the soul ceases 
in sleep through the inactivity of its organ, but the existence of the soul does 
not cease, and therefore it is necessary that its condition in death should be 
like its condition in sleep, for the parts follow the same rule? And this is a 
proof which all can understand and which is suitable to be believed by the 
masses, and will show the learned the way in which the survival of the soul is 
ascertained. And this is evident from the Divine Words: ‘God takes to Himself 
souls at the time of their death; and those who do not die in their sleep. 


Ghazali says: 


The third proof is that they say that, if knowledge resided in 
a part of the body, the knower would be this part to the 
exclusion of all the other parts of man, but it is said of man that 


457 


it is he who knows, and knowledge is an attribute of man in his 
totality without reference to any specified place. ‘ But this is 
nonsense, for he is spoken of as seeing and hearing and tasting, 
and the animals also are described in this way; but this does not 
mean that the perception of the senses is not in the body, it is 
only a metaphorical expression like the expression that 
someone is in Baghdad although he is in a part of the whole of 
Baghdad, not in the whole of Baghdad, the reference however 
being made to the whole. 


I say: 


When it is conceded that the intellect is not related to one of man’s organs- 
and this has already been proved, since it is not self-evident -it follows that its 
substratum is not a body, and that our assertion that man knows is not 
analogous to our assertion that he sees. For since it is self-evident that he sees 
through a particular organ, it is clear that when we refer sight to man 
absolutely, the expression is allowed according to the custom of the Arabs and 
other people. ; And since there is no particular organ for the intellect, it is 
clear that, when we say of him that he knows, this does not mean that a part of 
him knows. However, how he knows is not clear by itself, for it does not 
appear that there is an organ or a special place in an organ which possesses 
this special faculty, as is the case with the imaginative faculty and the 
cogitative and memorative faculties, the localization of which in parts of the 


brain is known. 
Ghazali says: 


The fourth proof is that, if knowledge inhered for instance 
in a part of the heart or the brain, then necessarily ignorance, 
its opposite, might reside in another part of the heart or the 
brain, and it would then be possible that a man should both 
know and not know one and the same thing at the same time. 
And since this is impossible, it is proved that the place of 
ignorance and the place of knowledge are identical, and that 
this place is one single place in which it is impossible to bring 
opposites together. But if this place were divisible, it would not 


458 


be impossible that ignorance should reside in one part of it and 
knowledge in another, for a thing’s being in one place is not 
contradicted by its opposite’s being in another, just as there 
may be pie baldness in one and the same horse, and black and 
white in a single eye, but in two spots. This, however, does not 
follow for the senses, as there is no opposite to their perception; 
but sometimes they perceive and sometimes not, and there 
exists between them the sole opposition of being and not-being, 
and we can surely say that someone perceives through some 
parts, for instance the eye and the ear, and not through the 
other parts of his body; and there is no contradiction in this. 
And you cannot evade this difficulty by saying that knowing is 
the opposite of not-knowing, and that judgment is something 
common to the whole body; for it is impossible that the 
judgment should be in any other place but in the place of its 
cause, and the knower is the place in which the knowledge 
resides; and if the term is applied to the whole, this is a 
metaphor, as when we say that a man is in Baghdad, although 
he is in a part of it, and when we say that a man sees although 
we know with certainty that the judgment of his sight’ does not 
reside in his foot and hand but is peculiar to his eye. The 
judgments are opposed to each other in the same way as their 
causes, and the judgments are limited to the place where the 
causes reside. And one cannot evade the difficulty by saying 
that the place disposed to receive the knowledge and the 
ignorance of man is one single place in which they can oppose 
each other, for according to you theologians every body which 
possesses life can receive knowledge and ignorance, and no 
other condition but life is imposed, and all the parts of the body 
are according to you equivalent so far as the reception of 
knowledge is concerned. 


The objection to this is that it can be turned against you 
philosophers in the matter of desire, longing, and will; these 


things exist in animals as well as in men, and are things 


459 


impressed on the body, but it is impossible that one should flee 
from the object one longs for and that repugnance and craving 
in regard to one and the same thing should exist in him 
together, the desire being in one place and the repugnance in 
another. Still, that does not prove that they do not inhere in 
bodies, for these potencies, although they are many and 
distributed over different organs, have one thing that joins 
them together, namely the soul, which is common both to 
animal and to man; and since this cohesive entity forms a unity, 
the mutually contradictory relations enter into relation with it 
in turns. This does not prove that the soul is not impressed 
upon the body, as is quite clear in the case of animals. 


I say: 


The only logical consequence of what he says here in the name of the 
philosophers is that knowledge does not inhere in the body in the way colour 
and in general all accidents do; it does not, however, follow that it does not 
inhere in body at all. For the impossibility that the place of knowledge should 
receive the knowledge and want of knowledge of a thing necessarily 
demonstrates its identity, since opposites cannot inhere in one and the same 
place, and this kind of impossibility is common to all attributes, whether 
perceptive or nonperceptive. But what is peculiar to the receptivity of 
knowledge is that it can perceive opposites together; and this can only happen 
through an indivisible apprehension in an indivisible substratum, for he who 
judges is of necessity one, and therefore it is said that knowledge of opposites 
is one and the same. ‘ And this kind of receptivity is of necessity proper to the 
soul alone. What is indeed proved by the philosophers is that this is the 
condition of the common sense when it exercises its judgement over the five 
senses, and this common sense is according to the philosophers something 
bodily. And therefore there is in this argument no proof that the intellect does 
not inhere in a body, for we have already said that there are two kinds of 
inherence, the inherence of non-perceptive attributes and that of perceptive. 


And the objection Ghazali makes here is true, namely that the appetitive 
soul does not tend to opposites at the same time although it resides in the 


460 


body. I do not know of any philosopher who has used this argument’ to 
establish the survival of the soul, unless he paid no attention to the 
philosophical doctrine that it is the characteristic of every perceptive faculty 
that in its perception two opposites cannot be joined, just as it is the 
peculiarity of contraries outside the soul that they cannot be together in one 
and the same substratum; and this is what the perceptive potencies have in 
common with the non-perceptive. It is proper to the perceptive faculties to 
judge coexisting contraries, one of them being known through knowledge of 
the others and it is proper to non-psychical potencies to be divided through 
the division of the body so that contraries can be in one body at the same 
time, though not in the same part. And since the soul is a substratum that 
cannot be divided in this way, contraries cannot be in it together, i. e. in two 
parts of the substratum. 


Such arguments are all arguments of people who have not grasped the views 
of the philosophers about this problem. How little does a man understand, 
who gives it as a proof of the soul’s survival that it does not judge two 
opposites at the same time, for from this it follows only that the substratum of 
the soul is one, and not divided in the way the substratum of the accidents is 
divided; and it does not follow from the proof that the substratum is not 
divided in the way the substratum of the accidents is divided that the 
substratum is not divided at all. 


Ghazali says: 


The fifth proof is: If the intellect perceived the intelligibles 
through a bodily organ, it would not know its own self. But the 
consequent is impossible; therefore it knows its own self and 
the antecedent is impossible. We answer: It is conceded that 
from the exclusion of the contrary of the consequent the 
contrary of the antecedent follows, ‘ but only when the 
consequence of the antecedent has been previously established, 
and we say we do not concede the necessity of the consequence; 
and what is your proof? 


And if it is said that the proof is that, because sight is in the 
body, sight does not attach itself to sight, and the seeing is not 


461 


seen nor the hearing heard, and so on with respect to the other 
senses; and if the intellect, too, could only perceive through 
body it could not perceive itself, but the intellect thinks itself 
just as it thinks other things, and it thinks that it thinks itself 
and that it thinks other things-we answer: What you assert is 
wrong on two points. The first is that according to us sight 
could be attached to itself, just as one and the same knowledge 
can be knowledge of other things and of itself, only in the usual 
course of events this does not happen; but according to us the 
interruption of the usual course of events is possible. The 
second, and this is the stronger argument, is for us to say that 
we concede this for the senses; but why, if this is impossible for 
some senses, is it impossible for others, and why is it 
impossible that there should be a difference in the behaviour of 
the senses with respect to perception although they are all in 
the body? just as sight differs from touch through the fact that 
touch, like taste, can only come to perceive by being in contact 
with the object touched, whereas separation from the object is a 
condition of sight, so that when the eyelids cover the eye it does 
not see the colour of the eyelid, ‘ not being at a distance from it. 
, But this difference does not necessitate that they should differ 
in their need to be in a body, and it is not impossible that there 
should be among the senses something called intellect that 
differs from the others in that it perceives itself. 


I say: 


The first objection, that the usual course of events might be interrupted so 
that sight might see itself, is an argument of the utmost sophistry and 
imposture, and we have discussed it already. As to the second objection, that 
it is not impossible that a bodily perception should perceive itself, this has a 
certain plausibility, but when the motive is known which led the philosophers 
to their assertion, then the impossibility of this supposition becomes clear, for 
perception is something which exists between the agent and the patient, and it 
consists of the perceiver and the perceived. It is impossible that a sense 
should be in one and the same respect its own agent and patient, and the 


462 


duality of agent and patient in sense arises, as concerns its act, from the side 
of the form and, as concerns its passivity, from the side of the matter. But no 
composite can think itself, because if this were so, its essence would be 
different from that by which it thinks, for it would think only with a part of its 
essence; and since intellect and intelligible are identical, I if the composite 
thought its essence, the composite would become a simple, and the whole the 
part, and all this is impossible. When this is established here in this way, it is 
only a dialectical proof; but in the proper demonstrative order, i. e. preceded 
by the conclusions which ought to precede it, it can become a necessary one. 


Ghazali says: 


The sixth proof is that they say that, if the intellect perceived 
through a bodily organ like sight, it would be just as incapable 
of perceiving its own organ as the other senses; but it perceives 
the brain and the heart and what is claimed to be its organ, so 
that it is proved that it has no organ or substratum, for 
otherwise it would not perceive the brain and the heart. 


We have the same kind of objection against this as against 
the preceding proof. We say it is not inconceivable that sight 
should perceive its subject, for that it does not perceive it is 
only what happens in the usual course of events. Or shall we 
rather say it is not impossible that the senses should differ 
individually in this respect, although it is common to them all 
to be impressed on bodies, as has been said before? And why do 
you say that what exists in a body cannot perceive the body, and 
how do you know its impossibility in all cases, since to make an 
infinite generalization from a finite number of individual cases 
has no logical validity? In logic it is stated, as an example of an 
inference made from one particular cause or many particular 
causes to all causes, that when we say, after learning it by 
induction through observing all the animals, ‘all animals move 
the lower jaw in masticating’, the crocodile has been neglected, 
since it moves the upper. ‘ The philosophers have only made the 


induction from the five senses, and found this known common 


463 


feature in them and then judged that all the senses must be like 
this. But perhaps the intellect is another type of sense which 
stands in regard to the other senses as the crocodile stands to 
the other animals, and in this case there would be some senses 
which could perceive their substratum although they were 
corporeal and divisible, and other senses which could not do 
this; just as the senses can be divided into those which perceive 
the thing perceived without contact, like sight, and those which 
cannot perceive without contact, like taste and touch. Although, 
therefore, what the philosophers affirm creates a certain 
presumption, it does not afford reliable evidence. 


But it may be said by the philosophers: We do not merely 
point to the enumeration of the senses but lay stress on a proof, 
and say that if the heart or the brain were the soul of man, he 
could never be unaware of them, and never for a moment not 
think of them, just as he is never unconscious of himself; for 
nobody’s self is ever unaware of itself, but it is always affirming 
itself in its soul, but as long as man has not heard any one 
speaking about the heart and the brain or has not observed 
them through the dissection of another man, he does not 
perceive them and does not believe in their existence. But if the 
intellect inhered in the body, it would necessarily either think 
or not think of this body continually; neither the one nor the 
other is the case, but it sometimes thinks of its body and 
sometimes does not. This can be proved by the fact that the 
perception which inheres in the substratum perceives that 
substratum either because of a relation between itself and the 
substratum-and one cannot imagine another relation between 
them than that of inherence-and then the perception must 
perceive its substratum continually, or this relation will not 
suffice; and in this case the perception can never perceive its 
substratum, since there can never occur another relation 


between them; just as because of the fact that it thinks itself, it 


464 


thinks itself always and is not sometimes aware, sometimes 


unaware of itself. 


But we answer: As long as a man is conscious of himself and 
aware of his soul, he is also aware of his body; indeed, the name, 
form, and shape of the heart are not well defined for him, but 
he regards his soul and self as a body to such an extent that he 
regards even his clothes and his house as belonging to his self, ‘ 
but the soul or the self which the philosophers mention has no 
relation to the house or the clothes. This primary attribution of 
the soul to the body is necessary for man, and _ his 
unconsciousness of the form and name of his soul is like his 
unconsciousness of the seat of smell, which is two excrescences 
in the foremost part of the brain resembling the nipples of the 
breast; still, everyone knows that he perceives smell with his 
body, but he does not represent the shape of the seat of this 
perception, nor does he define this seat, although he perceives 
that it is nearer to his head than to his heels, and, in relation to 
the whole of his head, nearer to the inside of his nose than to 
the inside of his ear. Man knows his soul in the same way, and 
he knows that the essence through which the soul exists is 
nearer to his heart and breast than to his foot, and he supposes 
that his soul will persist when he loses his foot, but he does not 
regard it as possible that his soul should persist when his heart 
is taken away. But what the philosophers say about his being 


sometimes aware of his body, sometimes not, is not true. 
I say: 


As to his objection against the assertion that a body or a bodily faculty 
cannot know itself, because the senses are perceptive faculties in bodies and 
do not know themselves, this assertion indeed is based on induction, and 
induction does not provide absolute evidence. ; As to Ghazali’s comparison of 
this to the induction which establishes that all animals move their lower jaw, 
this comparison is only valid in part. For the induction that all animals move 


their lower jaw is an imperfect one, because not all animals have been 


465 


enumerated; whereas the man who assumes that no sense perceives itself has 
certainly made a complete induction, for there are no other senses than the 
five. “ But the judgement based on the observation of the senses that no 
perceptive faculty is in a body resembles the induction by which it is judged 
that all animals move their lower jaw; for, just as in the latter case not all the 
animals, in the former not all the perceptive faculties are enumerated? 


As to his saying in the name of the philosophers that if the intellect were in 
the body, it would, when it perceives, perceive the body in which it is, this is a 
silly and inane assertion which is not made by the philosophers. It would only 
follow if everyone who perceived a thing had to perceive it together with its 
definition; but that is not so, for we perceive the soul and many other things 
without perceiving their definition. If, indeed, we perceived the definition of 
the soul together with its existence, we should of necessity know through its 
definition that it was in the body or that it was incorporeal; for, if it were in 
the body, the body would be necessarily included in its definition, and if it 
were not in the body, the body would not be included in the definition. And 
this is what one must believe about this problem. 


As for Ghazali’s objection, that a man knows of his soul that it is in his body 
although he cannot specify in which part-this indeed is true, for the ancients 
had different opinions about its seat, but our knowledge that the soul is in the 
body does not mean that we know that it receives its existence through being 
in the body; this is not self-evident, and is a question about which the 
philosophers ancient as well as modern differ, for if the body serves as an 
instrument for the soul, the soul does not receive its existence through the 
body; but if the body is like a substratum for its accident; then the soul can 
only exist through the body. 


Ghazali says: 


The seventh proof. The philosophers say that the faculties 
which perceive through the bodily organs become tired through 
the long-continued performance of the act of perception, since 
the continuation of their action destroys the mixture of their 
elements and tires them, and in the same way excessive 


stimulation of the perceptive faculties makes them weak and 


466 


often even corrupts them, so that afterwards they are not able 
to perceive something lighter and more delicate; so for instance 
a loud voice and a strong light hinder or corrupt the perception 
of a low voice and delicate objects of sight afterwards; and in 
fact the man who tastes something extremely sweet does not 
afterwards taste something less sweet. But the intellectual 
faculty behaves in the opposite way; a long observation of 
intelligibles does not tire it, and the perception of important 
necessary truths gives it strength for the perception of easy 
observations and does not weaken it, and if sometimes 
tiredness may befall it, this happens because it makes use of 
and gets assistance from the imaginative faculty, so that the 
organ of the imaginative faculty becomes weary and no longer 
serves the intellect. 


Our objection to this follows the same line as before, and we 
say that it may well be that the bodily senses differ in this; and 
what is true for some of them need not be true for others-yes, it 
may be that the bodies themselves may differ and that some of 
them may grow weak through a certain type of movement, 
whereas others may grow strong through a certain type of 
movement, not weak, and that when this type of movement has 
made an impression on them, it causes a renewal of strength in 
them so that they do not perceive any new impression made on 
them. And all this is possible, since a judgement valid for some 
is not valid for all. 


I say: 


This is an old proof of the philosophers, and it amounts to this: that when 
the intellect perceives a strong intelligible and afterwards turns to the 
perception of a slighter, it perceives it more easily, and this shows that it does 
not perceive through the body, since we find that the bodily perceptive 
faculties are impressed by strong sensations in a way which lessens their 
power of perception, so that after strong sensations they cannot perceive 
things of slight intensity. The reason is that through every form which inheres 


467 


in a body the body receives an impression, because this form is necessarily 
mixed with it; for otherwise this form would not be a form in a body. Now 
since the philosophers found that the receptacle of the intelligibles was not 
impressed by the intelligibles, they decided that this receptacle was not a 
body. 


And against this there is no objection. For every substratum which is 
impressed congruously or incongruously by the inherence of the form in it, be 
it little or much, is necessarily corporeal, and the reverse is also true, namely 
that everything corporeal is impressed by the form which is realized in it, and 
the magnitude of the impression depends on the magnitude of the mixing of 
the form and the body. And the cause of this is that every becoming is the 
consequence of a change, and if a form could inhere in a body without a 
change it might happen that, there could be a form whose realization did not 
impress its substratum. 


Ghazali says: 


The eighth proof is that the philosophers say: ‘All the 
faculties of parts of the body become weaker, when they have 
reached the end of their growth at forty years and later; so sight 
and hearing and the other faculties become weaker, but the 
intellectual faculty becomes strong in most cases only after this 
age. ‘ And the loss of insight in the intelligibles, through illness 
in the body and through dotage in old age, does not argue 
against this, for as long as it is proved that at certain times the 
intellect is strong notwithstanding the weakness of the body, it 
is clear that it exists by itself, and its decline at the time of the 
declining of the body does not imply that it exists through the 
body, for from a negative consequent alternating with a positive 
consequent there is no inference. For we say that, if the 
intellectual faculty exists through the body, then the weakness 
of the body will weaken it at all times, but the consequent is 
false and therefore the antecedent is false; but, when we say the 
consequent is true, sometimes it does not follow that the 
antecedent is true. Further, the cause of this is that the soul has 


468 


an activity through itself, when nothing hinders it and it is not 
preoccupied with something. For the soul has two kinds of 
action, one in relation to the body, namely to govern and rule it, 
and one in relation to its principles and essence, and this is to 
perceive the intelligibles, and these two kinds of action hinder 
each other and are opposed to each other, and when it is 
occupied with the one action, it turns away from the other and 
it cannot combine both. And its occupations through the body 
are sense-perception and imagination and the passions, anger, 
fear, grief, and pain, but when it sets out to think the intelligible 
it neglects all these other things. Yes, sense-perception by itself 
sometimes hinders the apprehension and contemplation of the 
intellect without the occurrence of any damage to the organ of 
the intellect or to the intellect itself, and the reason for this is 
that the soul is prevented from one action through being 
occupied with another, and therefore during pain, disease, and 
fear-for this also is a disease of the brain-intellectual 
speculation leaves off. And why should it be impossible that 
through this difference in these two kinds of action in the soul 
they should hinder each other, since even two acts of the same 
kind may impede each other, for fear is stunned by pain and 
desire by anger and the observation of one intelligible by that of 
another? And a sign that the illness which enters the body does 
not occur in the substratum of the sciences is that, when the 
sick man recovers, he does not need to learn the sciences anew, 
but the disposition of his soul becomes the same as it was 
before, and those sciences come back to him exactly as they 


were without any new learning. 


The objection is that we say that there may be innumerable 
causes for the increase and the decrease of the faculties, for 
some of the faculties increase in power at the beginning of life, 
some in middle life, some at the end, and the same is the case 
with the intellect and only a topical proof can be claimed. And it 
is not impossible that smell and sight should differ in this, that 


469 


smell becomes stronger after forty years and sight weaker, 
although they both inhere in the body, just as those faculties 
differ in animals; for in some animals smell is stronger, in 
others hearing and sight because of the difference in their 
temperaments, and it is not possible to ascertain these facts 
absolutely. Nor is it impossible that the temperament of the 
organs also should differ with individual persons and 
conditions. One of the reasons why the decay of sight is earlier 
than the decay of the intellect is that sight is earlier, for a man 
sees when he is first created, Whereas his intellect is not mature 


¢ 


before fifteen years or more, ‘ according to the different 
opinions we find people to have about this problem; and it is 
even said that greyness comes earlier to the hair on the head 
than to that on the beard, because the hair on the head grows 
earlier. If one goes deeper into these causes and does not simply 
refer them to the usual course of nature, one cannot base any 
sure knowledge thereon, because the possibilities for certain 
faculties to become stronger and others weaker are unlimited, 


and nothing evident results from this. 
I say: 


When it is assumed that the substratum of the perceptive faculties is the 
natural heat, and that natural heat suffers diminution after forty years, then 
intellect must behave in the same way in this respect; that is, if its substratum 
is natural heat, then it is necessary that the intellect should become old as the 
natural heat becomes old. If, however, it is thought that the substrata for the 
intellect and the senses are different, then it is not necessary that both should 


be similar in their lifetimes. 
Ghazali says: 


The ninth proof is that the philosophers say: How can man 
be attributed to body with its accidents, for those bodies are 
continually in dissolution, and nutrition replaces what is 
dissolved, so that when we see a child after its separation from 
its mother’s womb fall ill a few times and become thin and then 


470 


fat again and grow up, we may safely say that after forty years 
no particle remains of what was there when his mother was 
delivered of it. Indeed, the child began its existence out of the 
parts of the sperm alone, but nothing of the particles of the 
sperm remains in it; no, all this is dissolved and has changed 
into something else, and then this body has become another. 
Still we say that the identical man remains and his notions 
remain with him from the beginning of his youth, although all 
the bodily parts have changed. And this shows that the soul has 
an existence outside the body and that the body is its organ! 


The objection is that this is contradicted by what happens to 
animals and plants, for when the condition of their being small 
is compared to the condition of their being big, their identity is 
asserted equally with the identity of man; still, it does not prove 
that they have an incorporeal existence. ‘ And what is said 
about knowledge is refuted by the retention of imaginative 
forms, for they remain in the boy from youth -to old age, 
although the particles of his brain change. 


I say 


None of the ancient philosophers used this proof for the survival of the soul; 
they only used it to show that in individuals there is an essence which remains 
from birth to death and that things are not in an eternal flux, as was believed 
by many ancients who denied necessary knowledge, so that Plato was forced 
to introduce the forms. There is no sense in occupying ourselves with this, 
and the objection of Ghazali against this proof is valid. 


Ghazali says: 


The tenth proof is that they say that the intellectual faculty 
perceives the general intellectual universals which the 
theologians call modes, so that man in general is apprehended 
(whereas the senses perceive the individuality of a definite 
man), and this universal differs from the man who is perceived 
by the senses, for what is perceived by the senses is in a 
particular place, and his colour, size, and position are 


471 


particular, but the intelligible absolute man is abstracted from 
all these things; however, in him there is everything to which 
the term ‘man’ is applied, although he has not the colour, size, 
position, or place, of the man perceived by the senses, and even 
a man who may exist in the future is subsumed under him; 
indeed, if man disappeared there would remain this reality of 
man in the intellect, in abstraction from all these particular 
things. 


And in this way, from everything perceived by the senses as 
an individual, there results for the intellect a reality, universal 
and abstracted from matters and from positions, so that its 
attributes can be divided into, what is essential (as, for example, 
corporeity for plants and animals, and animality for man) and 
into what is accidental (like whiteness and length for man), and 
this reality is judged as being essential or accidental for the 
genus of man and plant and ofeverything not apprehended as 
an individual perceived by the senses, and so it is shown that 
the universal, in abstraction from sensible attachments, is 


intelligible and invariable in the mind of man. 


This intelligible universal cannot be pointed at, , nor has it a 
position or size, and in its abstraction from position and matter 
it is either related to its object (which is impossible, for its 
object has position and place and size) or to its subject (which 
is the rational soul), and therefore the soul cannot have a 
position or be pointed at or have a size, for if it had all these 
things what inheres in it would also possess them. z 


And the objection is that the idea of a universal which you 
philosophers assume as existing in the intellect is not accepted 
by us. ; According to us nothing inheres in the intellect but what 
inheres in the senses, only it inheres in the senses as an 
aggregate which they cannot separate, whereas the intellect is 
able to do so. Further, when it is separated, the single part 
separated from its attachments is just as much an individual in 


472 


the intellect as the aggregate with its attachments, only this 
invariable part’ in the mind is related to the thing thought oft 
and to similar things by one single relation, and in this way it is 
said to be a universal. For there is in the intellect the forma of 
the individual thing thought of which is first perceived by the 
senses, and the relation of this form to all the individuals of this 
genus which the senses perceive is one and the same. If, after 
seeing one man, someone sees another, no new form occurs to 
him, as happens when he sees a horse after seeing a man, for 
then two different forms occur in him. A similar thing happens 
to the senses themselves, for when a man sees water, one form 
occurs in his imagination, and if he sees blood afterwards, 
another form occurs, but if he sees another water, no other 
form occurs, but the form of the water which is impressed on 
his imagination is an image for all individual stretches of water, 


and for this reason it is often thought to be a universal. 


And in the same way, when for instance he sees a hand, 
there occurs in his imagination and in his intellect the natural 
position of its parts, namely the surface of the hand and the 
division of the fingers in it and the ending of the fingers in the 
nails, and besides this there occur to him the smallness or 
bigness of the hand and its colour, and if he sees another hand 
which resembles the first in everything, no other new form 
occurs to him; no, this second observation, when a new thing 
occurs, does not produce an impression on his imagination, 
just as, when he sees the water after having previously seen it in 
one and the same vessel and in the same quantity, no new 
impression is produced. And he may see another hand, 
different in colour and size, and then there occurs to him 
another colour and another size, but there does not happen to 
him a new form of hand, for the small black hand has in 
common with the big white hand the position of its parts, 
differing from it in colour, and of that in which the second hand 
agrees with the first no new form is produced, since both forms 


473 


are identical, but the form of the things in which they differ is 
renewed. And this is the meaning of the universal both in 
sensation and in intellect, for when the intellect apprehends the 
form of the body of an animal, then it does not acquire a new 
form of corporeity from a plant, just as in imagination the form 
of two stretches of water perceived at two different times need 
not be renewed; and the same happens with all things that have 


something in common. 


But this does not permit one to assert the existence of a 
universal which has no position whatever, although the intellect 
can judge that there exists something that cannot be pointed at 
and has no spatial position; for instance, it can assert the 
existence of the creator of the universe, with the understanding, 
however, that such a creator cannot be imagined to exist in 
matter, and in this kind of reality the abstraction from matter is 
in the intelligible itself and is not caused by the intellect and by 
thinking. But as to the forms acquired from material things, this 


happens in the way we have mentioned. 
I say: 


The meaning of the philosophical theory he relates is that the intellect 
apprehends, in relation to the individuals which have a common species, a 
single entity, in which they participate and which is the quiddity of this 
species without this entity's being divided into the things in which the 
individuals qua individuals are divided, like space and position and the 
matters through which they receive their plurality. This entity must be 
ingenerable and incorruptible’ and is not destroyed by the disappearance of 
one of the individuals in which it exists, and the sciences therefore are eternal 
and not corruptible except by accident, that is to say by their connexion with 
Zaid and Amr; that is, only through this connexion are they corruptible, and 
not in themselves, since if they were transitory in themselves this connexion 
would exist in their essence and they could not constitute an identity. And the 
philosophers say that, if this is established for the intellect and the intellect is 
in the soul, it is necessary that the soul should not be. divisible in the way in 


474 


which individuals are divisible, and that the soul in Amr and in Zaid should 
be one single entity. And this proof is strong in the case of the intellect, 
because in the intellect there is no individuality whatever; the soul, however, 
although it is free from the matters’ through which the individuals receive 
their plurality, is said by the most famous philosophers not to abandon the 
nature of the individual, although it is an apprehending entity. This is a point 
which has to be considered. 


As for Ghazali’s objection, it amounts to saying that the intellect is 
something individual and that universality is an accident of it, and therefore 
Ghazali compares the way in which the intellect observes a common feature in 
individuals to the way in which the senses perceive the same thing many 
times, since for Ghazali the intelligible is a unity, but not something universal, 
and for him the animality of Zaid is numerically identical with the animality 
which he observes in Khalid And this is false, and if it were true, there would 
be no difference between sense-perception and the apprehension of the 
intellect. 








The Third Discussion 








And after this Ghazali says that the philosophers have two proofs to 
demonstrate that the soul after once existing cannot perish. The first is that if 
the soul perished this could only be imagined in one of these three ways: 
either (1) it perishes simultaneously with the body, or (2) through an opposite 
which is found in it, or (3) through the power of God, the powerful. It is false 
that it can perish through the corruption of the body, for it is separated from 
the body. It is false that it can have an opposite, for a separate substance has 
no opposite. ‘ And it is false, as has been shown before, that the power of God 
can attach itself to non-being. 


Now, Ghazali objecting to the philosophers answers: ‘We theologians do not 
admit that the soul is external to the body; besides, it is the special theory of 
Avicenna that the souls are numerically differentiated through the 
differentiation of the bodies, for that there should be one single soul in every 
respect and in all people brings about many impossibilities, for instance that 
when Zaid knows some. thing Amr should know it too, and when Amr does 


475 


not know something Zaid should not know it either; and many other 
impossibilities follow from this assumption. ‘And Ghazali adduces against 
Avicenna the argument that when it is assumed that the souls are numerically 
differentiated through the differentiation of the bodies, then they are attached 
to the bodies and must necessarily perish with their decay. 


The philosophers, however, can answer that it is by no means necessary that, 
when there exists between two things a relation of attachment and love, for 
instance the relation between the lover and the beloved and the relation 
between iron and the magnet, the destruction of the one should cause the 
destruction of the other. But Avicenna’s opponents may ask his partisans 
through what the individuation and numerical plurality of souls takes place, 
when they are separated from their matters, for the numerical plurality of 
individuals arises only through matter. He who claims the survival and the 
numerical plurality of souls should say that they are in a subtle matter, 
namely the animal warmth which emanates from the heavenly bodies, and 
this is a warmth which is not fire and in which there is not a principle of fire; 
in this warmth there are the souls which create the sublunary bodies and 
those which inhere in these bodies . And none of the philosophers is opposed 
to the theory that in the elements there is heavenly warmth and that this is the 
substratum for the potencies which produce animals and plants, but some of 
the philosophers call this potency a natural heavenly potency, whereas Galen 
calls it the forming power and sometimes the demiurge, saying that it seems 
that there exists. a wise maker of the living being who has created it and that 
this is apparent from anatomy, but where this maker is and what His 
substance is is too lofty a problem for human understanding. ‘ From this Plato 
proves that the soul is separated from the body, for the soul creates and forms 
the body, and if the body were the condition for the existence of the soul, the 
soul would not have created it or formed it. z This creative soul is most 
apparent in the animals which do not procreate, but it is also evident in the 
animals which do. And just as we know that the soul is something added to 
the natural warmth, since it is not of the nature of warmth qua warmth to 
produce well-ordered intelligible acts, so we know that the warmth which is in 
the seeds does not suffice to create and to form. And the philosophers do not 
disagree about the fact that there are in the elements souls creating each 


476 


species of animals, plants, and minerals that exists, and that each of them 
needs a directing principle and preserving powers for it to come into 
existence and remain. And these souls are either like intermediaries between 
the souls of the heavenly bodies and the souls in the sensible bodies of the 
sublunary world, and then no doubt they have absolute dominion over these 
latter souls and these bodies, and from here arises the belief in the Jinn, ‘ or 
these souls themselves are attached to the bodies which they create according 
to a resemblance which exists between them, and when the bodies decay they 
return to their spiritual matter and to the subtle imperceptible bodies. 


And there are none of the old philosophers who do not acknowledge these 
souls, and they only disagree as to whether they are identical with the souls in 
our bodies or of another kind. And as to those who accept a bestower of 
forms, they regard these powers as a separate intellect; but this theory is not 
found in any of the old philosophers, but only in some philosophers of Islam, 
because it belongs to their principles that the separate principles do not 
change their matters by transformation in respect of substance and primarily, 
for the cause of change is the opposite of the thing changed. s This question is 
one of the most difficult in philosophy, and the best explanation that can be 
given of this problem is that the material intellect thinks an infinite number of 
things in one single intelligible, and that it judges these things in a universal 
judgement, and that that which forms its essence is absolutely immaterial . b 
Therefore Aristotle praises Anaxagoras’ for having made intellect, namely an 
immaterial form, the prime mover, and for this reason it does not suffer any 
action from anything, for the cause of passivity is matter and in this respect 
the passive potencies are in the same position as the active, for it is the 
passive potencies possessing matters which accept definite things. 








The Fourth Discussion 








Having finished this question Ghazali begins to say that the philosophers 
deny bodily resurrection. This is a problem which is not found in any of the 
older philosophers, although resurrection has been mentioned in different 
religions for at least a thousand years and the philosophers whose theories 
have come to us are of a more recent date. The first to mention bodily 
resurrection were the prophets of Israel after Moses, as is evident from the 


477 


Psalms and many books attributed to the Israelites. Bodily resurrection is also 
affirmed in the New Testament and attributed by tradition to Jesus. It is a 
theory of the Sabaeans, whose religion is according to Ibn Hazm the oldest. 


But the philosophers in particular, as is only natural, regard this doctrine as 
most important and believe in it most, and the reason is that it is conducive to 
an order amongst men on which man’s being, as man, depends and through 
which he can attain the greatest happiness proper to him, for it is a necessity 
for the existence of the moral and speculative virtuess and of the practical 
sciences in men. They hold namely that man cannot live in this world without 
the practical sciences, nor in this and the next world without the speculative 
virtues, and that neither of these categories is perfected or completed without 
the practical virtues, b and that the practical virtues can only become strong 
through the knowledge and adoration of God by the services prescribed by the 
laws of the different religions, like offerings and prayers and supplications 
and other such utterances by which praise is rendered to God, the angels, and 
the prophets. 


In short, the philosophers believe that religious laws are necessary political 
arts, the principles of which are taken from natural reason and inspiration, 
especially in what is common to all religions, although religions differ here 
more or less. The philosophers further hold that one must not object either 
through a positive or through a negative statement to any of the general 
religious principles, for instance whether it is obligatory to serve God or not, 
and still more whether God does or does not exist, and they affirm this also 
concerning the other religious principles, for instance bliss in the beyond and 
its possibility; for all religions agree in the acceptance of another existence 
after death, although they differ in the description of this existence, just as 
they agree about the knowledge, attributes, and acts of God, although they 
differ more or less in their utterances about the essence and the acts of the 
Principle. All religions agree also about the acts conducive to bliss in the next 
world, although they differ about the determination of these acts. 


In short, the religions are, according to the philosophers, obligatory, since 
they lead towards wisdom in a way universal to all human beings, for 
philosophy only leads a certain number of intelligent people to the knowledge 


478 


of happiness, and they therefore have to learn wisdom, whereas religions seek 
the instruction of the masses generally. Notwithstanding this, we do not find 
any religion which is not attentive to the special needs of the learned, 
although it is primarily concerned with the things in which the masses 
participate. And since the existence of the learned class is only perfected and 
its full happiness attained by participation with the class of the masses, the 
general doctrine is also obligatory for the existence and life of this special 
class, both at the time of their youth and growth (and nobody doubts this), 
and when they pass on to attain the excellence which is their distinguishing 
characteristic. For it belongs to the necessary excellence of a man of learning 
that he should not despise the doctrines in which he has been brought up, and 
that he should explain them in the fairest way, and that he should understand 
that the aim of these doctrines lies in their universal character, not in their 
particularity, and that, if he expresses a doubt concerning the religious 
principles in which he has been brought up, or explains them in a way 
contradictory to the prophets and turns away from their path, he merits more 
than anyone else that the term unbeliever should be applied to him, and he is 
liable to the penalty for unbelief in the religion in which he has been brought 


up. 


Further, he is under obligation to choose the best religion of his period, even 
when they are all equally true for him, and he must believe that the best will 
be abrogated by the introduction of a still better. Therefore the learned who 
were instructing the people in Alexandria became Muslims when Islam 
reached them, and the learned in the Roman Empire became Christians when 
the religion of Jesus was introduced there. And nobody doubts that among the 
Israelites there were many learned men, and this is apparent from the books 
which are found amongst the Israelites and which are attributed to Solomon. 
And never has wisdom ceased among the inspired, i. e. the prophets, and 
therefore it is the truest of all sayings that every prophet is a sage, ‘ but not 
every sage a prophet; the learned, however, are those of whom it is said that 
they are the heirs of the prophets. 


And since in the principles of the demonstrative sciences there are 
postulates and axioms which are assumed, this must still more be the case for 
the religions which take their origin in inspiration and reason. Every religion 


479 


exists through inspiration and is blended with reason. And he who holds that 
it is possible that there should exist a natural religion based on reason alone 
must admit that this religion must be less perfect than those which spring 
from reason and inspiration. And all philosophers agree that the principles of 
action must be taken on authority, for there is no demonstration for the 
necessity of action except through the existence of virtues which are realized 
through moral actions and through practice. 


And it is clear from this that all the learned hold about religions the opinion 
that the principles of the actions and regulations prescribed in every religion 
are received from the prophets and lawgivers, who regard those necessary 
principles as praiseworthy which most incite the masses to the performance 
of virtuous acts; and so nobody doubts that those who are brought up on 
those principles are of a more perfect virtue than those who are brought up on 
others, for instance that the prayers in our religion hold men back from 
ignominy and wickedness, as God’s word certifies, and that the prayer 
ordained in our religion fulfils this purpose more truly than the prayers 
ordained in others, and this by the conditions imposed on it of number, time, 
recitation, purity, and desistance from acts and words harmful to it. And the 
same may be said of the doctrine of the beyond in our religion, which is more 
conducive to virtuous actions than what is said in others. Thus to represent 
the beyond in material images is more appropriate than purely spiritual 
representation, as is said in the Divine Words: ‘The likeness of the Paradise 
which those who fear God are promised, beneath it rivers flow. ‘; And the 
Prophet has said: ‘In it there is what no eye has seen, no ear has heard, nor 
ever entered the mind of man. ‘And Ibn Abbas said: ‘There is no relation in 
the other world to this world but the names. ‘ And he meant by this that the 
beyond is another creation of a higher order than this world, and another 
phase superior to our earthly. He need not deny this who believes that we see 
one single thing developing itself from one phase to another, for instance the 
transformation of the inorganic into beings conscious of their own essences, i. 
e. the intellectual forms. Those who are in doubt about this and object to it 
and try to explain it are those who seek to destroy the religious prescriptions 
and to undo the virtues. They are, as everyone knows, the heretics and those 
who believe that the end of man consists only in sensual enjoyment. When 


480 


such people have really the power to destroy religious belief both theologians 
and philosophers will no doubt kill them, but when they have no actual power 
the best arguments that can be brought against them are those that are 
contained in the Holy Book. What Ghazali says against them is right, and in 
refuting them it must be admitted that the soul is immortal, as is proved by 
rational and religious proofs, and it must be assumed that what arises from 
the dead is simulacra’ of these earthly bodies, not these bodies themselves, for 
that which has perished does not return individually and a thing can only 
return as an image of that which has perished, not -as a being identical with 
what has perished, as Ghazali declares. Therefore the doctrine of resurrection 
of those theologians who believe that the soul is an accident and that the 
bodies which arise are identical with those that perished cannot be true. For 
what perished and became anew can only be specifically, not numerically, one, 
and this argument is especially valid against those theologians who hold that 


an accident does not last two moments. 


Ghazali accused the philosophers of heresy on three points. One concerns 
this question, and we have already shown what opinion the philosophers hold 
about this, and that according to them it is a speculative problem. The second 
point is the theory attributed to the philosophers that God does not know 
individuals, but here again we have shown that they do not say this. The third 
point is their theory of the eternity of the world, but again we have shown that 
what they understand by this term has not the meaning for which they are 
accused of heresy by the theologians. Ghazali asserts in this book that no 
Muslim believes in a purely spiritual resurrection, and in another book he 
says that the Sufis hold it. According to this latter assertion those who believe 
in a spiritual but not in a perceptible resurrection are not declared heretics by 
universal consent, and this permits belief in a spiritual resurrection. But again 
in another book he repeats his accusation of heresy as if it rested on universal 
consent. And all this, as you see, is confusing. And no doubt this man erred in 
religious questions as he erred in rational problems. God is the succourer for 
the finding of what is true, and He invests with the truth whomever He 
chooses. 


I have decided to break off my inquiry about these things here, and I ask 
pardon for their discussion, and if it were not an obligation to seek the truth 


481 


for those who are entitled to it-and those are, as Galen says, one in a 
thousand’-and to prevent from discussion those who have no claim to it, I 
would not have treated all this. And God knows every single letter, and 
perhaps God will accept my excuse and forgive my stumbling in His bounty, 


generosity, munificence and excellence-there is no God but He! 


The End 


482 


