www.alhassanain.org/english 


Alhassanain (p) Network for Islamic Heritage and Thought 


International Journal of Shi‘i Studies 5(1) 185-238 
© 2007 by Global Scholarly Publications 


A Translation of Nasir al-Dln Tusl’s Commentary upon Ibn Slna’s al- 
Isharat wa’l- Tanbihat, al-Namat al-Tasi‘ fi Maqamat al-‘Arifin: 


Namat Nine on the Stations of the 

Mystics 

i 


Keven Brown 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


1 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Table of Contents 


Chapter 1: Remark [on the Stations of the Mystics] ...4 

Salaman and Absal 4 

Chapter 2: Remark [on the Difference Between the Ascetic, the 

Worshipper, and the Mystic]................... 10 

Chapter 3: Remark [on the Asceticism and Worship of the Mystic 

versus Those of the non-Mystic] ■■■■■■■ ■■■■■■■ 11 

Chapter 4: Admonition [on the Need for Religious Law and a Prophet] 

12 

Chapter 5: Admonition [on the Proper Objective of the Mystic] ...... 16 

Chapter 6: Admonition [on the Difference Between One Who Seeks the 
Truth as a Means and One Who Seeks Him for His Own Sake] ....... 19 

Chapter 7: Admonition [on Will as the First Stage of the Progress of the 

Mystics] 21 

Chapter 8: Admonition [on Spiritual Exercise] 23 

Chapter 9: Admonition [on the Mystical Moment] .27 

Chapter 10: Admonition [on the State of Rapture] ■■■■■ .28 

Chapter 11: Admonition [on Concealing Reaction to the State of 

Rapture ] 29 

Chapter 12: Admonition [on the State of Constant Recognition] ...... 30 

Chapter 13: Admonition [on Being Present while Absent] ■■■■. ...31 

Chapter 14: Admonition [on Attaining Recognition by Wishing It] ... 32 

Chapter 15: Admonition [on Recognition without a Wish]..... 33 

Chapter 16 Admonition [on Becoming a Polished Mirror] ■■■■ .34 

Chapter 17: Admonition on [Complete Arrival at the Holy Presence] 35 
Chapter 18: A Remark [on the Imperfection of the Stages before 

Arrival] ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■ ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■ 37 

Chapter 19: Admonition [on the Beginning and End of Mysticism] ... 38 

Chapter 20: Admonition [on the Stages of the Ocean of Arrival] 40 

Chapter 21: A Remark [on the Characteristics of the Mystics] ........ 42 

Chapter 22: A Remark [on the Mystic’s States Before and After 

Arrival] ■■■■■■■■ ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■ ■■■■ ■■■■■■■■ 43 

Chapter 23: Remark [on the Compassion of the Mystic] .44 

Chapter 24: A Remark [on the Attributes of the Mystic] 45 

Chapter 25: A Remark [on the Differing Intentions of theMystic] .... 46 

Chapter 26: A Remark [on the Mystic’s Exemption from Performing 
Religious Duties During the Time of Contact with the Truth] ■■■■■■■■■ 47 
Chapter 27: An Admonition [That Not Every Soul is Suited to 
Mysticism] .................................................................. 48 

Notes.. ................................................................. ...... 49 


2 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


(TusI): In the previous Namat, since he [Ibn Sina] explained that the 
happiness (ibtihaj) belonging to all creatures is through the perfections 
specialized to them in accordance with their ranks, in this Namat he intends 
to explain the states of the people of perfection among the human species, 
clarify the nature of their progress in the stages of felicity, and mention the 
conditions that they experience during each of their stages. 

The Learned Commentator 2 has stated that this section is the most 
important in this book because the author [Ibn Sina] has arranged the 
sciences of Sufism in it in such away that no one before him has reached it 
and no one after him will surpass it. 


3 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 1: Remark [on the Stations of the Mystics] 

(I bn Sind): In this temporal life, the mystics have certain stations and 
stages which are specialized to them and not to others. It is as if, while 
being clothed in the veils of their bodies, they have shed their bodies, 
become free from them, and attained the world of holiness (‘alatn al-quds). 

They possess certain concealed states, while other states are manifested 
by them which are denied by those who do not believe in them and are 
praised by those who recognize them. We will relate these things to you. 


(TflsI): I say: Veil (jilbab) means “cover” (milhafa), and it is what 
covers, like a garment and so forth. And the word nada means “he took it 
off’ (khala‘a-hu). By his words “It is as if, while being clothed in the veils 
of their bodies, they have shed them, become free from them, and attained 
the world of holiness,” he means that although their perfect souls are 
outwardly covered by the veils of their bodies, in fact it is as though they are 
divested of them, free from all material impurities, and have arrived at the 
world of holiness, where they are united with those perfect essences that are 
free from deficiency and evil. They are the possessors of hidden states, 
which are their states of witnessing that which imaginations cannot 
apprehend and tongues are incapable of explaining, and their enjoyments of 
that which no eye has seen and no ear has heard. This is the meaning of the 
words (exalted be the speaker): “No soul knows what delights of the eye are 
kept hidden for them .” 3 The states manifested by them are signs of 
perfection and excellence that appear in their words and their actions. They 
include signs that are singled out to them, such as miracles (mujizat) and 
wonders (karamat), which are states “denied by those who do not believe in 
them.” In other words, the hearts of those who neither recognize them nor 
are favored by them put no trust in them. And “praised by those who 
recognize them” means that those who are apprised thereof and favored 
therewith exalt them. 


Salaman and Absal 

(Ibn Sind): Should the tale of Salaman and Absal reach your ears among 
the stories you have heard, and be narrated in detail to you, know that 
Salaman is a similitude for yourself, and Absal is a similitude for your stage 
in mysticism, if you are a mystic. Solve, then, the riddle (ramz) if you are 
able. 


(TusI): I say: ...The Learned Commentator [RazI] has said about this 
passage: 

If what the Master has mentioned does not belong to the genus of the 
puzzles to which he refers whose sum is not distinguishable by something 
incomprehensible, so that guidance is possible by them for it, and they are 


4 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


not wellknown stories, but rather these are two terms which the Master has 
invented to refer to certain things and their like that are impossible for 
reason to understand independently, then, in this case, the Master’s 
charging the reader to solve this riddle is like charging one to discover 
something concealed.... 

The best that may be said about this story is that Salaman stands for 
Adam (peace be upon him), and that Ab sal stands for Paradise. Therefore, it 
is as though he is saying that Adam signifies your rational soul and that 
Paradise refers to the stages of your happiness. By Adam’s expulsion from 
Paradise after consuming the fruit is meant the descent of your soul from 
those stages after indulging in your desires. 

I say: The discourse of the Master points to the existence of a story in 
which these two names are mentioned, whose theme includes a particular 
seeker of a goal that can only be attained gradually in stages, and through 
these stages he can achieve one perfection after another. Thus we can say 
that Salaman represents the seeker, that Absal stands for the seeker’s goal, 
and that the states that occur in between these two refer to the riddle the 
Master has charged us to solve. 

It is likely that this story is one of the stories of the Arabs, because the 
two terms are sometimes used in their proverbs and their tales. I have heard 
one of the scholars in Khurasan 4 say that Ibn al-A‘rabr in his book al- 
Nawadir has quoted a story in which it is said that two men became captives 
of a certain tribe. One of the two, known for his goodness, was called 
Salaman; and the other, known for his iniquity, belonged to the tribe of 
Jurhum. Salaman, because of his reputation for goodness, was ransomed and 
released from captivity. The man from the tribe of Jurhum, however, 
because of his reputation for evil, was held captive (ubsila) until he died. 
Because of these two a proverb started among the Arabs which says: 
“Deliverance is Salaman, and imprisonment (ibsdl) is his companion.” I do 
not remember this proverb, and I have not had an opportunity to read the 
story in the above-mentioned book, which is recounted the way I heard it. 
This story [as related by the scholar] does not conform to the Master’s intent 
here, although it does prove the occurrence of these two terms in the 
Nawadir and the accounts of the Arabs. If this is so, then the Master has not 
invented the two names “Salaman” and “Absal” for certain things and 
charged others to discover what he has invented. Rather, he has said that if 
you hear this story, understand by the two terms “Salaman” and “Absal” 
mentioned therein your soul and your stage of progress in mysticism. 

Then begin to solve the riddle, which is the theme of the story, and you 
will find that it corresponds with the states of the mystics. Therefore, the 
assignment to solve the riddle is not a charge to discover the concealed. It 
only depends upon listening to the story. In this case, reason may 
independently comprehend it and be guided to it. 

I should also mention that after writing this commentary, I came across 
two stories connected to Salaman and Absal: In one of these stories, which I 
heard first, it is said that long ago there lived a king who ruled Greece, 
Rome and Egypt. One of his friends was a philosopher (hakim). 


5 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


By following the instructions of the philosopher, the king had conquered 
all the countries. The king wished to have a son who would succeed him 
without having intimate relations with a woman. The philosopher managed 
for the king to have a son from his own seed without relying upon the womb 
of a woman. He named him Salaman, and a woman who was called Absal 
breast-fed him and raised him. After the boy became mature, he fell in love 
with her and stayed close to her. She invited him to herself and the pleasure 
of living with her. His father, however, prohibited him from associating 
with her and ordered him to leave her. The boy, however, did not obey the 
king, and the two ran away together overseas to the west. The king had 
some sort of instrument with which he could get information about the 
continents and the things therein and exercise his control over the 
inhabitants therein. He found the two with that instrument and he began to 
sympathize with them. He provided them with what they needed to survive 
and ignored them for a while. Then he became angry at Salaman because he 
continued to live with the woman. The king made each one of them desire 
the other, but they could not meet with each other despite the fact that they 
could see each other. They were in grief because this. Salaman soon realized 
what was going on, and he returned to his father and apologized, but his 
father informed him that after his involvement with the indecent woman (al- 
fajira) Absal, and his intimacy with her, he would not obtain the kingdom 
he was entitled to obtain. Thereupon, Salaman and Absal, holding each 
other’s hands, threw themselves into the ocean. By the order of the king the 
spirit of the water saved Salaman after he was near drowning, but Absal 
drowned. 

Because of this Salaman became extremely sad. The king appealed to the 
philosopher about his son’s affair. The philosopher called upon Salaman and 
told him that if he would listen to him, he would arrange for him to meet 
Absal. He obeyed the philosopher, who showed him an image of the 
woman. This appeased his hope of reunion with her, until after a time he 
was prepared to see an image of Venus (al-zuhara). The philosopher 
showed it to him after inviting him to see it. He fell in love with it and kept 
it always with him. Salaman then began to have an aversion for the image of 
Absal. By reason of his separation from her, he was now prepared to have 
the kingdom, and took charge of the kingdom. The philosopher, with the 
help of the king, constructed two pyramids, one for the king and one for 
himself, and this story was placed therein along with their bodies. No one 
could remove it except Aristotle, who removed it with instructions from 
Plato and closed the door. The story became public, and Hunayn ibn Ishaq 
translated it from Greek into Arabic. 

This story was invented by a layman philosopher in order to attribute the 
words of the Master to it. It is not conformable to them, however, because it 
requires the king to represent the agent intellect (al-‘aql cil-fa“al), the 
philosopher to represent the emanation (fayd ) that emanates upon him from 
above, and Salaman to represent the rational soul (al-nafs al-natiqa). It [the 
agent intellect] emanates the soul without the association of corporeal 
things. Absal would have to represent the animal bodily faculty that helps 
the soul to achieve perfection and becomes united with it. The love of 


6 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Salaman for Absal would stand for his inclination towards bodily pleasures. 
Ascribing indecency to Absal would symbolize attachment to something 
other than the specific soul’s attachment to its matter after the separation of 
the soul. Their running away overseas to the west would symbolize their 
involvement in worldly matters that are far away from the Truth (haqq) 6 
Their carelessness (ihmal) for a time would symbolize the passing of time in 
their case. Their suffering through desire by their deprivation while they are 
close to each other would stand for the persistence (baqa) of the soul’s 
inclination despite the weakening of its powers after aging. The return of 
Salaman to his father would symbolize the comprehension of perfection 
(kamal) and becoming regretful for indulgence in false matters. The action 
of throwing themselves into the ocean would represent their being entangled 
in destruction, whether of the body, because of the dissolution of the 
[animal] faculties and the constitution, or of the soul, because of its 
partiality toward the body. The deliverance (khalas) of Salaman would stand 
for its persistence after the death of the body. His acquaintance with the 
image of Venus would symbolize the soul’s delight and pleasure in 
intellectual perfections. His taking charge of the kingdom would represent 
his attainment of real perfection. The two everlasting pyramids would stand 
for corporeal form and matter. Such is the interpretation of the story. 

Salaman conforms here to what the Master has intended, but Absal does 
not represent what the Master means, because he intended Absal to stand for 
the stages of the mystic in mysticism. But in this interpretation he is 
impeded from mysticism and perfection. For this reason the story does not 
suit what Master has said. This indicates the deficiency of the inventor of 
the story in understanding what the Master intended by it. 

As for the second story, I came across it twenty years after completing 
my commentary. This story is also attributed to the Master, and it seems that 
the Master has indeed alluded to it because Aba ‘Ubayd al-Jurjanl 7 has 
listed the story of Salaman and Absal in his index of the works of the 
Master. 

The gist of the story is that Salaman and Absal were two intimate 
brothers, and Absal was the younger one who was brought up by his older 
brother Salaman. Absal grew into a handsome young man, who was 
intelligent, wellmannered, learned, chaste, and brave. The wife of Salaman 
had fallen in love with him (Absal ), and she asked her husband to let Absal 
live with his family so that his children could learn from his good manners 
and knowledge. Salaman asked his brother to do so, but Absal refused to 
associate closely with women. Salaman said that his wife was like Absal’ s 
mother. Absal went to her home and she was very kind to him, but after 
some time she expressed her love to him in private. Absal became upset. 
She realized that he would not obey her. She [the wife of Salaman] then 
asked Salaman to marry her sister to Absal. She told her sister, “I have 
arranged this marriage, but not just for you, but so that I can share him with 
you.” On the other hand, she told Absal that her sister was a virgin (bikr) 
and very shy, so he must not cohabit with her during the day and must not 
speak to her until she becomes comfortable with him. On the night of the 
wedding, the wife of Salaman slept in the bed of her sister. When Absal 


7 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


came to her, she could not control herself, and she quickly pressed herself 
against him. Thereupon Absal became suspicious and thought that timid 
virgin girls do not behave like this. The sky was clouded at that time by a 
dark cloud. Suddenly, a flash of lightning shone in which he saw her face. 
He pushed her away, left her, and determined to separate himself from her. 

He told Salaman, “I would like to conquer territories for you, and I am 
able to do that.” He led an army, fought nations, and conquered territories 
for his brother on sea, on land, in the east and the west, without a power 
against him. 

He was the first Alexander who conquered the earth. 

When he came back home he thought she [the wife of Salaman] might 
have forgotten about him, but she remembered her love and sought to 
embrace him. He refused her and pushed her away. Thereafter a war broke 
out and Salaman sent Absal with an army to face the enemy, but she [the 
wife of Salaman] gave money to the officers in the army not to support 
Absal in the fight. They did as she wanted and the enemy overcame him and 
left him badly wounded lying in his own blood thinking he was dead. A 
mother beast sympathized with him and breastfed him, nourishing him until 
he became strong and his wounds healed. 

He returned to Salaman, whose enemies had surrounded and subdued 
him while he was grieving for the loss of his brother. Absal revealed himself 
unexpectedly, took control of the army and the equipment, attacked the 
enemy, dispersed them, captured their chief, and secured the country for his 
brother. Then she [the wife of Salaman] plotted with his cook and his 
attendant and gave them some money to kill Absal, which they 
accomplished by putting poison in his drink. He was righteous and great in 
knowledge and practice. 

His brother became heartbroken by his death and abandoned his 
kingdom. He entrusted it to certain of his subjects. He communed with his 
Lord, who revealed to him the truth of the matter. Then he made his wife, 
the cook, and the attendant drink what they gave to his brother, and they 
died. This is what the story is about. 

The interpretation of this story is that Salaman stands for the rational soul 
and Absal for the theoretical intellect (‘aql nazari), which develops until it 
reaches the stage of the acquired intellect (‘aql mustafad ), 8 which is his 
station in mystical knowledge if he is progressing towards perfection. 

The wife of Salaman represents the bodily faculty that incites (al- 
ammara) appetite and passion, which is united with the soul and therefore 
appears as a person. Her love for Absal represents its tendency to control the 
intellect, as it has controlled the other faculties, so that the intellect will 
obey it in the acquisition of its passing desires. 

Absal’ s refusal stands for the intellect’s attraction to its own domain. Her 
sister that she controlled represents the practical faculty called the practical 
intellect (al-‘aql al-‘amalT), which is subservient to the theoretical intellect, 
which is the tranquil soul (al-nafs al-mutma’inna). Her attiring herself in 
place of her sister stands for the enticement of the soul that incites to evil, its 
base pursuits, and its attempts to show itself as the real benefactor. The 
brilliant lightning in the dark clouds stands for the divine flash that may 


8 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


happen during occupation with mortal affairs. It is an attraction from among 
the divine attractions. 

His rejection of the woman represents the intellect’s turning away from 
temptation. His [Absal’s] conquest of the territories for his brother 
represents the soul learning through the theoretical faculty about the realms 
of the dominion (jabarut) and the kingdom (malakiit), its progress toward 
the divine world, and its power through the practical faculty to properly 
manage its body and to administer civil and household affairs. This is why 
he [al-Jurjam] called Absal the first Alexander, because this name stands for 
one who rules both the East and the West. His betrayal by the army 
symbolizes the severance of the sensory, imaginative, and estimative 
faculties from the soul upon its ascent to the higher realm and the 
weakening of those faculties due to his lack of attention to them. 

His nourishment from the milk of the beast stands for the bestowal of 
perfection on him by the incorporeal substances (al-mufariqat) which are 
separate from this world. 

The deterioration of the condition of Salaman due to the absence of 
Absal represents the perturbation of the soul because of its negligence and 
its preoccupation with what is beneath it. 

Absal’ s return to his brother indicates the intellect’s attention to its 
beneficial arrangement with respect to its management of the body. The 
cook stands for the faculty of passion that is inclined to seek revenge. The 
attendant represents the appetitive faculty that is attracted to what the body 
needs. The plot of the two to destroy Absal points to the fading away of the 
intellect near the end of life and the soul’s use of these two because of 
increasing need and weakness. 

The destruction of the plotters by Salaman stands for the soul’s giving up 
its use of the bodily faculties at the end of this life and the disappearance of 
passion and desire and the defeat of their appetites. The abandoning of the 
kingdom by Salaman and his leaving it to others stands for the 
discontinuation of the soul’s management of the body and leaving it to the 
charge of others. 

This interpretation agrees with what the Master has mentioned. An 
evidence in support of this being the intent of the story is that he has 
mentioned the story of Salaman and Absal in his treatise on destiny and fate 
(Risalafi al-Qadd’ wa’l-Qadar), and has talked about the lightning from the 
dark cloud that revealed the face of the wife of Salaman to Absal so that he 
then stayed away from her. 

This is what has become clear to us with respect to this story. We have 
not narrated the story in the Master’ s own words lest we prolong the book. 


9 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 2: Remark [on the Difference Between the 
Ascetic, the Worshipper, and the Mystic] 

(I bn STna): One who shuns worldly delights and goods is called an 
ascetic (al-zahid). One who is diligent in performing worship by standing 
for prayer, fasting, and other such acts of worship is called a worshipper 
(al-‘dbid). One who turns with his thoughts toward the holy realm of the 
Dominion (quds al-Jabarut) and continually seeks the shining of the light of 
Truth in his inmost heart is called a mystic (al-‘arif). Some of these may be 
combined with others. 


(TflsI): I say: One who seeks something begins by staying away from 
whatever he believes will keep him away from his goal. Then he turns 
toward what he believes will take him nearer to his goal, and eventually he 
reaches his goal. Therefore, the seeker of the Truth (al-haqq) must begin by 
staying away from all else besides the Truth, especially things that would 
hinder him from seeking, in other words, the goods of the world and its 
benefits. Then he should devote himself to the practice of those acts that he 
believes will take him nearer to the Truth. According to the majority of 
people these are particular acts of worship. 

These are asceticism and worship in one respect, and opposing (tabarri) 
and resisting (tawallT) in another respect. Then when he finds the Truth, the 
first stage of finding Him is to recognize Him (al-ma‘rifa). Therefore, these 
three are the states of seekers of the Truth. For this reason the Master began 
with their definition. 

These states may be found in individuals in isolation, and they may be 
found in combination. This is due to the difference of accidents and 
combinations. Twoness amounts to three and threeness amounts to one. The 
Master has alluded to this by his words: “Some of these may be combined 
with others.” 


10 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 3: Remark [on the Asceticism and Worship 
of the Mystic versus Those of the non-Mystic] 

(I bn Sma): Asceticism (al-zuhd) to a non-mystic is a kind of contract, as 
if he buys the delights of the next world by abstaining from the delights of 
this world. To a mystic it is a kind of detachment from all that would 
distract him from the Truth, and it is being disinterested in everything other 
than the Truth. Worship (‘ ibada ) to a non-mystic is a kind of contract, as if 
he acts in this world to gain a recompense in the next world in the form of 
rewards. To a mystic it is a kind of exercise for his intentions (himam) and 
the estimative and imaginative faculties of his soul, to train them by habit 
from the threshold of deceit toward the threshold of the Truth. In this way, 
they will become reconciled with the inmost self (sirr) whenever the Truth 
sheds its light and not in conflict with it. Thus the inmost self arrives at the 
shining radiance, and this becomes an established aptitude. 

Whenever the inmost self desires, it can behold the light of Truth without 
any interference from the intentions. Rather, they accompany the inmost self 
in this regard, and it totally enters the path of holiness. 


(TusI): I say: Since the Master has pointed to the existence of a 
combination of the three states, he intends to instruct about the objective of 
the mystic and the non-mystic with regard to asceticism and worship in 
order to distinguish the two minds accordingly. Thus he states that 
asceticism and worship of a non-mystic are forms of contract, because a 
non-mystic ascetic is like a merchant who buys goods in exchange for 
goods, and a non-mystic worshipper is like a person for hire who works for 
payment. Therefore, the two acts are different although the goal is the same. 

In the case of a mystic, he is an ascetic in the state wherein he is attentive 
to the Tmth, turning away from other things and remaining detached from 
all that may distract him from the Truth, preferring what he has intended. 

But in the state wherein he is attentive to things other than the Truth, 
everything besides the Truth becomes intolerable to him, and he regards 
them as inferior. Moreover, he is a worshipper when he trains his intentions, 
which are the principles of his will, and his inclinations to passion and 
anger, etc., and the imaginative and estimative faculties of his soul, in order 
to lead all of them from the corporeal world and occupation with it to the 
real world, accompanying him when he attends to that world. One of the 
goals of this discipline is to make them used to such association so that the 
intellect does not conflict with the state of witnessing and the inmost self 
does not interfere with it. In this way the intellect can attain to that world, 
and all of the faculties under its command will join with it in attending to 
that realm. 


11 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 4: Admonition [on the Need for Religious 
Law and a Prophet] 

(I bn Sma): Since man is not able to survive without association with 
other individuals of his kind, through commutative contract (mu'awada) 
and equal exchange that takes place between them, each one agrees to 
commit himself to an important job on behalf of his neighbor. Were all these 
things charged to himself, too many responsibilities would pile up upon one 
individual. It would be very difficult if at all possible. Because of this fact, it 
is necessary for people to have social interactions and to deal with each 
other with justice, which is preserved and protected by the divine law 
(sharj that a law-giver (shdrij has sanctioned. Such a legislator merits 
obedience due to being singled out by signs which prove they are from his 
Lord. It is also necessary for the doers of good and the doers of evil to 
receive recompense (jazd’f from their Lord, the Almighty, the Omniscient. 
Recognition (ma'rifa) of the Requiter and the Law-giver is therefore 
necessary, and with recognition a means of preserving it. Therefore, 
worship, which is remembrance of the One worshipped, is enjoined upon 
them. This worship must be repeated by them, because remembrance is 
preserved by repetition. In this way the invitation to justice, which protects 
the life of the species, is propagated. Those who act accordingly, besides the 
great advantages they will accrue in this world, will receive abundant 
rewards in the life to come. For the mystics who practice it there is an 
additional benefit reserved for them, inasmuch as they have wholly turned 
their faces toward Him. Look then toward wisdom, then toward mercy and 
bounty. You will find an excellence whose wonders amaze you. Then rise 
and be steadfast. 


(TusI): I say: Since he has stated in the previous chapter that asceticism 
and worship only proceed from the nonmystic for the sake obtaining 
recompense and reward in the next life, he intends to call attention to the 
establishment of the doctrine of reward and punishment, which was 
mentioned. 

He then establishes prophecy (al-nubuwwa) and religious law (al- 
sharVa) and what is associated with them by the method of the 
philosophers, because reward and punishment depend upon the existence of 
prophecy and religious law, and that in turn depends upon certain principles 
(qawd‘id). 

The evidence of this is to say: Man is not independent and alone with 
respect to the means of his subsistence, because he needs food, clothes, 
shelter, and the means to defend himself, his children and others. Each of 
these is a work of craftsmanship which is not possible for a single person to 
produce alone, unless it be in a period of time during which it is impossible 
or exceedingly difficult to live without it. In contrast, it is easy for a 
community, where everyone supports each other and participates together in 
its realization. In such a manner, each one relieves some of the burden 


12 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


carried by his neighbor, and it is accomplished by equal exchange, which is 
each person acting in a manner comparable to the actions of his peers. 

By commutative contract is meant that each one should give his neighbor 
a portion from his labor comparable to what he takes from him. Man by 
nature, therefore, needs to live in a society that will support his well-being 
and his livelihood. This is the meaning of their words: “Man is civilized by 
nature.” Civilization (al-tamaddun) in their [the philosophers’] terminology 
consists of the kinds of societal relations just mentioned. Consequently, this 
is a principle. 

Moreover, we say: A society whose members support each other will not 
come into existence unless social interaction (mu'amala) and justice (‘adl) 
exist between them, because each person craves what he needs and becomes 
vexed with one who competes with him in that. His desire and anger cause 
him to commit injustice to others, and this state leads to chaos and the 
disruption of the social order. 

However, if social interaction and justice occur between them, this will 
not happen. Therefore, there must be a religious law (sharVa). The term 
shark a in classical Arabic means a watering place, and it is named in this 
sense because everyone drinks water and benefits from it on an equal basis. 
This is a secondary premise. 

Moreover, we say: The divine law certainly comes from an originator 
who establishes these laws and determines them in the manner which is 
best. This is the lawgiver (sharV). If the people dispute with each other over 
the formation of the law, this will lead to chaos and confusion. 

Therefore, it is necessary for the legislator to be distinguished among 
them, by his deserving obedience, so that others will follow him and accept 
the laws. Deserving obedience is only established by signs which prove that 
the laws are from the presence of his Lord. These signs are his miracles 
(mujizat), and they come either in the form of words or in the form of acts. 
Those in the form of words are more acceptable to the educated, while those 
in the form of acts are more acceptable to the masses. A miraculous act by 
itself, however, devoid of the miracle of utterance, is not complete, because 
prophecy and performing miracles cannot be realized without inviting the 
people to goodness. 

Therefore, there must be a prophet who can make the laws and manifest 
miracles. This is a third principle. 

The common people and the less educated may disdain justice (‘adl), 
which benefits them as a species but restrains them from what they covet as 
individuals, by which they might commit acts contrary to the religious law. 

Consequently, for the obedient and the rebellious there is reward 
(thawdb) and punishment ('iqdb) in the next life, the hope and fear of which 
prompt them to obedience and the abandonment of sin. The religious law 
cannot work properly without this. Thus, each agent of good or evil must 
receive the reward that he deserves from God, who is capable of 
recompensing them and who knows what they do plainly and in private, be 
it in thoughts, words, or deeds. 

Recognition (ma'rifa) of the Requiter and the Law-giver is also 
necessary for those who submit to the religious law. 


13 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


The recognition of the common people is rarely certain, and therefore it 
is not stable. Thus, together with it, there must be a cause to preserve it, and 
this is remembrance tied to repetition, in other words, repeated worship in 
remembrance of the One worshipped performed at successive intervals, such 
as daily ritual prayer and similar forms of worship. Therefore, the prophet 
must invite the people to acknowledge the existence of their Creator, the 
Almighty, the All-Informed. He must summon them to faith in the 
truthfulness of the law-giver sent down by Him, and to confession of the 
promise and the threat in the next life. He must call upon the people to 
perform acts of worship in which the Creator is praised by His attributes of 
glory and to obey the religious laws which the people require in their social 
interactions, so that justice, which gives life to the human race, will 
continue. This is a fourth principle. 

All of this is ordained by divine providence because of mankind’s need 
of it, and it therefore exists for all times and places. It is the object sought, 
and it is a benefit compared to which no other benefit is more universal. 
Besides the great worldly advantages for those who observe the divine law, 
there will be great rewards in the next world according to what they are 
promised. For the mystics among them, besides the worldly benefits and the 
rewards of the life to come, there will be the additional achievement of the 
real perfection mentioned. Consider [God’s] wisdom, which is the 
maintenance of the system in this way, [His] mercy, which is the 
preservation of ample recompense after great benefit, and [His] bounty, 
which is real happiness added to these two. Behold the majesty of the One 
who emanates these good things, whose wonders dazzle, overwhelm, and 
astonish you. Then elevate the religious law and be steadfast in seeking 
nearness to His holy presence. 

The Learned Commentator [RazI] has raised the following objections: 

(1) If you intended by “necessary ” in your words “when the people need 
a legislator, they need his existence,” this is essential necessity (al-wujub 
al-dhdn), which is impossible. And if you intended that God is obligated, as 
the Mu'tazila 10 believe, this is not the belief of your school of thought. If you 
intended thereby that this necessity is a cause for the system that is good, 
while God is the source of all good, therefore it is necessary for Him to have 
such a system, this also is not valid, because it is not necessary for the best 
to come into existence. Otherwise all the people would be created with the 
disposition to do good, since that is best. 

(2) Your claim that miracles prove that the legislator is from God is not 
worthy of you, because, according to you, miracles are a phenomenon of the 
soul which are achievable equally by the prophets and by their opponents 
among the magicians (sahara), as is stated in the Tenth Namat. The only 
difference between a prophet and a nonprophet is the fact that the prophets 
call people to goodness and not to evil, and the criteria to discern good 
from evil is reason (‘aql). Thus, there is no proof that those who perform 
miracles are prophets. 


14 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


(3) Also your statement that a miracle proves the truthfulness of its 
author is based on assenting to a free agent [i.e., the Creator] who knows 
temporal particulars. But you do not assent to this. 

(4) Also, punishment for sins does not agree with your principles. You 
believe that the punishment for a sinner is the desire of his soul for worldly 
things when the soul has lost access to them. You will be committed to 
saying that the forgetfulness of the sinner of his sin will necessitate the lapse 
of his punishment. 

The following is the answer [to the above objections] on the basis of their 
own principles. 11 As for the first, we say: The dependence of natural acts 
upon their necessary final causes, along with assenting to divine providence 
in the way mentioned, suffices to affirm the existence of those acts. It is for 
this reason that they explain acts through their final causes [i.e., purposes], 
such as speaking of certain teeth as being suitable for chewing (al-madgh), 
which is their final cause. If the final cause was not necessary for the 
existence of the act, causation by it would not be a definite result. As for his 
objection that it is not necessary for the best to come into existence, we 
reply that the best in relation to the whole is not the same as the best in 
relation to the part. The former is necessary, while the latter is not 
necessary. People being created with the disposition to do good does not 
belong to that category, as was explained. 

As for the second, we say that extraordinary things, among which are 
miracles, appear both in the form of words and in the form of acts, as was 
mentioned. The miracles reserved to the prophets are not miracles of action 
alone, but the association of miracles of action with miracles of words is 
what is specialized to them, and this is what proves their truthfulness. 

As for the third, we say besides what was said about knowledge and 
power, the observation of the miracles that are the signs of the souls of the 
prophets are proof of the perfection of those souls, and this requires 
acknowledging the truthfulness of their words. 

As for the fourth, we say: The commission of sins is based on the 
existence of a habit deeply rooted in the soul, which causes its suffering. 
Forgetting the act does not cause the removal of that habit; thus it will not 
cause the lapse of a due punishment. 

Know that whatever the Master has stated about the prophets and 
religious law is not absolutely necessary for human survival. They are 
things without which a system that leads to goodness for everyone in this 
world and the next cannot be established. It suffices mankind to live in some 
kind of political system for the protection of society, even if it is based upon 
dictatorship and the like. The proof of this is that the inhabitants of the 
world all necessarily live in political systems. 


15 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 5: Admonition [on the Proper Objective of 

the Mystic] 

( Ibn Sind): A mystic seeks the First Truth (al-haqq alawwal) not for 
anything else besides Him , and prefers nothing more than the recognition 
(‘irfdn) of Him and worship of Him alone, because He deser\>es to be 
worshipped and because such worship is an honorable relationship to Him, 
not due to desire or to fear. If it were, the thing desired or feared would be 
the motive for worship and the object sought. The Truth, in this case, would 
not be the goal but a means to something other than Him, and that other 
thing would be the goal and the end. 


(TusI): I say: The Master has mentioned the goal of the mystic and the 
non-mystic in asceticism and worship, and he has established the principles 
of a different goal, in other words, reward and punishment. In this chapter 
he has pointed to the objective of the mystic and his aims. Therefore, we 
say: A mystic who recognizes real perfection has two states in relation to it. 
One belongs to his soul in particular, and it is his love of that perfection, and 
the other belongs to both his soul and body, and it is his progress in seeking 
to draw near it. The Master has expressed the first as desire (or: will irada ) 
and the second as worship (ta‘abbud). He has further said that the desire and 
worship of a worshipper are connected to the First Truth (exalted be His 
remembrance) for Himself; they are not connected to other things for 
themselves. Indeed, if they are related to anything besides the Truth, they 
are related for the sake of the Truth as well. Therefore, his statement, “A 
mystic seeks the First Truth not for anything else besides Him” is an 
explanation for the relation of his will to the Truth with respect to the Truth 
Himself. His statement, “He prefers nothing more than the recognition of 
Him” means that he does not prefer something besides the Truth over the 
recognition of Him, although the Truth is preferred to His recognition 
because recognition [as such] is not preferable in itself to the mystic, as the 
Master will explain later in his statement, “He who prefers recognition 
(‘irfdn) for the sake of recognition has accepted the second [goal besides the 
Truth ].” 13 Whatever is preferred but not preferred for itself is certainly 
preferred for other than itself. Consequently, recognition is preferred for the 
sake of something other than itself, and this is nothing but the Truth. Thus, 
the Truth is preferable to recognition. 

He has distinguished the mystic by the fact that he does not prefer 
anything besides the Truth over the recognition of Him, because the non- 
mystic, on the other hand, prefers the attainment of reward and protection 
from punishment over recognition, since he purposes recognition for the 
sake of reward and safety from punishment. But the mystic does not prefer 
anything over it [recognition of Him] other than the Truth, Who is solely 
preferred for Himself. The statement of the Master, “his worship of Him 
alone,” also points to the relation of the worship of the mystic to the Truth 
alone. 


16 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


If someone argues that this is contrary to what the Master has said before, 
that the worship of a mystic is an exercise to discipline his faculties , 14 so 
that he leads them to the threshold (jindb) of the Truth, which is not Him, 
then he has led the faculties to the threshold of the Truth, not to the Truth 
Himself - we say, he does not mean that a mystic in his worship seeks 
nothing besides the Truth in an absolute sense. Rather, he means that the 
mystic seeks nothing but the Truth essentially. If he seeks something else, 
he seeks it accidentally, and for the sake of the Truth, as was mentioned. 
This is a rule insofar as the mystic considers himself in relation to the First 
Truth, Who is intended for Himself. If the Truth and worship are considered 
in relation to each other, the dependency of worship upon the First Truth 
would be found to be necessary in two respects: 

(a) With respect to the consideration of the Truth in relation to worship, 
which is expressed by his words “because He deserves to be worshipped.” 
(b) With respect to the consideration of worship in relation to the Truth, 
which is expressed by his words “because such worship is an honorable 
relationship to Him.” 

The Learned Commentator [RazI] has responded to this passage as 
follows: 

The worship of the mystics can be either for the essence of the Truth 
(dhat al-haqq), for any of His attributes, or for the perfecting of themselves. 
These categories correspond to three ranks. The Master has alluded to the 
first with the words “his worship of Him alone, ” to the second with his 
words “because He deser\>es to be worshipped, ” and to the third with his 
words “because such worship is an honorable relationship to Him. ” 

I say: In this commentary there is a sanction that allows the mystic to 
have an essential object of worship other than the Truth, while the rest of the 
chapter establishes the opposite of this. Moreover, the Master has alluded to 
“the goal of the mystic being different from the goals of non-mystics,” by 
his words, “not due to desire or to fear,” in other words, not due to the desire 
of reward or the fear of punishment. He also has explained the falsehood of 
this being a goal for the mystic by his words: “If it were. . in other words, 
if the two purposes of worship were the above-mentioned desire or fear, so 
that reward would be the object desired and punishment the object not 
desired, then this would be the motive to worship the Truth, these two 
would be the aim of the worshipper of the Truth, and the Truth would not be 
the goal but a means to obtain reward and deliverance from punishment, 
which is the goal and the object sought. In this case, it would be the 
essential object of worship, not the Truth. This is the elaboration of this 
chapter. 

The Learned Commentator [RazI] says: “Some people rule out the 
position of God (exalted be He) being an object desired for Himself. They 
assert that desire (or: will irada) is an attribute which is only connected to 
possible things because it requires the preponderation of one of two 
extremes desired over the other, and this is only reasonable with possible 
things.” He says: “The Master, in the beginning of Namat Six, also 


17 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


established that for whoever desires something, the attainment of what one 
wants must be preferable to its non-existence, and the object intended by 
primary intention is that attainment.” He deduced from this “that whoever 
desires something wants perfection. 

Therefore, whoever seeks God (exalted be He) does not really seek Him 
but wants to perfect himself.” 

He [RazI] answered these two propositions [of Ibn Slna] by claiming 
“they commit the logical fallacy of petitio principii, because they are based 
on the assumption that desire (or: will irada) is only connected to the 
possible and to that by which the one desiring (murid) seeks perfection. 

It is what the critic has caused him to assert.” 

Our answer to this is that it [desire/will] is indeed connected to God, not 
by another thing besides Him as well. 

And I say in explanation that the desire connected to what the desiring 
one performs necessitates the possibility of the object desired and the 
perfecting of the desiring one, not due to the connection of the will to it [the 
object desired], but due to its being an act or due to its being something 
attained for the desiring one by his desire. But in this case the object desired 
[i.e., God] is not like this! Therefore, the objection is invalid. 


18 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 6: Admonition [on the Difference Between 
One Who Seeks the Truth as a Means and One Who 
Seeks Him for His Own Sake] 

(Ibn Sind): One who considers it permissible to make the Truth a means 
will receive mercy in some respect, for he has not tasted the sweetness of 
delight in the Truth so that he would seek it. His knowledge only 
encompasses imperfect pleasures, so that he yearns for them and is heedless 
of what is above them. His likeness compared to the mystics is as a boy 
compared to a wise man. Children are not aware of certain good things to 
which the sagacious aspire. Their pursuit of games and amusement limits 
them, and they become surprised by serious people who turn away from 
such matters, disdain them, and are intent upon other things. In the same 
way, one whose vision has been hindered from beholding the splendor of the 
Truth by imperfection ties his hands to the false pleasures surrounding him, 
then he abandons them in this life grudgingly, and he only does so in order 
to obtain double their recompense. He only worships and obeys God 
( exalted be He) in the hope that in the next world He will satisfy him fully 
with such pleasures and send him to a place with delicious food, sweet 
drinks, and beautiful women. If it be laid bare, he has no objective in this 
world and in the next except the pursuit of carnal pleasures. But he who is 
endowed with understanding, through the guidance of holiness, of the 
sorrows of love knows the delight of the Truth, has set his face towards it, 
and asks mercy for this one who has turned away from His guidance 
towards its opposite, even though what he aspires to through his toil is 
granted in accordance with His promise. 


(TusI): I say: The meaning of mukhdaj (lit. imperfectly formed) is 
“deficient” (ndqis). It is said: “The she-camel brought forth her young one 
imperfectly formed,” meaning she brought forth her offspring deficiently 
formed, so the baby animal is imperfect. Hanun [commonly meaning 
“affectionate”] is used here in the sense of “yearning” (mushtdq). [The term 
muhannakin pertains to the saying]: 

“Age made him sound in judgment and experienced,” in other words, his 
experiences made him so, so that he is a wise man and experienced. Azurra 
‘an (turn away from) is the same as ‘adala ‘an. [The term ‘a’ifin, as in] “he 
disdained food or drink,” means he has an aversion to it, and thus does not 
partake of it. [The word ‘akifin, as in] “he is intent upon something,” means 
he dedicated himself to it diligently. [The word yukhawwilu, as in] “God 
granted him something,” means He caused him to possess it. Bu‘ithra ‘an 
[commonly meaning scattered from] is used here in the sense of “being 
revealed” or “laid bare.” To direct his eyes toward something [as an 
objective] means to lift them. Alqabqab [commonly meaning “swelling”] 
refers to the stomach (batn), and al-dhabdhab [commonly meaning 
“dangling”] to the penis (dhakar). The Master has in mind with respect to 
these two words the saying of the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon 


19 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


him): “He who is protected from the evil of his prattling (al-laqlaq), his 
swelling, and his dangling is indeed protected.” Al-laqlaq refers to the 
tongue. Sorrows (shujun) is the plural of sorrow (shajan), which is the path 
of the Valley (wadi). Toil (kadd) is intensity with respect to practice and 
seeking to attain. 

The object of this chapter is to justify those who consider it permissible 
to use the Truth as a means of achieving something other than Him, such as 
the ascetics of this world and the worshippers of the Truth, whose practices 
are aimed at reward and safety from punishment. The reason for 
justifiability is the imperfection in them. 

In the statements of the Master there are many subtle points that you 
should examine and ponder upon. One is describing [inclination toward] the 
bodily pleasures as a defect in one’s nature which cannot be removed. 
Another is his likening of one who is unable to behold real splendor to a 
blind person who seeks something he has lost, and grasps whatever is near 
him, whether or not it is the object sought. 

Another is his drawing attention to the fact that the asceticism of a non- 
mystic is reluctant asceticism. Although such a person may appear in the 
garb of ascetics, in reality he is the greediest of creatures for the bodily 
pleasures, because abstention from something in the hope of receiving 
double their recompense is closer to avarice than to contentment. 

Another is the affinity of his ambition (himma) to baseness and 
weakness. The Master’s words “he has no objective... [except the pursuit of 
carnal pleasures]” allude to the fact that his station is lower than that he 
should deserve those base pleasures. Another is the eloquent expression 
with respect to singling out the pleasure of the stomach and the genitals by 
remembrance [of the tradition]. 

At the end of this chapter, he states that the imperfect person who is the 
object of mercy will attain what he hopes for and seeks in the way of bodily 
pleasures because of his diligent effort, as the prophets (peace be upon 
them) have promised. He has alluded to the nature of this state in the Eighth 
Namat, when he discusses the possibility of the attachment of simple- 
minded souls to bodies that are the subject of their imaginations, and he has 
considered such happiness as the happiness that is worthy of them. 


20 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 7: Admonition [on Will as the First Stage of 
the Progress of the Mystics] 

(Ibn Sma): The first of the stages which are the progresses (harakat) of 
the mystics is what they call will (irada). This is the desire ( raghba ) that 
comes to one endowed with understanding (al-mustabsir), by demonstrative 
certainty or by the soul’s peace through the conviction of faith, to hold to 
the firm handle (‘urwat al-wuthqd), as a result of which he moves toward 
the holy presence that he may partake of the joy of contact (ittisal). As long 
as this is his stage, he is a seeker (or wilier murid). 


(TflsI): I say: A‘tara-hu means “to come upon him,” and i‘tilaq is “to 
cling” to the sure handle. Know that the Master, after setting forth the aims 
of the mystics and others, intends to set forth their successive states in their 
journey on the path of the Truth from the beginning of their progress to the 
end of it, which is their attainment to Him (exalted be He). In eleven 
chapters, he explains what occurs to them at different stages. The first of 
them is this chapter, which includes the principles (mabddij for their 
progress. He has said that the will is the first stage of their successive stages. 
It is the principle adjacent to movement, 

and its principle is the conception of the essential perfection specialized 
to the First Principle, Who emanates His signs upon those who are ready 
among His creatures in accordance with their capacities. The definite 
acknowledgement of His existence is accompanied by a peace of soul, 
whether it be certain (yaqini), acquired by demonstrative analogy, or 
through faith (iman), attained by accepting the words of the Imams 15 who 
guide others to God (exalted be He). Each of these is a conviction which 
causes its possessor to seek that overflowing grace. Since will (irada) is a 
result of this acknowledgement, he has defined it as a state which occurs 
after understanding (istibsdr) or the privation mentioned. He then explains 
that it is a desire to cling to the firm handle, which never ceases or changes. 

This, then, is the starting point of progress toward the world of holiness, 
and its goal is to attain of the joy of contact in that world. 

Know that the Master, in the Third Namat, states that for any volitional 
or animal movement, there are four principles: 

(a) perception (idrdk), (b) appetite (shawq), which is called lust 
(shahwah) or passion (ghadab), (c) determination (‘azm), which is called 
decisive will, (d) and the subservient faculty extended into the organs. The 
movement under discussion here is volitional, not animalistic, and it has 
primacy among the principles mentioned. This is what he has called 
understanding (istibsdr) or the conviction connected to the peace of the soul 
(sukun al-nafs). The second and the third, which he has called will, are 
united here because they are only different from each other if there is a 
difference of occasions and events, and such a difference is not perceptible 
with the peace of the soul, which he has set as a condition here. The fourth 
is disregarded, because this movement is not a bodily movement. 


21 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


The Learned Commentator [Razi], in his commentary on this chapter, has 
set forth the kinds of seekers of the Truth and the religious practices suitable 
for each kind. That, however, is inadequate, due to what it contains. 


22 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 8: Admonition [on Spiritual Exercise] 

(I bn Sma): Furthermore, he is in need of spiritual exercise (rlydda) that 
is directed toward three goals. The first is the elimination of everything 
besides the Truth from the path of affection. The second is the submission of 
the soul that incites to evil (al-nafs al-ammdra) to the tranquil soul (alnafs 
al-mutma’inna), so that the faculties of imagination and estimation will be 
drawn to conceptions which are worthy of holy concerns and drawn away 
from conceptions that are worthy of base concerns. The third is the 
refinement of the inmost self in order to become awakened and mindful. 

Real asceticism will assist him with the first goal. A number of things will 
assist him with the second goal: worship accompanied by contemplation 
(fikr), the use of melodies by the faculties of the soul that cause the words 
intoned by him to be acceptable to the mind, and the didactic discourses of 
an intelligent speaker with eloquent words, a pleasant voice, and rightly 
guided conduct. As for the third goal, it is assisted by refined thoughts and 
virtuous love, which are dictated by the attributes of the Beloved, not the 
rule of the appetite. 


(TusI): I say: The expression mustann al-ithar (“the path of affection”) 
refers his mystical way (tariqa). The term mashfu‘a means “connected to” 
(maqruna). The word rakhim (“pleasant”) means “soft” or “gentle” (raqiq). 
It is said: “He mellowed his voice,” meaning he softened it. 

The word al-shimal, with the vowel kisra, refers to “character” or 
“disposition” (khulq), and its plural form is shama’il. 

The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the seeker’s need for spiritual 
exercise and to explain the purpose of such discipline. Before beginning my 
commentary, I would like to discuss the meaning of the term riyada 
(“exercise,” “discipline,” “practice,” “training”). The training of animals 
prevents them from venturing upon actions that would not please the trainer, 
so that the animal becomes accustomed to obeying the trainer. If the animal 
faculty, which is the principle of animal perceptions and actions in man, 
does not have the disposition to obey the rational faculty, it would be like an 
untrained beast that is sometimes motivated by its appetite and sometimes 
by its passion, which are affected by its faculties of imagination and 
estimation, sometimes due to what they recollect and sometimes due to 
something one of the external senses leads them to which is agreeable to it, 
as a result of which it performs various animal actions because of these 
causes. The rational faculty, in this case, is used merely to obtain its [the 
animal faculty’s] desires, as a result of which it is a faculty which incites to 
evil (ammdra). Various acts with respect to the principles would proceed 
from it, and the rational faculty would be unwillingly commanded and 
compelled. 

However, if the rational faculty trains the animal faculty, and prevents it 
from indulging in imaginations, estimations, feelings, and acts that activate 
its appetite and passion, and forces it to obey what the practical intellect 
requires, until it becomes trained to obey it and to serve it, then the intellect 


23 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


will be tranquil (mutma’inna), no contrary actions by means of the 
principles will proceed from it, and all the other faculties will obey the 
intellect and be submissive to it. Between these two states there are various 
other states corresponding to the degree of domination of one over the other. 
Sometimes the animal faculty pursues its desires in disobedience to the 
rational faculty, and then regrets its disobedience and blames itself. In such 
a case, it is called the blaming soul or faculty. These faculties are called the 
blaming soul (al-nafs al-lawwama), the soul inciting to evil (al-nafs al- 
ammara), and the tranquil soul (al-nafs al-mutma’inna) because of what is 
said about them in the Holy Qur’an. 16 

Thus, training the soul means forbidding it from indulging in its desires 
and commanding it to obey its Lord. 

Since the goals of the rational faculty are various, the spiritual exercises 
are various. Among them are intellectual exercises that are mentioned in 
practical philosophy. And among them are traditional exercises called acts 
of worship in religious law. The most rigorous, however, are the practices of 
the mystics, since their object is the Face of God and nothing else. 
Everything other than Him is a distraction from Him. Consequently, their 
exercises prevent the soul from turning toward anything other than the First 
Truth and compel it to be attentive to Him, so that devotion to Him and 
detachment from all else besides Him becomes part of its natural disposition 
(malaka). It is clear that all forms of spiritual exercise, in reality, fall within 
the spiritual practice of the mystics and not the reverse. Indeed, their 
exercises differ in accordance with the differences of their stages in the 
quest, which may start with the most common forms of spiritual practice 
and end in the most subtle forms. Now we return to the topic. 

The ultimate object of spiritual exercise is one thing: the achievement of 
real perfection (al-kamdl al-haqlql). 

However, this depends on the acquisition of an existing factor, which is 
the disposition (isti‘dad) [for that perfection], which in turn depends upon 
the removal of obstacles, whether internal or external. For this reason, 
spiritual exercise is directed toward three goals, the first of which is “the 
elimination of everything besides the Truth from the path of affection.” This 
is the removal of external obstacles. The second is “the submission of the 
soul that incites to evil to the tranquil soul,” so that the imagination and the 
estimation will be drawn from worldly things to holy things, and the other 
faculties will necessarily follow. This is the removal of internal obstacles, 
that is, the animal motivations mentioned. The third is “the refinement of 
the inmost self in order to become awakened and mindful.” This is acquiring 
the disposition to attain perfection, since the compatibility of the inmost self 
with a refined or subtle thing is only possible through refinement. The 
sensitivity of the inmost self consists of a certain readiness, because 
intelligible forms are rapidly represented in it and it is easily influenced by 
delightful divine things due to its longing and ardor. 

After the Master finished stating the goals of spiritual exercise, he set 
forth that which will help in attaining each of these goals. As for the first 
goal, he has mentioned one thing among those things which will assist him 
to attain it, and it is the real asceticism associated with the mystics. It is their 


24 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


detachment from all that distracts the inmost self from the Truth, as 
mentioned before, and this is clear. 

As for the second goal, he has mentioned three things among those things 
which will assist him to attain it. The first is worship accompanied by 
contemplation (fikr). He means the kind ascribed to the mystics. The benefit 
of combining worship with contemplation is that worship makes the whole 
body submissive to the soul, but if the soul together with the body turns 
toward the threshold of the Truth in contemplation, the individual in his 
entirety will become attentive to the Truth. Otherwise, worship may be a 
cause for misery, as the Holy Qur’an has stated: “Woe unto those who 
perform the obligatory prayers but are inattentive in their worship .” 17 The 
reason this worship is helpful for the second goal is that it is also a kind of 
exercise for the intentions (himam) of the worshipper and the mystic and the 
faculties of his soul to train them by habit from the side of deceit to the side 
of the Truth, as stated earlier . 18 

The second [assistance for the second goal] is melodies (alhan), which 
are helpful both essentially and accidentally. 

The reason they are helpful essentially is because the rational soul is 
attracted to them by its delight in harmonious compositions and regular 
proportions occurring in sound, which is the matter of speech, as a result of 
which it is distracted from using the animal faculties, with respect to the 
goals particular to them, and those faculties instead become submissive to it. 
Therefore, such melodies are helpful to it. The reason they are helpful 
accidentally is because they make the speech associated with them more 
acceptable to the estimation, for they contain a likeness to which the soul is 
naturally inclined. Thus, if your discourse is didactic and evokes seeking 
perfection, the soul will become mindful of what is worthy of its action, and 
it will dominate the faculties which engage it and make them subservient to 
it. 

The third [assistance for the second goal] is didactic discourse itself; in 
other words, discourse which inspires assent to that which is worthy to do, 
with the aim of persuasion and the assurance of the soul, so that the soul 
becomes awakened and dominant over the faculties, especially if it is 
associated with four things: One is related to the speaker. He must be 
righteous (zakiy), because this serves as evidence to prove his truthfulness. 
The admonition of one who is not himself admonished will not be effective 
because his deeds refute his words. The other three are related to speech: 
One is that the expression of words must be eloquent (ballgha)', in other 
words, they must be commendable, clear in meaning, and show the 
perfection that the speaker intends to express without excess or diminution, 
as if a receptacle into which the meaning is poured. Another is that the form 
and mode of the words should convey a tender melody, because a gentle 
voice inspires receptivity in the soul, while a harsh voice causes it to reject 
and withdraw. For this reason, melodies have various effects upon the soul, 
and each kind suits a different state in the soul. Physicians and preachers use 
music to cure psychological illnesses and to persuade toward desirable ends. 
The last is that their meaning should be rightly guided; that is, they should 
lead to an assent which benefits the seeker in order to travel more quickly on 


25 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


his journey (suluk). Know that didactic discourse itself, in the art of oratory, 
is called “the pillar” (al-‘amud), and the things related to it to convince 
people are called persuasions (istidrajat). 

As for the third goal, he has mentioned two things among those things 
that will assist him to attain it. The first is refined thinking, which needs to 
be moderate in quality and quantity, and with respect to times. Bodily 
things, such as excess weight or thinness, and the like, should not distract 
the soul from intellectual perception, because ample engagement with this 
kind of thought will prepare the soul to easily perceive the objects it seeks. 
The second is virtuous love. There are two kinds of human love: real, as 
mentioned earlier, and figurative. The second kind is either soul-centered 
love or animal love. The basis of soul-centered love is the similarity 
between the soul of the lover and the soul of the beloved in substance. Most 
of the lover’s delight is in the attributes of the beloved, because they are 
traces that proceed from his soul. Animal love is based on animalistic 
appetites and on the quest for animal pleasures. 

In this case, the lover is most attracted to the external appearance, form, 
color, and shape of the beloved, because these are bodily matters. 

By the words “virtuous love,” the Master is alluding to the first kind of 
figurative love, since animal love is something required for the dominance 
of the soul which incites to evil, and it aids it to dominate the rational 
faculty. For the most part, animal love is associated with indecent acts 
(fujur) and desire for such things. The first kind of figurative love, on the 
contrary, makes the soul gentle, kind, compassionate, and amiable, severed 
from worldly attachments and turning away from whatever is other than its 
beloved, making all interests one interest. Therefore, turning toward the real 
beloved is easier for the one who turns than otherwise, because he does not 
need to turn away from multiple things. The author of the following 
tradition has alluded to this by his words: “One who loves and is virtuous, 
who keeps it secret and then dies, he has died a martyr.” 


26 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 9: Admonition [on the Mystical Moment] 

(Ibn Sind): Furthermore, if will and spiritual exercise bring him to a 
certain stage, delightful raptures ( khulsat ) from the light of Truth shining 
upon him will come to him, like lightning suddenly flashing upon him and 
disappearing. 

This is what they call “moments” (awqat). Two ecstasies ( wajdan ) 
embrace every moment, one toward it and one away from it. These 
overwhelming moments will multiply for him if he devotes himself 
assiduously to the spiritual exercises. 


(TusI): I say: Something “coming forward” or “appearing” (‘anna al- 
shay’) means “to present itself’ (Vtarada) The verbs khalasa and ikhtalasa 
mean “to steal,” or “carry off’ (istalaba). [Hence khulsat are literally 
“stealings away” or “carryings off’.] The image of lightning flashing here 
refers to a slight flash in an unclouded area. In this chapter, the Master 
explains the first of the stages of ecstasy and conjunction, which is achieved 
only after attaining the proper disposition, which is acquired through will 
and spiritual training, and it increases with the growth of the disposition. 
When designating this state as a “moment” (waqt), they had in mind the 
saying of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family): “I have a moment 
with God with which no messenger or favored angel is able to dispense.” 
The two ecstasies which embrace the moment are not equal, because the 
first is grief at the tardiness of ecstasy and the second is regret at its passing. 


27 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 10: Admonition [on the State of Rapture] 

( I bn Sma): Should he penetrate deeply into this, until the experience 
ovem’helms him even while not practicing spiritual discipline, then 
whenever he sees something, he will turn away from it and toward the 
threshold of holiness. 

He will remember from its affair another affair, as a result of which a 
rapture will overcome him. Thus he all but beholds the Truth in each thing. 


(TusI): I say... He means that if contact (ittisal) with the threshold of 
holiness becomes a natural disposition, then it may be attained outside of the 
state of spiritual discipline, while he had to prepare to receive it earlier. 


28 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 11: Admonition [on Concealing Reaction to 
the State of Rapture ] 

( I bn Sma): It may happen on his way to this stage that his mystical 
experiences overwhelm him and his peace (saklna) departs from him, as a 
result of which his companion will take notice due to his arousal from his 
settledness. 

However, if the spiritual exercise is extended, the experience will not 
disturb him and he will learn how to conceal it. 


(TusI): I say: ‘ala and istcdala have the same meaning (to “overcome,” 
“overwhelm”). Sakina (“peace,” “tranquility”) refers to poise (waqdr). 
Being aroused in his posture means to sit upright in distraction. Fear and the 
like is what aroused him. Talbls, similar to tadlls, is concealing the defect. 
The reason for what the Master has said is that when a man begins to 
experience such a tremendous affair and suddenly it befalls him, because the 
soul is not ready for it, he will be defeated immediately. But if such a thing 
happens regularly and continuously, he will get used to it and the agitation 
will disappear from him, because the soul is ready and expects to receive it. 
A mystic will deny from himself the agitation mentioned because of his 
aversion to feigning perfection. Therefore, he will conceal what has 
occurred to him and use dissimulation with respect to it. 


29 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 12: Admonition [on the State of Constant 

Recognition] 

( I bn Suia): Spiritual exercise will take him to a stage wherein his 
moment (waqt ) 19 is transformed for him into peace. Thus the state of being 
carried away will become familiar, and the gleam of light will become an 
evident flame. He will attain a state of constant recognition, as if it is a 
continuous companionship, and in it he will enjoy His splendor. Therefore, 
if he is transported from that state, he will be transported to loss and 
sorrow. 


(TflsI): I say: In some manuscripts the word waqt (“moment”) is replaced 
with wafd (“arrival”). It is said: 

“Such a one came to (wafada) the prince,” meaning he came as a 
messenger to him. Therefore, he is an envoy (wafid). The word waqt makes 
more sense. Al-katf is the state of being seized or carried away. Al-shahab is 
the flame of a bright fire, whose brightness is evident. In some manuscripts 
thabit is used instead of mustaqarr (for “constant”); in other words, his 
recognition of the First Truth is constant. Asif is to lament [upon being 
transported from that state]. The meaning is clear. 


30 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 13: Admonition [on Being Present while 

Absent] 

(Ibn Sind): Perhaps on his way to this stage, what is with him will 
overwhelm him. Blit if he penetrates deeply in this recognition, its 
overwhelming him will diminish, so that he is present while he is absent, 
and he is at rest while he is moving. 


(TusI): I say: Water penetrates deeply into the tree, meaning it pervades 
it. The word za‘ana means to move or travel. By before this stage, the 
mystical experience being such that it overwhelms him, he means that joy is 
caused by the “traveling” (dhahab) and sorrow at the state of reversal, but in 
this stage the experience overwhelming him is decreased. Consequently, his 
companion will see him in the state of contact with the threshold of Glory, 
present with Him, and at rest with Him, while in reality he is absent from 
Him and moving toward something besides Him. 


31 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 14: Admonition [on Attaining Recognition 

by Wishing It] 

(Ibn Sind): Perhaps on his way to this stage, this recognition (ma‘arifa) 
is only facilitated for him at certain times, but then he will advance 
gradually until he can attain it whenever he wishes. 


(TusI): I say: In some manuscripts the verb tasanna (“rendered 
possible”) is used [instead of tayassara (“facilitated”)]; in other words, it is 
opened and made feasible for him. 


32 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 15: Admonition [on Recognition without a 

Wish] 

(Ibn Sind): Then he advances beyond this stage, so that his affair is not 
dependent on a wish, but rather whenever he considers one thing, he 
considers another 20 as well, even if his consideration is not for the sake of 
consideration. This will enable him to ascend from the world of falsehood to 
the world of Truth, wherein he will dwell even while the heedless surround 
him [in this world]. 


(TusI): I say: ‘Araja means “to ascend” ( artaqa ) while ‘arraja ‘alay-hi 
means “he was elevated” (aqdma). ‘Arajja ilay-hi and in‘araja mean “to be 
inclined toward” (mala and in'atafa). So ta‘rlf here is either an 
intensification of “ascension” (irtiqa’) or in the sense of “inclination” (may l 
and in ‘itaf). Haffa and ahtaffa hawli-hi means “to move about him” or “go 
around him.” 


33 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 16 Admonition [on Becoming a Polished 

Mirror] 

(I bn Sma): When the mystic passes (‘abara) the stage of spiritual 
exercise to the stage of attainment, his inmost self (sirr) will become a 
polished mirror facing the direction of the Truth, celestial delights will flow 
copiously upon him, and he will be rejoiced in himself because of the traces 
of the Truth therein. He will have a vision of the Truth and a vision of 
himself and after that he will vacillate [between the two]. 


(TusI): I say: It is said that mi lk and the like “flowed copiously” (darra), 
meaning it was “poured out” (insabba) or “flowed forth” (fada). The 
meaning of this statement is that when the mystic finishes the discipline of 
spiritual exercise and does not need it to reach his goal, which is his 
constant contact with the Truth, his inmost self will become empty of all 
besides the Truth, like a mirror polished to have a perfect reflection by 
constant rubbing. When he voluntarily faces the direction of the Truth, the 
traces of the Truth will be reflected in him, real delights will shower upon 
him, he will rejoice in himself due to the signs of the Truth within him, and 
he will have two visions: one toward the Truth, rejoicing in him, and 
another toward himself, rejoicing in the Truth. Thereupon, he will be in a 
state of vacillation (taraddad) between the two sides. 


34 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 17: Admonition on [Complete Arrival at the 

Holy Presence] 

(Ibn Sma): Then he will become absent from himself and behold only the 
threshold of holiness. If he beholds himself it is only insofar as the self is 
beholding, not insofar as it is adorned with the self At this stage the arrival 
is real. 


(TusI): I say: This is the final stage of the mystic’s journey to the Truth, 
and it is the stage of complete arrival (wusul). The stages of the journey 
subordinate to it have this as their goal. It ends with the state of annihilation 
(mahw) and self-obliteration ( fana ’) in the divine unity, as will be discussed 
later. At this stage, the vacillation mentioned in the last chapter ceases, and 
one’s absence from oneself and attainment of the Truth is complete. 

The explanation of the following words: “If he beholds himself, it is only 
insofar as the self is beholding, not insofar as it is adorned with the self’ is 
that if the beholder, insofar as he is a beholder, beholds himself being a 
beholder, then he has beheld himself. However, this beholding is apart from 
the beholding which is before it, because he is here beholding the self 
insofar as it is engraved with the Truth and adorned with an adornment 
coming to it from the Truth. Therefore, he rejoices in the self, and this 
rejoicing in the self, although by reason of the Truth, is astonishment in the 
self and attention to the self. 

Therefore, sometimes he is attending to the self, and sometimes he is 
attending to the Tmth. Thus, you consider it to be vacillation. But in this 
case, he is turning wholly to the Truth, and only beholds the self insofar as 
he beholds one turning to the Truth who is not separated from the beholding 
of the turner, as a result of which it is a beholding of the self figuratively or 
accidentally. For this reason, he judges this to be real arrival. This is a 
commentary upon what is in the book. 

It remains for us to mention the reason for the number of these chapters 
and the stages mentioned in them. Thus, I say: For every movement there is 
a beginning, a middle, and an end. If the departure from the beginning, the 
passing over the middle, and the arrival at the end is not at once [but 
gradual], then each one of these also has a beginning, a middle, and an end, 
and the total would be nine. The Master, after the chapter on spiritual 
exercise, set forth nine chapters in explanation of these stages. The first 
three stages which he mentions - the beginning of contact called “the 
moment,” its strengthening, such that it occurs outside of spiritual exercise, 
and its constancy (istiqrdr) being such that constancy vanishes along with it 
- comprise the beginning stages. The next three stages - the increasing of 
contact, which he expresses by the moment becoming tranquil, the 
strengthening of that so that the sign of attainment is concealed by the sign 
of non-attainment, and its constancy being such that it occurs whenever he 
wishes - comprise the middle stages. The last three stages - the attainment 
of contact ( ittisdl ) without need of wishing it, its constancy without spiritual 


35 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


exercise, and its continuance without beholding the self - comprise the final 
stages. 


36 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 18: A Remark [on the Imperfection of the 
Stages before Arrival] 

( Ihn Sind): Attention to what is far from Him is a distraction, and 
reliance upon that which is obedient to the self is a weakness. Rejoicing in 
the adornment of pleasures, insofar as they are pleasures, even if it be in the 
Truth, is going astray, but complete devotion to the Truth is salvation. 


(TusI): I say: Since he has finished explaining the stages of the journey 
and ended with the stages of arrival, the Master intends to instruct about the 
imperfection of all of the stages before the arrival stage in comparison to it. 

Thus, he starts with asceticism, which is a certain distancing (tanazzuh) 
from whatever distracts one from the Truth. 

He states, moreover, that it is a distraction. Thus he said: 

“Attention to what is far from Him,” meaning what is other than the 
Truth, “is a distraction.” Therefore, asceticism leads to that whereby one is 
guarded from distraction. This is followed by worship, which is making the 
soul that incites to evil subservient to the tranquil soul, so that the tranquil 
soul will become strong in its particular acts with the inciting soul 
supporting it in that. He states, moreover, that it is a weakness. Thus he said: 
“Reliance upon that which is obedient to the self (or the soul al-nafs) is a 
weakness.” 

He means that the reliance of the soul upon that which is subservient to it 
is a weakness. Therefore, worship also leads to that whereby one is guarded 
from weakness. 

This is followed by the final stages of the journey, which culminate in the 
stage of arrival. The instruction here is about the existence of imperfection 
in the previous stages. He explains that delight in that which brings 
pleasure, insofar as it is pleasure, even if that outcome is the Truth himself, 
is going astray and perplexity, because it requires vacillation from one side 
to another side contrary to it. He seeks by this to guide away from 
perplexity. Thus, he says: “Rejoicing in the adornment of pleasures, insofar 
as they are pleasures, even if it be in the Truth, is going astray.” Therefore, 
pausing at this stage of the journey also leads to what guards from 
perplexity through the journey. 

He then states that salvation from all of this is through the arrival which 
he mentions in the last stage. Thus he says: 

“but complete devotion to the Truth is salvation.” This explains the 
meaning of what they say: “The sincere ones face a great danger.” 


37 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 19: Admonition [on the Beginning and End 

of Mysticism] 

(Ibn Sind): Recognition (or mysticism ‘irfan) begins with the separation 
(tafriq), the shaking off (nafd), the abandoning (tark), and the rejection 
(rafd) of one who is truly devoted to a whole, which is the sum of the 
attributes of the Truth belonging to the essence that seeks in truth, and it 
ends with the One and abiding ( wuquf) there. 


(TusI): I say: The Master has summed up all the stations of the mystics 
in this chapter. With respect to his statement, it is well known among the 
people of taste [i.e., mystics] that two things are necessary for the perfecting 
(takmil) of imperfect individuals: (a) abstention (takhllya) and (b) 
beautification (tahliya), just as sick persons are treated by detoxification 
(tanqlya) and nutrition ( taqwTya ). 

The first one is a negating process and the second one is an affirming 
process. Sometimes “abstention” is characterized as “purification” (tazkfya). 
Each of these two has a number of stages. 

As for the stages of purification, they have been mentioned above, and 
the Master has arranged them in this chapter in four levels, namely: 
separation, shaking off, abandoning, and rejection. “Separation” (tafriq) is 
the intensified form of separation (farq), and it is a parting between two 
things without any preference of one over the other. An example of this is 
the parting of hair. “Shaking off’ (nafd) is moving something so that 
undesirable things are detached from it, like dust from a garment. 
“Abandoning” (tark) is giving up and withdrawing from something. 
“Rejection” (rafd) is abandoning together with disregard and lack of 
interest. 

Thus, recognition (‘irfan) begins with a separation between the self 
(dhat) of the mystic and all that would distract him from the Truth. Next 
comes the shaking off of the effects of those preoccupations, like inclination 
toward and attention to them instead of his self with respect to perfecting it 
by detachment from all besides the Truth and contact with Him. Next is 
abandonment for the purpose of perfection for the sake of his self. After this 
is rejection of the self altogether. These are the stages of purification. 

As for beautification, whose stages the Master will present in the next 
chapter, it can be summarized as follows: 

When the mystic has become detached from himself and come into 
contact with the Truth, he will perceive every power dependent upon His 
power, which is connected with all possible things, and every knowledge 
dependent upon His knowledge, from which nothing is hidden, and every 
will dependent upon His will, with which it is not possible for any possible 
thing to be in opposition. 

Nay, every existence and every perfection of existence emanates from 
Him and flows forth from Him. In this case, the Truth becomes the eyes by 
which he sees, the ears by which he hears, the power by which he acts, the 
knowledge by which he knows, and the existence by which He is exists. In 


38 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


this case, the mystic becomes adorned with the attributes of God (exalted be 
He) in reality. This is the meaning of his words: “the recognition... of one 
who is truly devoted to a whole, which is the sum of the attributes of the 
Truth belonging to the essence that seeks in truth.” 

After that he sees these attributes and qualities as multiple in relation to 
the many and one in relation to their solitary source. Thus, His essential 
knowledge is itself His essential power, which is itself the same as His will, 
and so forth with the other attributes. Since essential existence does not 
belong to anything but Him, there are no attributes different from His 
essence and no essence which is a subject for the attributes. Rather the 
whole is one thing. As he says (exalted be the speaker): “God is only one 
God.” Consequently, there is nothing in addition to Him. This is the 
meaning of the Master’s words: “and it ends with the One.” 

At this stage there is no praiser and no object of praise, no traveler and no 
object of the journey, no recognizer and no object of recognition. This is the 
station of abiding. 


39 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 20: Admonition [on the Stages of the Ocean 

of Arrival] 

(Ibn STna): One who gives preference to recognition (‘irfan)for the sake 
of recognition has advocated the latter. And one who finds recognition in 
such a way that he does not find it, but instead finds through it the object of 
recognition, has dived into the ocean of arrival (al-wusul). Here there are 
stages that are not fewer than the stages preceding them. 

We prefer to be brief with respect to them, because discourse will not 
make them comprehensible, statements will not explain them, and words 
will not reveal them except in imagination. He who wishes to become 
acquainted with them should proceed gradually, step by step, until he 
becomes one of the people of witnessing, not of those who talk, and one of 
those who have arrived at the source, not of those who hear the trace. 


(TusI): I say: Recognition (‘irfan) is the state of the recognizer in relation 
to the object of recognition. Thus it is certainly not the same as the object of 
recognition [i.e. , the Truth], As for the one whose aim in recognition is 
recognition itself, he is not one of those who profess God’s unity, because 
he seeks something else along with the Truth. This is the state of one who 
rejoices in the adornment of his self (dhati-hi), even though it is through the 
Truth. But he who has recognized the Truth and become absent from 
himself is also certainly absent from recognition, which is the state 
belonging to his self. Therefore, he has certainly found recognition as 
though he has not found it, but rather he finds the object of recognition 
alone while he plunges into the ocean of arrival. 

There are stages of beautification by existential things which are the 
divine attributes, and these stages are not less than the stages preceding 
them, by which I mean the stages of purification from the affairs of created 
things, which derive from privative qualities. This is because divine things 
are unlimited and encompassing, while the affairs of creatures are limited 
and encompassed. His words (exalted be the speaker) allude to this: “Say: If 
the sea were ink for the words of my Lord, the sea would dry up before the 
words of my Lord would run out.” 21 Progress in these stages is the journey 
toward God, and within them is found a journey in God. Both journeys end 
in self-obliteration (fanaj in the divine unity (tawhid). 

Know that explanation of these stages is not possible because words are 
the subject for meanings conceptualized by the people who speak them, then 
memorize them, recollect them, and understand them for the purpose of 
instruction and learning. 

As for that which only he who is absent from himself, not to mention the 
faculties of his body, attains, it is not possible for words to describe it, let 
alone for an explanation to explain it. Just as the objects of intellection are 
not perceptible to the estimative faculty, the objects of estimation are not 
perceptible to the faculty of imagination, and the objects of imagination are 
not perceptible to the senses, in like manner, that which can only be seen by 
the eye of certainty cannot be perceived by the knowledge of certainty. 22 It 


40 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


is therefore necessary for those who seek these stages to strive to attain them 
by means of experience, not by seeking with philosophical proofs. This is 
the explanation of what the Master has said. He made an exception for 
imagination when he said, “words will not reveal them except in 
imagination,” because as he will explain in the Tenth Namat, when the 
mystics become engaged in beholding the world of sanctity, they may see in 
their imaginations certain things that remotely resemble what they are 
witnessing. 


41 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 21: A Remark [on the Characteristics of the 

Mystics] 

( Ihn Sind): The mystic is bright-faced , friendly, and smiling. He shows 
respect to the young out of humility in the same manner that he shows 
respect to the old. He is friendly with the lowly just as he is friendly with the 
great. 

How could he not be bright-faced when he is joyful in the Truth and 
through each thing because he beholds the Truth within it? How could he 
not treat all equally when to him all are in the same station? The people of 
mercy are occupied with the worthless. 


(TusI): I say: After setting forth the stages of the mystics, he commences 
to explain their characteristics and their states.... The meaning of this 
chapter is clear. These two qualities - namely, being friendly to all and 
viewing all creatures alike - are the signs of a single attribute called 
“contentment” (ridaj. It is an attribute which does not allow its possessor to 
deny anything, to fear the oppression of anything, or to be grieved over the 
passing of anything. 

The following words (exalted be the speaker) allude to this: 

“The good pleasure (ridwdn) of God is the greatest [bliss ].” 23 The 
interpretation of their saying: “The keeper of paradise is a king whose name 
is contentment,” becomes clear from this. 


42 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 22: A Remark [on the Mystic’s States Before 

and After Arrival] 

(I bn Sma): The mystic has states in which he cannot bear the whisper of 
rustling let alone greater distractions. They occur in the moments of his 
turning with his inmost self to the Truth, if a veil (hijab) from his soul or 
from the progress of his inmost self appears before arrival. However, upon 
arrival, he is either wholly occupied with the Truth and not anything else, or 
he is open to both sides due to the range of his power. In like manner, upon 
departure in the garment of divine favor, he is the most luminous of God’s 
creatures in his joy. 


(TusI): I say: ...His meaning is that the mystic has states in which he 
cannot bear to sense an external distraction, even if that distraction is almost 
imperceptible let alone greater. These states occur during the moments when 
he turns with his inmost self to the Truth, if a veil appears, or is ordained for 
him, during those moments before arriving at the Tmth, either due to his 
soul (nafs), as when that which removes his disposition for arrival befalls it, 
or due to the progress of his inmost self (sirr), as when it is represented in 
his thought, as a result of which he becomes attentive to something besides 
the Truth. In short, he is not fulfilled because one of the two things prevents 
him from arriving at the Truth. Instead, he remains in a state of bewildered 
expectation, on account of which disquietude at everything other than the 
Truth and impatience with whatever distracts him dominates him. 
Consequently, he cannot bear anything such as we have described. But with 
arrival and departure, it is not like this. Upon arrival, there must be one of 
two conditions: The first is that his power (quwa) is such that when 
preoccupied with the Truth he is unable to attend to anything else, either due 
to his inability or due to the intensity of the preoccupation. 

In this case, he is preoccupied with the Truth alone and heedless of 
whatever befalls himself, so that he does not sense external distractions. The 
second is that his power is such that it suffices two things at once, so that he 
is not vexed by external things, because they do not distract him from the 
Truth. As for departure, upon it, he will be the happiest of men due to his 
joy, as a result of which he will meet whatever comes to him with gladness 
and a smiling face. 


43 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 23: Remark [on the Compassion of the 

Mystic] 

< I bn Sma): Inquiry and seeking information do not concern the mystic, 
nor is he moved to anger upon observing the reprehensible (munkar), since 
he is filled with mercy. This is because he discerns God’s secret in the 
outcomes of fate. 

Moreover, if he admonishes others to the good (ma'ruf), he admonishes 
with kindness and sincerity, not with harshness and rebuke. And if he 
magnifies the good, he may guard it from those who do not deserve it. 


(TusI): I say: ...His meaning is that the mystic does not concern himself 
with inquiring into the affairs of the people. This is because he is occupied 
with his own condition, not anything else, and does not pursue the 
imperfection of anyone.... Anger does not seduce him upon witnessing 
reprehensible behavior, but rather mercy imbues him. This is because of his 
understanding of the mystery of fate. If he admonishes others to goodness, 
he admonishes them with kindness and sincerity, as a father admonishes his 
son, not with harshness and reproach. This is due to his compassion for all 
of God’s creatures. If he magnifies the good, perhaps he will facilitate it to 
protect it from those who do not merit it. The Learned Commentator states 
in his commentary: “If he magnifies the good without deserving it, perhaps 
solicitude will befall him from it, not envy.” 

This interpretation is not conformable with the text. 


44 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 24: A Remark [on the Attributes of the 

Mystic] 

( Ihn Sind): The mystic is courageous, and how could he not be when he 
is free from the fear of death. He is generous, and how could he not be when 
he is free from the love of falsehood. He is forgiving of sins, and how could 
he not be when his soul is greater than being susceptible to the injury of 
another. And he harbors no resentments, and how could he when his 
remembrance is occupied with the Truth. 


(TusI): I say: Munificence (kciram) is either through giving something 
beneficial when it is not necessary to give it, or it is through preventing 
harm when it is not necessary to prevent it. The first is either through the 
self, which is courage, or through possessions and the like, which is 
generosity. These are both existential things. The second is either together 
with the ability to harm, which is forgiveness, or it is not together with the 
ability, which is the forgetting of resentments. Both of these are privative. 
The mystic is characterized by all of these, as the Master has mentioned and 
explained the reasons. 


45 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 25: A Remark [on the Differing Intentions of 

theMystic] 

(I bn STnci): The mystics may vary with respect to intentions (himam) in 
accordance with the difference of their thoughts, which are influenced by 
different motivating factors. The mystic may consider a life of poverty and a 
life of luxury to be the same, or he may prefer a life of poverty. 

In like manner, he may consider the ill-smelling to be equal to the 
fragrant, or he may prefer the ill-smelling. This is when he has the idea in 
his mind to regard all save the Truth as contemptible. However, he may be 
inclined to adornment, love of the best in every genus, and aversion to the 
imperfect and worthless. This is when he considers his habit of association 
with external conditions, so that he has in view the beauty in each thing, 
since it is an excellence bestowed by the First Providence and nearest to 
being like that upon which his desire is intent. This may differ in two 
different mystics, and it may differ in one mystic with respect to two 
different moments. 


(TusI): I say: . . .His meaning is clear. With respect to his words: “since it 
is an excellence bestowed by the First Providence and nearest to being like 
that upon which his desire is intent,” there are two reasons for the mystic’s 
inclination toward beauty. The first is the grace of Providence toward him, 
and the second is affinity to the holy Command. 


46 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 26: A Remark [on the Mystic’s Exemption 
from Performing Religious Duties During the Time of 
Contact with the Truth] 

(Ibn Sma): The mystic may be absent from himself in the state wherein 
he reaches the Truth, and heedless of everything, as a consequence of which 
he is not legally obligated to perform religious duties. How could he when 
religious duties are enjoined upon those who understand them in the state 
wherein they understand them, and upon those who commit offenses, even if 
they do not understand the religious duties? 


(TusI): I say: He means that the mystic may be unaware of this world in 
the state of his contact with the world of holiness. Thus he is heedless of 
everything in this world, and he commits an infraction of religious duties. 
But he does not become a sinner because of this, since he is not legally 
bound to perform religious duties. This is because the performance of 
religious duties is dependent upon someone who comprehends them during 
the time he comprehends them, or upon someone who is a sinner by 
forsaking the religious duties, even if he does not understand them - such as 
the negligent, the heedless, and immature young men, who are obligated to 
perform religious duties. 


47 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Chapter 27: An Admonition [That Not Every Soul is 
Suited to Mysticism] 

(Ibn Sind): His holiness the Truth is far exalted above being a drinking 
place for every traveler or being revealed except in succession. For this 
reason, what this discipline contains is a laughing matter to the heedless 
and a warning sign for the scholar. Consequently, he who has heard it and 
then recoiled from it, let him accuse his own soul, for perhaps it is not 
suitable for it. Each is facilitated toward that for which he was created. 


(TusI): I say: ...His purpose is to mention the insignificant number of 
those who reach the Truth. He points out that the reason the majority reject 
this discipline, which is explained in this Namat, is their ignorance of it, for 
the people pass by that which they do not comprehend. 

Furthermore, this kind of perfection cannot be attained by acquisition 
alone, but rather, along with this, it needs a substance (jawhar) suited to it 
with respect to the innate nature. 


48 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


Notes 

1. The text used for this translation is Ibn STna, al-Isharat wa’l-Tanblhat, ma'a Sharh 
Nasir al-DTn al-TusT, edited by Sulayman Dunya (Cairo 1960). 

2. “The learned commentator” is a reference to Fakhr al-DTn RazT. 

3. Qur’an 32:17. 

4. Khurasan is the northeastern state of ban. 

5. i.e., Ibn al-‘Arabi, the author of Fusus al- Hikam and al-Futuhat al-Makkiyyah. 

6. al-Haqq, the Truth, or the Real, a name of God often employed by the Sufis. 

7. al-Jurjani was one of Ibn STna's friends and a student of his in philosophy. 

8. According to Ibn STna. intellect consists of several different levels: (1) the material 
intellect (‘aql al-hayulam), (2) the intellect in habitu (‘aql bi al-malaka), (3) the actual 
intellect (‘aql bi al-fi‘l), and (4) the acquired intellect (‘aql al-mustafad). See H. Davidson, 
Alfarabi, Avicenna, and Averroes on Intellect (Oxford University Press 1992), p. 83 ff. 

9. The same term jaza’ applies to both reward and punishment. 

10. The Mu‘tazila were one of two theological schools of thought (kalam) that appeared 
in the second century A.H. (eighth century A.D.), the second school being the Ash'ariya. 
The Mu‘tazila maintained that all of God's attributes are identical to His essence, so He 
cannot perform unjust or irrational actions. 

11. RazT follows the Ash'arite school, and TusT is responding to the principles of that 
school here. 

12. al-haqq al-awwal, the First Truth, means God here. 

13. See Admonition for chapter 20 below. 

14. See Chapter 3 above. 

15. In other words, the ShT‘a Imams, who are considered by the ShT‘a to be the divinely 
guided successors of the prophet Muhammad. 

16. See Qur’an 12:53, 75:2, and 89:27. 

17. Qur’an 107:4-5. 

18. See Namat 9, chapter 3. 

19. Waqt refers to a time in which the mystic is overcome by a mystical experience. 

20. In other words, the First Truth. 

21. Qur’an 18:109. 

22. These terms are derived from verses in the Qur'an. ‘Ilm al-yaqln (cognitive 
certainty), which is an understanding of things reached by reasoning, such as understanding 
fire by reading books, is a lower level of certainty than ‘ayn al-yaqln (visual certainty), 
which is an understanding of things obtained by seeing them with one’s own eyes. We see 
the fire. The third and highest level mentioned in the Qur'an is haqq al-yaqTn (objective 
certainty), which is an understanding of things reached by direct experience. We are burned 
by the fire. (See Yusuf Ali, The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, vol. 2, footnote 5673.) 

23. Qur’an 9:72. 


49 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


All rights reserved for Al-Hassanain (p) Network, ImamHussain (p) 

Foundation 


Alhassanain (p) Network for Islamic Heritage and Thought 


www.alhassanain.org/english 


50 


